ALMIRA 
BEING THE 
HISTORY 
OF A 
YOUNG LADY 
Of good Birth and Fortune, but more 
diftinguifh'd Merit. 
VOL. I. 
s . * * 
■4 
LONDON: 
printed for W. Owen, near TempIe^Bxr. 
M.DCC.LXIL 
S. 
B'» 
r c 
bift 
v;;!'' THE 
PREFACE 
TO THE 
^ It E A D E R. 
rHE author of tbefe following Jheets^ 
k not without due apprebenftoh from 
the judgment of the impartial critic ; 
to whom every individual of each clafi of - 
writers (and confequentlyfcribhlers)Jhould 
fubmii with pleafure* 
If therefore^ any fuch /ball find tb^ 
have thrown away fome hours in readings, 
what thefe following fh^ets contain^ let, 
their humanity intreat p&mifjion of their 
judgment to accept this truth as, an.apo-- 
logy : Th'dt a motive^ much more exciifable 
than any vanity had been^ guided the pen ' 
that undertook />, to amufe the leifures 
A hours 
jp' 
[ iv ] 
hours of one wbofe thoughts bad been^ an^ 
were^ fo much imbittered hy'ihe moft 
affli^ing troubles^ that there is little room 
for wonder y if they find the proper fweets 
and requifttes of fenfe and diSiion wantr 
ing. 
». 
Nor had an undertaking of this nature 
been attempted^ but for the importunity 
of a few kind and partial friends -, who 
had entertained., perhaps ^ too favourable 
an opinion of the abilities of one ^ whom 
they wifbed to find both meritorious and 
fuccefsful in fucb an undertaking. « 
It probably may.be remarked by fpme 
readers^ that there are h^Xno ^baraSlers 
exalted above what we ^cdu^hcpeSi to fee in 
human life. *Tis granted ; rather below 
it certainly. The author is^ quite fenfible 
of that deficiency ; and^ W^efore^ begs the 
reader^'s leave^ to offer the following rea- 
fon. ' 
That, having not the vain prefumptioit 
to form patterns for the worlds it was 
. judged mofi proper to attempt no more than 
to become an humble cjo^ier of nature only ; 
endca- 
endeavouring tbo\ to have a iue negird t^ 
moral jiifiiccj thro'' the plan ; that ^ffti^ 
whole is found too injignificfint to do mort' 
good^iitbati innocently entertain an houri 
or tw^' it may^ at leaft^ enforce no bad 
example^ by reprefenting virtue made too, 
wretched^ or vice triumphant — A dange- 
rous p^ec^nt for youthful readers ! 
'\ 
■ v. 
Xet}the author had not an opinion higk 
euoughy of this performance^ to furnijb 
courage for its publication^ after having 
finifhed it f even years ^ had not a motivf:^ 
that was judged to he moji laudable^ en- 
couraged itj — the hope of making it prove 
fervic cable to fome unhappy individuals ^ 
%vhom it is dejigned to benefit. 
And^ in an age where public a5fs of 
great benevolence are fo extenjive and fo 
nobly confpicuous^ it is not probable^ that 
one of the fame nature (tho^ of a more 
private tendency) fhould fail of meeting 
with ajufi reception from the multitude of 
hun^ane readers. 
This little hijiory labours under one 
great dif advantage : The many (and fome 
of 
t ^ ] 
i^f thm- 'worfbify ' ^proved) fwegMn^ 
pieces of the iik^juirk of 'o&ritjfng^ wbich^ 
h^e hten'iimnsi ytars fifii^mited.'-^T^ 
noveity-mc^ always b§pe^ to pieafe a little i 
'sM iris not dmap atike meritoriom^ and 
i^afaMe of charming. 
Jndy if this piece Jhall prove fo for-^ 
tunate^ as not to merit the candid" readerV 
difapprobationy the writer of it willy with 
gratitude andpleafure^ acknowledge^ that 
tbofe hours were not mifpent in which it 
has been written. 
The 
HISTORY 
OF 
A L M IRA. 
SLMIRA was the onlf daughter 
; of a worthy merchant in the city 
_ I of London. Her education hav- 
ing been intruded to my care as governors, 
for the inftru£ting her young mind, I mjjfll; 
be beft acquainted with the excellencies"!t)f 
it. For, from the time her infant mno-i 
cence found power of utterance, I have 
been honoured with the pleafing charge, 
till within thefe twelvemonths pafti when 
Vol, I. B her 
% The history 
her good father kindly and gencrouffy re- 
compenced my trouble, as he was pleafed 
to cdl it, by making me a prefent of five 
hundred pounds (additional to what I had 
kid m^QUt pf his yearly bounty) by way 
of fortune, to a gentleman of merit and 
eftate, who had the uncommon generofity 
to think me worth deiiring as a wife, in 
caf^ (he i^id) I wa^ not worth a ihUIing. 
Nor couW a change kfs Imppy than my 
prefent one, with this moft worthy hufband, 
have reconciled me tx> the recolleftion of 
having left fo kind and amiable a lady ! 
^ *Tis from the letters I have been ho* 
noured with from her (according to her 
own obliging promife when we parted) that 
I have formed the following (heets \ and, 
as X judged they might agreeably amufe a 
kifure hour, and tik^wiie tend to edify 
young readers, I have obtained her leave to 
snake them pubtic ; but with this reftridi- 
^n, that I (hould m^ke ufe of only fuch 
imaginary namefr as thofe herein contained. 
For tbo* a charadter, like hers, in any 
light, might, with advantage to itself, be 
offered to . public view ; yet her modcfty 
OF ALMIRA. 5 
is Co great,-*— a modefly dtvefted of all offen- 
tation, that tho' (he inigbt be certain fhe 
ivould attract the admiracion of her readers^ 
yet would fhe not, on any account, admit 
the thought of being known in print. 
r 
If, therefore, our fiAitious names (hould 
caft a kind of (omantic m upon the follow- 
ing particulars, I hope it will be pardoned. 
And common names have been avoided, 
for fear of giving offence to any perfons 
who might be of the fame. 
Almira^s father had a fortune with her 
mother of ten thoufand pounds ; and, be- 
ing always profperous in his merchandizing, 
acquired, dijring the years he followed bu- 
finefs, twenty thou&ndi more. And then, 
finding his health decline apace, and having 
loft a wife he loved moft tenderly, he fet- 
tied his affairs, and quitted London wholly. 
Soon after which, a complication of dif- 
tempers feized him ; and, notwithftanding 
* the beft advice that could be had' for him, 
nature drooped daily more and ^mi&fe, and 
warned him of his approachhi^ end ', Which 
he, as a juft man and a Chriftian, looked 
upon with chearful refignation. 
B 2 But 
4 The HISTOR^Y 
. But as often as; he thought^ of his deaf 
^rl, and tbcyaricty of dangers to .wiiich 
her' youth and fortune might expofe her; 
a (igh would rife from his mod: tender, 
aching heart! wMch generally finding a. 
relief in tears, ended in fervent prayers, for 
bleilings to attend her days» when he'lno 
more could aid her with protedion. i 
Having made his will, wherein he had. 
fettled all his fortune (excepting a few be- 
nevolent legacies) upon his daughter, he 
fent a meflcnger away for his fifter, who 
lived a few nf^ilcs off. This lady was a 
widow who pofleflcd an eafy fortune, and 
had one child, a fon, jufl then of age, whon^ 
ihe had brought up to the law ; and he 
Cbeiqg then out of his clerklhip) was jufl: 
returned to live with her. 
He received her with his ufual brotherly 
tendernefs ; and, when they were alone, 
with a melancholy air thus addrefled him-r 
felf to her : 
** My dear Crudelia, faid he, I beg you 
will obferve, with great attention, all I am 
about to fay to you, as it concerns my 
peace 
OF almira; $ 
peace of mind in thefc the laft, the few 
rcmaimftg moments of my life, 
* ' You are to have the care of my dear 
child Almira, (dear orphan, fhortly Ihe will 
be !) a care, that will, I hoj)e, be attended 
with pleafure, becaufe of her fweetnefs' of 
temper, and many excellent qualities ! She 
was too young, ever to know the blefllng 
t)f a mother, when Heaven deprived her of 
fo great a one. Let both parents hence- 
forth be. found in your indulgent care and 
tendernefs : you always loved my Mira ; 
and, as you have no daughter,. I make no 
doubt Jbut you will look upon her as your 
own, and treat her as if Ihe was fuch. 
^* We have, you know, always (fetting 
afide the partiality of a fond father) found 
reafon, from her infancy to the prefent 
hour, to think that flie cannot ftand in need 
of rigour 5 nor has fhe (that is my comfort) 
ever felt Jit, . 
*s She is allowed, by all who know her, 
' to be happy in the graces of perfon ; yet 
^Tt thofe the fmalleft of her merit. Thofe 
of her mind furpafs her years j and hither- 
. B 3 to 
6 Thj HISTORY 
to have proved her worthy of being trufted 
with herfelfj — a dangerous charge, I own, 
to mbft young women of her age ! If, 
therefore, Ihe ihould happen, among the 
many fuitors, whom her form or fortune 
mufl: attrad, to fix regard on one whom' 
you may think inferior to her, (according 
€0 the general way of judging) if he be in 
every other rcfped: unobjeftible, crofs not, 
I beg of you, her choice ; not even by 
advice, or the mod diftant hint of your 
difapprobation ; left her obedience to your 
wifti Ihould render her unhappy. She is 
incapable of placing her afiedion upon a 
worthlefs objetft, and her own fortune i& 
large enough for happineis. 
*' Upon her day of marriage, or (if tin- 
, married) when of i^ge, Ihe is to be in full 
pofleflion of her fortune. Heaven bkfs her 
with it ! and may fhe know as mucJi fe* 
licity in the poflefiioa of it, as I receive de- 
light from the refleftion of my being bleft 
with power to leave it her. 
** Be kind to poor Cleone likewife ; you 
will find that 1 have not forgot her : pray 
give her that, when I am gone. Nor have 
I, my 
OF ALMf RA. '7 
*! , my dear fiftcr, been forgetful of your- 
J^lf and fon, a$ a pre-acknowledgm^nt df 
^mtiuide, for all the ftitu^ cztt and kind^ 
nefs which I may be indebted to you for, 
4011 my dear girl*^ accouftt.'* 
Alftiira, who was thett in her own apart- 
fncnt> (whkh joined to hk) heard all hfet 
-father (aid s, and was fc inttch affected with 
Jiis paternal gbodnefs to her, aod higjh opi- 
nion 'Of her, (as what good and gmtefol 
^daughter would not ?) that ftifc feS into <i 
violent flood of graifeful tearfe, s which fhe 
could not fupprefs for feveral hours. 
Crudelia folecnnly a^i^ed him, (he 
would, in every reipc^, fulfill his laft re- 
iqueft i md ihtreated him to fet his mind 
intirely at reft on that account *, adding, 
that yet (he hoped he would hlwifdf Kve 
long enough to have tl^ke fatisfa<?lion of fee- 
ing her well fettled in a married ftate. But, 
alas ! that wifh proved foon as fruitlefs as 
it might be infincere ; for, in a fhort time 
after, ftic was called to execute this truft. 
The tender father died, and the difconlblate 
Almira was taken home to her aunt's houfe* 
B 4 Crucje- 
/ 
$ tnz' HISTORY 
r Crudelia's difpofition was . quitfe unlite 
that' of her brother; flie was avaricious^ 
and not unartful. Her huiband was a wor- 
thy ^nanV and had left his fortune wholly at 
^her difpofal. S)ie had, as was before faid^ 
brought up her fon a lawyer : his morals 
were indeed fnuch more adapted to the 
obliquities of that profeffion, than his un^ 
derflanding; for having, thro' his child- 
hood, fhared too largely of maternal folly, 
(for fondnefs, void of judgment, can defervc 
no milder name) ftudy appeared too great 
a labour for his tender intelledts. 
Jrlh father died when he was but an in- 
fant, or his mind had ftbod a chance of 
being better cultivated ; for his father had 
abilities, and a knowledge, much fuperior 
to . that of his wife ; a cafe that does not 
always happen neither s, fince we fometimes 
fee the contrary ; and that the prerogatives 
affumed by the other fex, do not always 
confer mafculine accomplifliments ; though, 
from tyrannic cuftom, we annex implicitly 
(too often) inferiority to woman. 
This young gentleman had a fort of wild 
good-nature > a quality, that, unpruned by 
reafon, 
OF ALMIRA. ^ 
icalbn, proves often a great misfortune to 
the perion who pofiefles it. This, added 
to a low, ill-grounded pride, to be at all 
dmes^the monarch of his company^ mifled 
him into many inconveniences, which 
proved greatly prejudicial to his perfon, 
mind, and circumftances ; the laft of which, 
indeed, his mother chiefly fufFered by, to 
her great forrow ! as nothing ftood in com- 
petition with her love of money, but her 
tendernefs for her fon. 
The lovely orphan was no fooner with 
her aunt, than Crudelia began to look 
with wifhful eyes upon fo large a fortune ; 
and avarice being her prevailing paffion^ 
Ihe foon forgot the ftrift injunftions of a 
sdying brother. She knew, in cafe Almirii 
ihoiild not marry, that (he, or her FlaviUo, 
(Ihould they out-live her) might fucoced to 
it : but, that a perfon fo attraftivf, Ihould 
be permitted to live fingle, was hanHy to 
be expefted : and as Ihe was in two years 
more, to be quite miftrefs of herfelf, flic 
apprehended there were fmall hopes that 
either of them would ever be the better for 
it. But foon a thought, that fprung from 
fordid felfifhnefs, and was fupported and 
cn-^ 
lo THfe HISTORY 
encouraged by it, gave vigour to her hbjies; 
Her fon, the young Flavillo^ had tcrtainljr 
(Ihe thought) accomplilhmcnts that could 
not be withftood j for as flie faw, or fck^ 
no fault he had, but that of being too ex- 
travagant, (which marriage too might cure 
him ot) flie foon determined to propofc to - 
him, to lofe no time in gaining the aiFec^ I 
tions of his couHn, making no doubt of 
his fuccefs, as all (he thought would iee 
with her love-clouded eyes. Accordingly^ 
(he foon told him her view, enforcing it by 
adding, that it was her command he (hould 
immediately pUrfue it. 
But how furprized and difconcerted was 
Ibe to obferve, that he received with much 
reluctance this imagined agreeable propo* 
iaJj replying, that he thought they were 
too- nearly related to permit their marry ing^ 
That argument had, with Crudelia^ very 
litde force ; and, therefore, (he by threaten- 
ing intimations, extorted from him a pro** 
mile to proceed immediately in this affair. 
Accordingly, a (hort time after, as he 
was fitting with his coufin, (the dinner ber 
ingjuftovcr) and his mother, dcfirous of 
every 
OF ALMIRA. XI 
evdj opportunity of leaving them toge- 
ther, quitting the room ; juft as Almira 
was about to rife and follow her, Flavilio; 
with an abmpt and aukward air, feized on 
her hand, and begged . her to fie dill, for 
he had fomething he mult fay to her. She 
very obligingly retained her feat ^ and thu$ 
he addreiled her : 
" Coufin, faid he, I have a fecret to in* 
truft you with, that is to me of great im- 
portance, and it regards you likewife. My 
mother, you muft know, intends you for 
my wife; and you .are, doubtlefs, deferving 
of a better hufband. Were I not otherways 
engaged, there is no one I would (o fooQ 
have chofcn for life, I will aflure you/* 
Almira had, by this time, fcarcc patience 
left, and with difficulty compofcd herfalf 
to a calmnefs capable of, anfwering at all 
to fo unexpe<fted a communication of hU 
mother's view. . 
" This is, indeed, faid fhe, a piece of news 
that has, I own, furprized me greatly. 
But pray, good coufin, fpare yourfclf tl>e 
ncediefs pains of any more apologies, re- 
lating 
ii The HISTORY 
s 
lating to your pre-engagement 5 fipce, bad" 
you been as free in your afFeftions as, thank 
Heaven ! I am, we certainly muft have 
continued fo, as to each other ; at lead, I 
anfwer for myfelf. And pray acquatint 
your mother, fir, (I fliould have faid my 
aunt perhaps, but anger often overpowers 
relpedl) that I am every way too free, 
thanks to the beft of fathers, to be at all 
at her diJpbfal. Excufe the warmth vvith 
which I make this declaration, fince *tis t\\t 
lead my juft refentment can be fatisfied 
with." 
" Madam, replied Flavillo, I hopeyoo. 
^are not difpleafed with me, for what 1 have 
faid, (loqking quite out of countenance) and 
be fo kind, 1 beg it of you, not to difcover 
what I have told you of my pre-engage- 
ment ; for, if my mother knew it, it might 
prove my utter ruin ! You know, madam, 
that fhe has her humours , tho* intereft is, 
I know, her favourite point in view s, but, 
for my part, I own I am of another way of 
thinking quite i and happinefs is what I 
chiefly aim at 5 yet I, perhaps, may find 
myfelf miftaken, as others have been before 
me. -However, I wiU (if you think proper, 
coufin) 
OF ALMIRA.; fj 
coulin) inform her only, that my addrelles 
arc refufed. What think you ? will not; 
that be my beft anfwer ?" 
Truth is, undoubtedly, the beft reply» 
returned Almira, with a fmile, that both 
implied due fcorn and pity ; but with 
which he was pcrfeftly well fatisfied, mif- 
taking the f mile for one of approbation. 
She immediately withdrew, to contem- 
plate on what had paffed, and to meditate 
what meafures (he fhould take, dr^eading 
many uneafy confequenccs from the cir- 
cumftances of this affair : yet was fhe de- 
lighted that fo fortunate a one was on . her 
fide, as that of his being pre-engaged ; a$ 
moft undoubtedly it would make her talk 
much lighter, than otherwife it would have 
proba&ly been. 
« 
She was juft then but nineteen years of 
age,' and there muft be two years to come 
(and they might prove x>f wretched nefs, flie 
apppehended, from this communication of 
her aunt^s interefted fcheme) before flie was 
to be releafcd from being under her tuition, 
unlefs ihe was to marry ; and that Ihe 
had 
t4 T.HB HISTORY 
had too much difcretion to allow herfelf to 
thiak of ;. till a perfon ftiould offer, who, 
by the qualities of his mind, as well as by 
the agreeablenefs of his perfon and manners, 
was likely to make her truly happy» 
. She had already been addrefled by a 
Bumber of fuch as ch? world calls humble 
fervants ; but fhe thought them all un- 
worthy of her favour, notwithftanding one 
ef them was a nobleman of fplendid for- 
tune ! His years indeed might feem to 
Icflen, in fome meafure, the merit of Al- 
mira's refufal of him, he being upwards of 
fixty. Bur then his title and eilate, would, 
with many women, have covered that de- 
parity. Pride often turns the fcate even 
againft affedion ^ but here it could noc 
influence prudence : for, had his lordfhip 
been a much younger man than he was» 
his char^fter was in other relpefts very ex- 
ceptionable. He had been fo from his 
youth upwards ; and fhe knew that a wife 
could promife herfelf no great juftice, 
much lefs happinefs, from a man who 
lived, as it were, in defiance of his firft 
duties. 
Crude- 
ot almira; 15 
Crudelia, judging her neice (no doubt) 
by herielf, was much alarmed on the re- 
peated vifits of this nobleman, and was 
reiblved to fruftrate his fuccefs, if pofllble* 
And the firft means fhe ufed, was, never 
to quit the room while he was there ; and 
quickly, by her altered carriage, (he con- 
vinced him, that his ihorteft vifits to hec* 
neice were the moft agreeable to herfelf^ 
Nor would her fair neice have been behind-- 
band with her in exprefling her difappro- 
bation of his vi(its, on her account, had 
ftie not thought proper (in order to con- 
vince her aunt that fhe had no thought of 
encouraging an addrefs, more than equally 
odious to her, from her fon) to put on an 
appearance of being not altc^ther fo much 
averfe to the other offer, as in reality fhe was« 
This fo exafperated Crudelia, that fhe 
began to treat Almira in a manner fhe 
never had before experienced, and there- 
fore the lefs knew bow to bear it. And 
bad fhe not been confcious how far her 
man^emcAt and power (tho' an executrix) 
was limrtted, fhe would, I make no quef- 
tion, have carried it to very great extremes^ 
This 
t6 Ti?t HISTORY 
This added to the grief Almira fo fln- 
eenely felt before, for her dear father*a5 
death. And, had Ihe not been happy in 
the converfation of her companion and fa-, 
vourite Cleone, (he had been wholly void 
of comfort. But this young gentlewoman, 
was miftrefs of a folid underftanding, en- 
livened by a fprightly turn of converfation, 
that rendered her as entertaining as inftruc- 
tive. She was the daughter of a gentle- 
man reported to have died abroad ; and, 
having Joft her mother in her infancy, was, 
by her neareft furviving relation, fent into 
France for education, to accQmplifli her 
for fuch a genteel employment as ihe had 
the happinefs to meet with. And this in-, 
tention being (it was faid) intimated to A1-. 
mira's father, who was acquainted with her. 
family (as in the following fheets will fur- 
ther be related), upon the marriage of hee 
governefs, mentioned before, he fent for 
this young gentlewoman over to make her 
a companion for his daughter. She took 
fQ great a liking to her, that ihe treated 
her more like a filler than a dependant 
lady. A laudable example ! to the unfeel- 
ing, and, I may add, inhuman fortof morr 
tals ! A part of the creation, who dare call 
them- 
OF almira; i> 
themfelves good Chriftians s» yet can tak6 
a barbarouis pride, and pleafure, in ufing 
thofe with a diftinguifhable cruelty, who 
were born with happier expeftations^ " 
The difcrcet Cleone advifed Altnira 
to fmother all refentment, for fome time 
at leaft, fince fhe was unfortunately under 
Crudelia's care ; and urged her to amufe 
her mind more frequently with com* 
pany, and thofe diverfions which were 
to her the moft agreeable ; among which, 
good plays were always foremoft in Al-^ 
mira's choice. 
Accordingly, one evening, fhe con- 
fented, with Cleone, to go and fee the 
tragedy of Richard the third .; — the part 
of Richard was performed by Mr. Gar- 
rick ; and was fo admirably afted, that 
it gave pain, not pleafure, to them both. 
What griefs of various forts, do unre- 
fledling minds efcape! yet Ihould they 
not be envied ; for they likewife efcape 
true pleafure alfo. Almira mpft fincere- 
ly felt, and wept, the horrid uncle's 
cruelty ! and whifper'd to Cleone, Well, 
thank Heaven ! my aunt is not like this 
Vol. L C vile 
it T»B, HISTOR,Y 
vUeiincIe. I (hall find comfort from 
thi3 evening*s entertaincx^nt ; and love^ * 
or at lealft bear her ufage better, from 
frequently remembering the comparifon, 
* 
During the performance that night, 
a gemleman, in the next box to theirs^ 
ieemed more attrafted bjr Almira than 
by all he faw upon the 0:^e« His ob- 
fervation of her was fo particular, that 
it was impolfible for her not to perceive 
i(; and, the. confufion it occafioned^ 
ferved to increafe the natural blufh of 
beauty, with which (he was adorned ^ 
aflurance having been able to acquire no 
influence on her features, however re- 
commended by the fafhion. 
, When the play was over, he offered 
her his hand (relpedlfuUy) to lead her 
to her coach, as he perceived ihe had no 
gentleman to guard her thro' the crowd, 
which being then extremely great and 
noify, flie permitted » and he retreated 
with a re^dful modeft bow, yet feem'd 
in ibme anxiety of mind to fpeak to her^ 
at bis taking leave of them, but did not.. 
As 
OP ALMIRA; %^ 
As ibon as they were (eated in the 
coach, Cleone (fmiling) told Almira, thae 
ihe had made a vifible addition to the 
Hft of her admirers ; and ^fked her what 
file thought of him ? for that his thoughtd^ 
of her had been nevealed to the whole 
audience, if the apparent lanjguage of his 
eyes were undeiitood by them, as wdl 
as hen 
I think, Ckone, he is agreeable enough 
in perfon, (returned Almira) tho* I did 
not much obfove him 5 it favours great- 
ly of confidence, and vain felf^approba- 
tion, to return the notice (as I have feen 
ibme do) which it is often almoft im- 
poffible for one not to be confcious of* 
Then^ madam, (haftily refumedCleone) 
he is defirous now to give you further 
opportunity to view him better-, for 
there he flies (almoft) to fuit your horics 
pace, and mod politely guard you home. 
Poor man ! I find his heart has quite 
evaporated thro* his eyes, and he is now 
purfuing you as the receiver of it. 
Where ? which is be, * Cleone ? you but 
fancy fo j I cannot fee him, cried Almira* 
C2 There 
«o The HISTORY 
There* he is, drefled in black, returned 
Cleone, ftoppcd by a gentlemen this 
moment, madam ; fee, there ! there ! nay, 
now he is out of fight : ah, friend ! who-, 
ever thou art, I am fure thy compliments 
he would have gladly fpared at prefent. 
The coach drove /aft ; and, as he was 
fome time detained, they faw no more 
of their knight-errant. But, in a Ihort 
time after they came home, their cdn- 
verfation took a turn lefs chearful -, for 
the aunt, whofe. interefted views made 
her be ever fearful of her neice*s being 
leen in any public place, having been 
told that fhe was going to the play, and 
hearing to which houfe, Ihe had been 
there herfelf, and fat unfeen by them, in 
order to obferve who might be near Al- 
mira, taking no fervant with her ; and, 
having heedfuUy attended to what has 
been related, (he entered fome time after 
them with jealous anger in her counte- 
nance, (tho* both Almira and her friend 
were ignorant of the occafion for fome 
little time, but long fhe could not hide 
it; and addreiied her neice as follows : 
" Madam, 
ioK A L MIR A. 21 
^^ Madam, I underftand you have 
been entertaining your ears with a diver- 
fion, that, in my opinion, but corrupts 
the heart ; I fliould be better pleafed, 
while I am anfwerable for your condud):, 
if you would choofe amuiements leis 
pernicious ; for I have feldom known an 
ipftance where thefe plays did any good i 
but many forts of mifchief I have feen 
them prove the caufe of/' 
^' Madam, I am furprized (replied 
the half-affrighted and half-angry neic^) 
that you fhould thus condemn, promiicu- 
oufly, an entertainment that has been ib 
much efteemed, by the belt judges, as 
the noblefl and moil edifying of all 
diverlions ! elie» why do many of our 
great fchools of learning fuflfer them 
frequently to be the . prafticc of their 
pupils ? good ones I only mean to plead 
in favour of, for there are many which, 
I think, H woman, who can bluih thro' 
modefty, would not be feen at." 
s* Why do they fuffcr them, (impa- 
tiently Crudelia cried) bccaufe they are 
not wife enough to break a foolifh cuf- 
C 3 torn, 
ft« Tm« HtS^tORY 
torn, moft edifying, truly! Yes, they 
tio edify indeed : but, had I twenty 
^daughters, they fkould all be fent to 
^ify in fome more proper place. This 
X am fure of, if they ihould happen to 
iiave only one. faint fpark of evil in theff 
difpofition, it would be kindly mded to 
become a towering flame, ere long, by 
luch afllftants! Yes, I fupix>ie, poor 
Cynthia likewise went to edify :; who, 
after one fiditious tragedy was ended, 
began herfelf a real one ; but you, per- 
haps, have never heard her ftory^ She 
-iftras trepanned by a defigning k>ver} 
who, taking the advanti^e (^the crowd 
^hcn they came out, led her from the 
ft& of her company ; and, telling her 
'they Ihould overtake them foon, (and, 
"by agreement, they were all to fup to^ 
gether) he thus deceived her into a 
tavern proper for his purpofc.; where, 
-notwithftaiKiing innocence* and prayers, 
mnd tears, he ruined her ! and left her 
recolleftion room to entertain her, the 
remainder of her days, with how much 
-ffie had edified* 
Almira 
\ 
. c^ almira; ij 
Almira (fomewhat frighted at thi9 
ntdaiicholy ftory) replied, But don't you 
think, madam, this might have happen* 
ed at any other public place P however, 
fince I fee you have your reafbns for dif- 
likit^ them, I have no one fo prcfvalent, 
but I can give it up with great coniipo* 
lure, if it will make you eafier. — I own, 
I give the preference to that, of all the 
pleafures this great town affords ; but it 
were no compliment, indeed, to yield' a 
facnfice to you, that was to me indifferent. 
And thus did the obliging Almira de** 
privc hcrfelf, by her condefcending' dif* 
pofition, of a diverfion chat might have 
often relieved her melanchdy hours, a$ 
Ihe adhered too ftriftly to the compliance 
ihe had made an auftere aunt : for, tho' 
Ihe naturally po0eflfed a happy chearful- 
ncfs of temper, Ihc had now too great 
a tendency to grief and foKtUde ^ and 
ieldom could, by kind Cleone, be pre- 
vailed upon even to make- a? friendly 
vifit : for, as to fafhionable frothy ones, 
(he was too wife (tho* young and amiabfe) 
to throw her time away on any one of 
them. 
C 4 Cleone 
»4 Th.e, history 
Cleonc^ told hen Cafter CrudcKa kfc 
them^ ihe had been thinking, and had 
called to mind, a perfon whom (he 
thought their unknown cavallier fomc- 
what refcmbled ; adding, you will, I am 
certain, madam, think as I do ; your 
unfortunate Sam'ander is the jperfon : ejc- 
cufe me, that I ftill forget myfelf, and 
call him fo ! lince yours he would have 
been, had you permitted him.-, and, you 
well knov7, I ever pitied him. 
And, if I did not know it, f replied 
AlmiraJ that figh would certainly, my 
dear, confirm the truth of it. But, be^ 
lieve me, I might have flood in need of 
your kind pity, more than he does now, 
if I had been weak enough to let a 
preference of perfonal accompliihments 
have biaffed me, at the expence of rear 
ion, and religious as well as moral judgr 
ment. I was, you know, at firft, rather 
too partial to his miftaken merit *, and, 
therefore, thought it perfeft, till I was 
happily convinced of my miftarke, by one 
unguarded converfation, but one week 
(I think j before 1 was to have been 
given to him hf my good father, who 
had 
or ALMIRA. 25 
bad likewife been deceived in him. And 
I have often felt thankful reflexions at 
my heart, upon the fortunate difcovery, 
Rallery, I own, I much diflike, when its 
impertinence prefumes to play too freely 
with poor terreftrial friendfliip ! Bur, 
when it dares pretend to invade the fa- 
cred and incomprehenfible celeftial attri- 
butes ! the wound that gives my foul is 
as a poifoned arrow to the body, and ad- 
mits no healing. Could I have even 
hoped to keep poflcffion of that heart's 
fidelity, who was, or feemed to be, an 
infidel to Him who made him ! No, 
furely. And, as I was commended for 
my condu6t, by the wifeft and beft of 
parents, Cleone cannot, upon cool re- 
fledlion, furely, blame pie. 
. It was thofe perfedions which I fan- 
cied I perceived inhabiting his mind, 
and only they, which firft prevailed with 
me to think more favourably of him, 
than any other man I had been addreflcd 
by. But, when I found fo capital a 
Wemifli in that mind, it was undoubtedly 
my duty to difcard him. For, tho' our 
thoughts, no doubt, arc free, yet your 
free- 
t6 The HISTO 
free- thinkers as they are called, I evtr 
difapproved allowing my ear to lend at* 
tention tOr s 
But thou art partial tty his peribnal 
accomplifliments, in thinking the un-* 
known gentleman like him ; for, if I 
obferved him juftly^ there was a kind of 
modeft majefty in his deportment, which 
Samander wanted. 
Thus ended their difcourfc that night ; 
and, on the following day, Almira re* 
ceived a meflage from Amanda, to beg 
the favour of her company tliat after-* 
noon s, which only by her companion's 
perfuafion, fhe unwillingly confented to 
(Cleone being a lit-tle indiipofed.J 
Amanda was a lady irt their neigh- 
bourhood ; who (tho* a new acquaint'^ 
^nce,) was one for whom Almira had a 
great efteem ; (he being a perfon of fine^ 
fenfe, with gentle manners. 
They became acquainted, by fitting 
both in the fame pew at church, but 
Crcdulia's aufterity of temper, had de- 
prived 
trt A LMIRA. 17 
prived them of that intimacy, which 
vrould have been the moft agreeable 
between fuch neighbours v and a per- 
fon of a ftudiou^, or melancholy difpo- 
fitioh (fuch as Almira*s was,) ought to 
rflow berfclf thofe reafonabic fort of 
comforts frequently, in order to allay 
afflidion : but commonly the weakeft 
minds, with ftronger willingncfs, can fly 
to fuch relief. 
Glcone, behtg (as 1 obferved) a litthT 
indifpofed that day, did not accompany 
Almira to Amanda's. — But how fur- 
prized was poor Almira! as fte had 
juft received a difh of tea, to fee the be- 
fbrementioned unknown gallant enter 
the room-: he paid his compliments to 
thofe, for whom his vifit was alone de* 
figned, but when his eyes in the moft 
gRiceful manner went round the circle, 
to take in the company, they ftopt at 
her ; and a vifible confufion overfpread 
his countenance and whole deportment, 
to the apparent aftonifhment of all who 
.£tw it, excepting her, who wholy caufed 
it. And fbe returned the favourable 
diftin(£lion, in a fympathizing involun- 
trary 
zS The HISTORY 
tary xonfcioufnefs ; for from the mo^ 
ment he approached them, fhe feemed 
to catch the Toft furprize, which only by 
a deeper blufh had been perceived, but 
that the gentle trembhng of her difh of 
tea, betrayed the nerve's diforder, which 
fupported iu 
It was fome time before Florello 
fummoned up his fortitude of mincj, 
fufficiently to utter any thing ; and 
when he did, the hefitative manner it 
was fpoken in, plainly difcovered th^^t 
fome emotion ftrongly operated on his 
fpirits, which ever ufed to be chearful, 
polite, and eafy, and it had left fuch an 
cfieft on his complexion likewife, that 
it was impoflible for it to pafs unno- 
ticed. . 
Amanda therefore thus addrefled him, 
J arn afraid, my friend (if I may judge 
from your repeated change of counte-^ 
nance fince you (at down) you are not 
well, or fome thing has furprized you in 
this room : I think I have heard you fay, 
you have no antipathy to animals. 
Madam 
OF almira; 19 
s Ma Jam (replied Florelk),) I cqnfefs 
^ 1 was furprized ! but 'twas agreeably in- 
deed, and needs no pity, though its ef- 
fed: occafioricd fome diforder in my 
mind 5 but I am better now. Our fea- 
tures are the treacherous tell-tales of 
our hearts, efpecially to fuch a pene- 
trating eye as yours is, madam. — That 
lady (pointing genteely towards Al- 
mira) will, I hope, have the goodnefs to 
forgive me, when I declare that flie, 
though innocently, was the caufe of my 
diforder, by being the ftrongeft likc- 
nefs nature could poffibly produce, of 
one whofe image muft be ever dear to 
me ! and fuch an unexpefted pleafure, 
mingled with fome degree of pain (fuch 
give 'me leave to call it madam,) rofli- 
i«g upon my imagination unprepared, 
had for a while almoft overfet it, 
Almira bluflied, and bowing to!d 
him, that intention having had no hand 
in this, there was fcarce room to aflc his 
pardon for it : but that fbe was forry^ 
notwithftanding, fhe. had been the cauii 
of his indiipofition. 
He 
50 The HiStO 
. He fmiled, with confcious ienfibUiff, 
but had no power toanfwer her, and 
both feemed then alike defirous to drop 
the fubjcft, and a variety of general to-» 
picks foon fucceeded« But both the 
eyes and ears of the revived Florello^ 
were attached to one fair objeA \ nor 
could he join with his accuftomed wh: 
and fprightlinefs, in any converfation. 
— How ftrange it is, that whete a man 
would wi(h to make himfelf appear m6ft 
bright, (as always is the lover^s cafe, 
in company v/ith the beloved,) the un- 
accountablenefs of perverfe human na- 
ture fpreads fome dark cloud over every 
accompliftiment, as if on purpofe to 
obfcurc its luftre ! and it might truly 
have been faid of poor Florello, ** He 
*' never looked fo like the thing he is 
*' not, as you now fee him/* 
Soon after tea was over, Almira took 
her leave, he llarting from his chair, 
prepared to follow, as if to intreat the 
favour of her hand as formerly, to lead 
her to her coach 5 but in a moments 
time drew back, jnd re-affumed his 
jplace in fome confufion, where we will 
leave 
OF ytLMIkA« 31 
leave him for the prefcnt, and accom* 
pany (tho' he did not^ the fair*one home, 
Shehaftened to the chamber of her 
Ipyed Cleone, to unbofdm there that 
which had ipuch affedied her; and, findr 
ing her much better than flie left her, Ihc 
thm b^an to.entertaia her with the vific« 
*s O, my. Cleone ! thy indifpofiticw 
ha* deprived thee of a mod diverting 
£:epe ! in which, two unacquainted fooh 
have been the pripcipal performers. 
Hadft thou been well, or with me, .thjc 
friend, had not been one of them 5 thy 
illnefs c:;ertainly podeiled my fpirits, and 
I was fcarce myfelf this afternoon ^ I 
wiih, methinks, I b^d put my viiit off» 
and ftaid at home with thee *, but, it y^ 
was thy fault that I did not^ Who doft 
thou think dr^nk tea with us, and is 
acquainted with Amanda ? No other than 
our theatrical c4valiier ! l^ut his behavi* 
o^r jt is impoflible to tell thee ; nothing 
but rr^ine could equal it*, and nothing 
lersthai>fupernatural, could have amazed 
me more than . feeing him there. The 
company perceived the vifible confufion 
he 
52 The HISTORY 
he was in, and that obliged him to con- 
fefs the caufe. But I, who had no caufe, 
indeed, had nothing I could fay, by way 
of an apology, for the confufion which 
I am fure my foolifh fiery cheeks dif- 
covercd when he firft came in/* 
Cleone^ who had feven ycafs more 
experience than her friend, joined to the 
quickeft apprehenfion, thus declared her 
thoughts on what fhe had heard. Ahs ! 
my dear, there is mort certainly a caufe 
you have, that yet, perhaps, you know 
not. There is a certain foft, but fubtle 
poifon, that can find an entrance at the 
eyes, whofe influence quickly operates 
ihro* the young unfufpefting heart ! and, 
from the hearths diforder, the whole hu- 
man frame is afFefted. But, pray, what 
reafon ferved for his excufe ? for fuch 
you will furely >find it was hereafter. 
" It was, returned Almira, that I had 
the honour to refemble one, he either is, 
or ha$ been fond of, that has, it feems, 
inticled me to the being ftared fo out of 
countenance. Methinks I (hould be 
pleafed to fee this lady, fo much like 
■ myfeif ^ 
'dp AtNflRA; 33 
inyfelf i yet. It is a ielfifli and a filly 
curiofity, fince I may never fee the au- 
thor of it mor^, ♦ for by his convcrfation 
I perceived he feldom comes to London; 
— But pray, Cleonc, what was that you 
faid jull now, concerning eyes and 
hearts, and poifon ?" 
Juft then a fervant brought her up a 
letter, which openings ^ (he found the 
following contents. 
** Moft admirable lady! 
Y O U cannot be a ftranger to tlie paf- 
fion which I have the honour to be 
wretched by, as I have never yet had 
hope fufficient to fupport me^ even with 
courage to declare myfelf, when in your 
prefence, as I ought. 
** I figh with the confideration, that I 
am unworthy of you in every light but 
one, and fortune is, I own, a trifle, if 
weighed againft your merit. 
** If you can force your generous 
ibul.to pity me, by fufiering a wretch to 
live for you inftcad of mifery, his for- 
VoL I. D tune 
34 The HISTORY 
Wnc wlfoUy you command forever, with 
tbe whple foul and will of him, whole 
.f«e you govern, while he has life. to 
call himfelf, 
Deareft madam, 
Your moft refpeftfiiUy devoted, 
and moil obedient 
humbk fervant. 
Honor lo. 
p. S, Allow xm% good and deareft 
lady* to receive^ my doom, (however 
hprrid it may be,) when ne3« I have the 
honour to attend you/* 
This letter caufed Almtta at (his time 
no fmall embarraffment, how Ihe fbould 
a6| with prudence and ftrift honour; 
for, (as I have obferved before,) flie 
^Mf{^ herfelf ufidei: a difagreeafade ne- 
ceflity of bef^nng wkh this lord's ad« 
drefles, to defend her from her fordid 
aunt's more odious propofition, with re- 
lation to her fon } for often do we lee 
oie^i^ Qiinds, fuqh as Crudelia's was, 
. intimi- 
Df almira; 35 
intimidated by fbperior grandeur to their 
own, who would reign tyrants over 
every fuperkjrity of virtue. 
What to refolve ihc therefore knew 
not, and fhe was now compelled to 
Ipcak more plainly, than fhe wifhed to 
ipeak at prefent; nor could her- kind 
companion offer any thing as her ad* 
vice in this, but what agreed intirdy 
with Almira's ; {o much in every cafe, 
where delicacy or honour was concern- 
ed, they thought alike. 
A few days after fhe had received 
this letter, my lord, impatient for her 
anfwer, came : he found Almira at her 
fpinnetjuft after dinner, and alone; an 
opportunity for his knowing with cer- 
tainty, what he before had only feared. 
Madam, faid he, approaching her 
with a profound refpeft; whatever de- 
ftiny you mean for me, have ftill that 
goodnefs which is confiftent with your- 
ieify aod tell it me unfrowning. 
D 2 If 
36: The HISTORY 
If it is the fentence of my future nfii-* 
fcry, it were unjiift to reproach you^ 
even in thought, nor would I dare^ 
henceforth to offend your pity with one 
figh, out of the many thoufands it muft 
coft me. 
There was (he thought fo much good 
fenfe, refpeft, and dignity, in all he 
faid ; that it was with equal pain and 
pity fhe found power to anfwer, telling 
hira, that fhe held the high regard 
which he profcffed for her, an honour > 
as his high rank in life, was too unex- 
ceptionable 'to admit of an objcftion. 
But (he muft beg him to allow her to 
continue an alliance with his friendfhip 
only, fince (he, in more than that, could 
never think of acquiefcing, at having 
always been her opinion^ that a, parity 
of years and tempers, fliould be re- 
garded as a principle, towards render- 
ing the marriage ftate agreeable, 
FJis judgment could not help agree- 
ing, though in. fo unwilhed a fentence 
againft himfelf ; adding, that he muft 
only beg permiflion to make one re- 
fu fal 
OF ALMIRA; sf 
fofal on his part, as only he could prove 
the lofer by it ; it were f continued he) a 
fruitlefs effort, in the ableft phyfician, 
to attempt the patient's cure by nourifh- 
ing the malady ; and fuch muft be my 
cafe, deair madam, were I thus any longer 
to indulge my eyes and ears, when at 
my heart's expence, with all that has fo 
powerfully delighted them, — And it 
were to court new torments in the ob- 
fervation of a fcene moft dreaded! fome 
more deferving, or more happy lover ! . 
no, let me, thus unhappily defeated, now 
retreat ! nor by returning fuffer ftill more 
cruelly. 
I therefore humbly take my leave 
for ever, and may your future days be' 
happy, as min^ muft be wretched. 
Juft as he fpoke thefe words, and 
took his leave, with vifible emotion in 
his eyes and features, Crudelia entered 
the apartment^ and by a confciOus exul- 
tation in her look, difcovered (he had 
heard him, which greatly terrified the 
juftly grounded apprehenfion of her gen- 
tle niece : fhc thought this was no doubt 
D 3 the 
3« The HISTORY 
the luckiell ppportuoity to iibuivd Almt* 
r^*s way of thinking, therefore, asked 
her fneeringly, what o^her k>ver had ex- 
pelled fo great a ftar from hor horizw ? 
but in a moment, with a kinder look, 
and accent, as if from, recolleftiye hope, 
that this event might probably Iwlve. 
Iprung from a fecret preference of her 
fon, ihe beggpd her pardon for being 
fo inquifitive. 
Mira, faid ijic, I cannot look on you 
in any other light but that of my dear 
daughter, and that tender name, you 
know, will juftify my care and afliduity 
in all relpeds concerning you. — Such 
though you were not born, I cannot 
ceafe from wifhing you, and fuch, dear 
Mira, you have in your power to make 
yourfelf at any time. . 
Almira knew too well, but would not 
ftem to underftand her meaning, and 
rooft evafively, obligingly replied, that 
fhe was fenfible bow much fhe was- 
obliged for being looked upon by her 
in fuch a manner, and hoped (he never 
ihould give any reafonable caufe for her 
to 
OF A L MIR A. 39 
to leflen her regard 5 — but catched the 
rarlieft bpportunity to change the lub- 
jeft, whkh the moft welcome fight of 
her approaching friend Cleone gave her; 
and Credulia re-affumed her gloom of 
features, from the baulk her hopes had 
met with, in her neice*s too evafive an- 
fwer 5 and every word Ihe uttered after 
this, was full of vifible diftruft and fear; 
and anger, feemingly lay but unwillingly 
fupprefled, by all her little ftock of pru- 
dence, which made the life of this de- 
ferving lady, grow hourly more un- 
happy. 
But fuch was her fupcrior goodnefs, 
that fhe refolved to drive refentment 
from her thoughts, unlcfs fo much pro- 
voked, that fenfe and reafon would be 
fufFereris by her forbearance. 
Yet had Ihe been more wretched in 
this melancholy fituation, had Ihe not 
been miftrefs of that power, to find 
within herfelf that fatisfadlion, which 
too many maidens of her years, and for- 
tune, take the trouble to hunt abroad, 
though very often in the fruitlefs fearch 
D 4 of. 
4<3i TifE HISTOR.Y 
of. -Refledlion was to her an ever Wel« 
come gueft, and ferved both as an en^ 
tcrtaining friend, and prudent cpunfel- 
lor, that taught her mind rather to 
meet with pity, than difguft, the tedious, 
train of foibles, to which human nature 
is incident ; and flie would often f?iy, as 
ihe was liable to err herfelf, ^s well as 
Other niortals, patience was bqt a kind 
of felfifli charity, though feemingly be- 
llowed on others, and a duty indifpen-r 
fible. Books were her chief delight, 
and, having ^ tafle ^nd genius too for 
poetry, fomdtimes Ihe would amufe her^ 
felf in writing verfes, of which the fol- 
lowing pages give fome f^mples. 
Her time was therefore never bur-r 
thenfome without the aid of cards or 
company, and needlework would often 
make a part of her employment, but it 
was fuch as proyed agreeable and ufeful ; 
nor did (he think it, worthy commenda^^ 
tion for a lady to deprive her eyes of 
power, to make a better ufe of the^n ; 
only to have it faid, that (he had humbly 
imitated at the beft, a piece of lace with 
which her milliner, without fuch lo(s of 
time 
OF A L MIR A. 41 
titne and trouble, could have furntfhed 
But I Ihould be too tedious for my 
readers, (hould I proceed with the detail 
of her accomplifhments and virtues ^ I 
therefore will refume her ftory. 
It was not long before Amanda fent 
ijfi order to return her vifit; a vifir, 
which had left no faint imprefllon on 
the heart of her, whofe foul would not 
allow her to believe, to what true caufe 
flie owed its ftrong eiFedt, and that the 
tendered of prepofleffions had ufurped 
an empire in her breaft. 
Now as Amanda was a woman of a 
gay and witty turn of temper, (he could 
not flip the. opportunity fo lately given 
her of rallying Almira j and fhe was 
fcarcc fat down before flie thus began. 
A fine young lady, truly ! pray, what 
amends do you intend to make, for hav- 
ing the other day fo lavifhly Ihot forth 
your lightening, that its force fo inftan- 
taneouiiy could ftrike Florello, one of 
the 
42 The history 
tliic moft worthy fiicndi my littk kry* 
has to bead ? fome fatisfa6lion I demand, 
nor ihall lefs than half a dozen vifits, 
made me in a fhorter time than you 
have favoured me with one, excufe you, 
and in cafe of non-compliance, witch- 
craft at leaft, I fhall pronounce againd 
you ; for Mackbeth*s whole train could 
not have (hewn a ftronger influence. But 
you aJDcady have juftly fufFered for it, 
in loofmg that afternoon a converfation, 
&ch as but few men I ever knew, ex- 
cepting him, are capable of furnifhing ; 
for you can form no proper judgment of 
him, I alTure you, fince he was not him- 
felf that day you . faw him. He left us. 
truly, quickly after you was gone, nor 
have, we fecn him fince, though we ex- 
pefted him, but he- had fenfe enough 
however left him juft to ask your name, 
and where you lived,, before he went 
away, that he perhaps might entertain 
his {lumbers by repeating it. 
Almira after fmiling at this rallery, 
and anfwering it as well as fhe was able, 
(though honeft confcioufncfs appeared 
through fweet confulion) defired to 
know 
6F ALMIRA^ ' 4r 
know his name like wife, in order to be 
even with him as (he faid, for fuch a cu- . 
riofity. — To which Amanda replyed as 
follows. 
His father (Mr. Bellmore) is, my 
dear, our neighbour in Hercfordfhire ; a 
very worthy man, with whom we have 
been acquainted twenty years. Theeftate 
which he poflefles, is reckoned worth a 
hundred thoufand pounds ; befides large 
fums of money in the public funds. He 
has a wife, indeed, poor man, of a lefs 
bappy turn of temper than himfeif, fub- 
je^ to fpleen and pride, and quite impa* 
tient of the leaft cpntroul ; (though fiich 
as always is influenced both by reafbn 
and good manners, from him whom.hu- 
man and religious laws have made her 
mafter; but generally (he is to other 
people much more condefcending. They 
have no children living, out of many, 
bat Florello, who is juft returned from 
his travels ; he is, I think, now in the 
twenty-fourth year of his age, and is, 
indeed, an excellent young n>an ! but 
when he is to ftand on hi^ preferment, 
yoa 
/£s The history 
you muft not be admitted into the 
company. 
* . s 
Almira blufhcd, and looked a little^ 
filly, and chofe to alter their difcourfe to 
Various fubjeds. 
Cleone made a propofition for a walk 
riiat evening in the Park \ which, they 
agreeing to, Amanda's coach conveyed' 
them quickly thither s, they living in the 
neighbourhood of St. James's. 
Crudelia was abroad that afternoon » 
tho' (he would often, by choice, avoid , 
making one of the party among Almira's 
vifiters, unlefs there was a gentleman^ 
amongft them whom fhe imagined there 
was reafon to be fearful and careful of. 
The evening was ferenely pleafing ; 
and the walks were filled with what is 
called the beft of company. They pur- 
pofed walking round ; and only took the 
crowded walk, as in their way to pafs 
through ; for Almira faid, flie thought 
tlic common method of re-treading in an 
hour one path fo often, looked abfurd 
and 
OF ALMIRA. ^ 45 
sjid vain, by tacitly declaring to the 
beholders, that they thenfifelves believed, 
they could not be obfcrved too frequent- 
ly ; tho' Ihe had yet fcen but a few, (he 
a4ded, who, in her opinion, were dc- 
fcrving any notice. 
'. 
Well then, replied Amanda, I will 
fliew you one more at lead, this mo- 
ment : fee ! there are five in company ; 
three ladies, and two gentlemen : now, 
I Ihall leave it to yourfelf to find out 
which of the five I mean. 
Juft then Cleone tapped Almira on 
the arm ; and, whifpering, asked her, if 
fhe knew that beau in brown and filver ? 
but Ihe had then no time to anfwer her, 
excepting, (with a crimfQn'd blufh) that 
it was Florello, by reafon he was juft 
theil come up to them. He too difcover- 
ed that he was not infenfible whom he 
approached ; and bowed refpedfully, con- 
fufed, in paffing by them. 
s ■ * s ' . 
Well, cried Amanda, now I find he 
is not yet recovered ; for I have never, 
till this moment, met him any where 
Tthe 
46 The HISTORY 
(tht church alone fomctimes «cepted^ 
but he would (top and fpeak to me* 
He was in company with ladies, ma- 
dam, ^returned Almira^ and might, per- 
haps, be engaged too deeply in fome dif- 
courfe, to break the thread of it abrupt- 
ly ; and, in fuch a cafe, you ihould ex-^ 
cufe him. Nay, replied Amanda, if you 
pardon him, my dear, I fancy it will 
prove fufficient. And, in that moment, 
who Ihould join company with them 
but him they were then talking of, to 
prove how neceflary it is to (peak with, 
caution in all public places. 
He asked Amanda's pardon for ha- 
ving been obliged to pafs fo rudely by 
her juft before; adding, that as bis 
fault in that he could afiure her was 
attended with fufficient momentary pu- 
nifhment, he hoped (he would forgive 
him. 
This fpeech being fo a-propos to what 
they had been faying, overfpread each 
cheek with fome confufion, they all imar 
gining that he had over- heard them ; 
and. 
OF almira; 47 
<nd^ therefore, the more intimate Aman-- 
da anfwered him» that fhe really thought^ 
and had been faying, it ftood in need of 
fome apology, unlefs the lady, fhe had 
once heard him fpeak of, was in his 
company when he pafied by them. 
Madam, replied Florello, I am at a 
lofs to anfweryou. What lady can you 
mean ? for I can recolleft no one - 1 
would not leave with pleafurc inexpref- 
fible to join this company* Who that 
has any fkill in painting would not 
chooie to contemplate on the moft finifb- 
ed pieces ! Here arc too many fign-poft 
fort of beauties, forgive my fimile, hung 
out to attraft beholders, at the expencc 
of fhame and modefty ! I muft confefs, 
lince my return to England, I fcem 
dropped into a new world*, and every 
place, that ufed to give me pleafure, pre- . 
fcnts me now fo often^ with objeds of 
difguft, that I could even envy old 
Diogenes, but that his tub*s dim^enfion 
muft exclude this company. Modefty, 
once efteemed the great charafteriftic of 
your lovely fex, is almoft generally ba- 
niflxd now 5 ^nd the effeminacy fo na- 
tural 
48 r.At HISTQR^r 
lural and amiable in yours, regenerated 
into ours* 
Amanda own'd, that what he faid 
Cfhe thought^ was juft ; and faid it 
brougbt to her remembrance fome fa-, 
vourite lines (he had read ; which, as 
none there could take offence at, fhe 
would repeat them. They were as follow : 
Oh^ woman I woman! woman I think tike man<, 
But look andfpeak^ and move^ with native fenjif 
Of fower derived from fweetnef 5, Once our crime 
Was tempting man toojirongly. Now Uis ours 
To abdicate old power ^ to tempt at allj - 
Andjhame deftre from beauty. Light as air^ 
And emptier than the void, we flutter through j 
Flirting fantajlic on^ from fcorn to fcom^ 
Wejir'addle o^er^ and burfi all bounds of love* 
O! beabfolv*d^yefultansoftheEaJl! 
If there your prophet faw the fex fo loji^ 
Well might he fcruple to allow us foul f 
m 
Florellaexprefled himfelf much pleafed 
swith them ; — Almira and Cleone fmiled 
on each other, knowing the author of 
them. H^ begged to know it likewife ^ 
but. 
o F A L M I R A. 49 
but being told that iecrecy had been 
enjoined, was fatisfied to gain the pro- 
mife only of a copy of them, but added, 
that he thought jthe perfon need not 
wilfa to be unknown^ fince none could 
be offended at fuch juft and general fatyr, 
whom any human creature of good fenfe, 
would wifh to pleafe at all. 
s 
Almira told him, fhe believed he 
would not choofe himfelf to read them 
to thofe ladies he had juft then left, cf* 
pecially if one of them was her, who 
caufed him fo much pain one day, from 
her refemblance only being feen, fince 
lovers, fhe had heaird, was always fearful 
of ofFeoding, but that he, no doubt, was 
ableft to inform them if that was true ; 
and added, that fhe had indeed fo much 
of wonianifli impertinence and curiofky, 
that fhe wifhed to fee that lady, if fhe 
was really in the park. 
His eyes immediately befought the 
ground, as if to find an anfwer, when 
recollecting his invented ftory at Aman- 
da's, which was in truth no more than 
an apology for his confiifion on feeing 
Vol. I. E Almira 
s6. th* history 
Almira there $ he raifed them on her^ 
brightening through a lover^s l9nguor, 
and rcplyed as follows. 
When^ madam, I have next the ha- 
ndwr of feeing you, I (hall perhaps be 
able to oblige myfelf in (hewing her to 
you i but could thofe ladies, amdngft 
whom you thought (he was juft now, be 
fenfible how high a compliment you 
have made them in that miftake, they 
would, in my opinion, have much more 
reafon to be proud of their accomplifb- 
ments,. than have many of our moft ce- 
lebrated beauties ; but I will venture to 
alTure you, it would wound me greatly, 
if yoy, madam, whofe judgment none 
who know you, I am perfuaded, can 
doubt the ftrength of, Ihould condemn 
, my admiration <^ her ; as for thefe la- 
dies, I will hope I may be fafe in their 
jcind approbation of my choke, for Ihc 
is too like one they both admire and 
love, for them to difopprove her. 
That is, replyed Amanda to Cleone, 
a coriipliment made to our friend, ^ me^- 
thinks fomehow, which we both fcem 
com- 
nr j^LMI^Aa* St 
CoBipdled to joiH ih, if imt to fiay for^^ 
and by their looks upon each! otheiv 
they difcovered plainly that they undcr- 
ftood his meaniflgi 
Ibut Almira ^ being fikut, Flofdld 
ehanged the fubjofl, by defiring to 
know if flie admired mufick ? faying 
that he knew Amanda did^ and he 
flioutd think hjmfelf the moft obligjed^ 
by their acceptance of fomc ticket? foi' 
a concert, which he had taken for the 
benefit of an Unhappy gentleman I whofe 
frcat b<nevotence of heart to others, 
ad been the ctnly caufc of his misfor» 
tunes. 
^hat !b 1 taufe; turned Almlr^^ 
that demands aid of €v«ry powerful 
friend to virtue, and fhe begged Ihe 
tiiight have fix of them, haviii|g the 
mony ready for them ill her hana A* 
tnanda made the fanfie requeft, but be 
declared, with a polite confufion, that 
lanlefs be might be honoured by theif 
tondefcending to accept of tJiem, he 
Ihould be angry with himielf for hav- 
ing named it> ^4 doubly fo, us it mult 
£ a prov,€! 
$2 The history 
prove the means of his ofFending, by a 
difobedience not to be avoided. 
Amanda then, in order to decide it, 
told him, he fhould give them all to 
her, which he having done, ihe added, 
that ihe would manage the account her- 
felf and balance it, perhaps, by foon in- 
viting him to a concert of her own, an 
oppofite indeed to his, for it would 
oblige one of the mod happy families. 
Had you not named an obligation, 
madam, Florello anfwered, I fhould 
have guejSed that family would prove 
your own. 
It is, returned Amanda, and the ap- 
pearance of this company, on the com- 
memoration of a day, from which that 
happinefs was dated, will be held by my 
beft half, and me, the kindeft obliga- 
tion ; I muft not be denied by any one 
of you ; and I expert you all (hall like^ 
wife take it as a particular diftin<flion, as 
it has been our rule, to have no corn*- 
pany upon our wedding day, but thofe 
judged were happy like ourfclves, 
that 
OF ALMIRA. 53 
that envy might not come amongft us. 
But I ihould furnifli room for laughing 
at us, were I to tell you how feldom ('till 
we added fingle people to our number) 
we have been able to make up a company 
fufficient for a country«dance ; tho' our 
acquaintance is, you know, extenfi ve ; yet 
our intimates were but few. 
This is, I own, a whim , but may not 
private meetings be as whimfical as pub- 
lic ones ? No club, among you gentle- 
men, admits a member improperly ini- 
tiated -, and who, that is wife at all, 
would wilh unhappinefs to be aflbciate^ 
with true felicity ! An ugly, threatning 
omen, in the very found, methinks, there 
feems, that ihould forbid it upon fuch 
occafions. 
But, madam, (faid Florello) give me 
leave to afk a queftion. How are the 
members of your fociety to be admitted ? 
Not upon oath, but judgment, I fup-> 
pofe ? fince, if they are, 1 muft decline, 
I frankly own, the honour of accepting 
your pleafing invitation. 
£3 Sh« 
1^ T-tt* MlSYORY 
Sht (laugWilg) hiifvt^ttdy No; thkt 
Hfhat Ih^ gathered" from appfciaranc^s was 
tttl ft^Axed her choiW by; and Aat, 
f irdWd-, iflight soften too dfcceivts, wert 
Xtmh cofupelled to be tf^ fpwker of their 
fodety -, but fome allowsinces were mad« 
Ibfthc uftmarried, finc^ theffe is great 
difference between thofe who are not 
quite fo happy as they would be^ an4 
tt^ers who are l^nown {0 be really xia^ 
' Theft, madam, upon futh allowances, 
{replted FlOrello) I c^4^ with joy attend 
ytj^ I atid, nrioreover, promife thii, (if tii6 
'ittbft pleaiing profped don't deeeiv^e mc) 
that I will be that day happier than any 
bther 'company on earth could make me! 
My friend, your worthy fpoufe, I make 
no doubt, will be, by then, returned out 
tf *the North ; tho' now the day is pear, 
for Thurfday is, I think, the 2;oth, 
It is, {replied Amanda), and, as you 
will fee that very date upon thefe tickqts^ 
fir, you juft now gave me, I need not 
doubt your pardon for returning them % 
f ho* J Ihall infift upon it, that the poor 
gen. 
or almira: ss 
g^deixiafi, diere mentioned^ may not be 
a loofer, but a gainer by it, To-morrow 
I expeft my dear Fidelio, as he has wrote 
me word he ihould reach home by Tuef* 
day evening. But, added (he, in ipite 
of all my oftentatious boaliing, as if 1 
would be thought above a monal's date, 
I will difcover to you an unwonhy 
weaknefs in my nature, from which alone 
my happinefs has fuffered hitherto,— it 
ifi the frequent contemplating on the me- 
lancholy certainty of being feparated 
£nDm it ! and, notwithftandtng reafon and 
religion both condemn me -for this want 
of fortitude, I unavoidably goon, and 
fin againit convkftion. . 
Thus, fir, you fee a reafon why all 
paths mult be by me excluded on this 
fubjedl, and ought even in the mod ac- 
compliihed ftate on earth, to all appear- 
ance.-r-I was this morning reading a few 
lines which pleafed and pained me much *, 
and, as they are very a-propos to my 
difcourfe, I will repeat them to you. 
Their author is no ftranger to this com- 
pany^ and I wiU, one day, let you read 
E 4 the 
5^ The HISTORY 
th^ poem ; but th^fe four lines partial* 
larly, dwelt upon my menwry, 
O / why were friend/hip's concords wound 
fo high! 
^0 found the fofteft.fweeteft^ftrongeft notes. 
When envious death mufijnap each tuneful 
firing. 
And all the keys of barmotr/ be mute ! 
AH. prefent joining in the approba* 
tioh of them, excepting Almira, fbe 
undefigncdly difcovered who was the au- 
thor of them. 
Juft then an unexpefted and unwel- 
come fhower obliged them, with pre- 
cipitation, to haften to their coach ; and 
the much-concerned Florello, (after ex- 
preffing politely his warm hopes, that he 
fhould be fo happy to find again on 
Thurfday, the fatisfadlion he was then 
too foon deprived of) ftepped into his 
chair, which waited for him in the 
Stable-Yard. 
Amanda fet down Almira and Cleone 
at their own door, but would not be perr 
fwaded 
OF almira; 57 
iwaded to a*Iight, for there was a vilible 
alteration in her fpirits, occafioned by 
the melancholy part of her difcourfe 
that evening. It greatly influenced her 
beauteous friend; and had not kind 
Cleone, now and then broke filence, in 
their driving home, they had appeared 
a filent meeting ; but, at their parting, 
Ihc forgot not to remind them of the ex* 
pefted vifit on the Thurfday following* 
That night Crudelia and her fon were 
both to fup abroad, ftho* not together) 
which left thefe female friends an op- 
portunity agreeably of furnifliing them- 
felves with converl'ation ; a favour they 
would gladly have difpenfed with oftner ; 
for, where we fear, the true felicity of 
love or friendfliip muft be wanting ! ex- 
cepting only the pleafmg fear, or care, of 
giving any pain to thofe we fo efteem, 
Almira aflced Cleone, what (he thought 
of this Florcllo, now fhe had heard, as 
well as feen him ? 
She anfwered, he appeared (flie 
thought) as amiable in mind as pcrfon ! if 
he 
5S Thb history 
be was not deceitful, like coo many of 
bis fex ^ but he has given one inilance 
of his judgment, added ihe, that calls 
for no fufpicion, his preference of you to 
every other woman. 
Fie, fie, Cleone, faid Almira, fufier 
pot thy kind partiality ib much to pre* 
poflefs thee. Thefe travellers, in order 
to become agreeable, are often found to 
be thus lavifh of their praifes s, which, 
generally, are ^s light and tranlicnt, as ' 
the air tbro^ which they are conveyed : 
and, yet, how many melancholy proofs 
are daily given, of credulous poor girls 
being taken in thofe traps, thrown QVt 
to catch tl^ir folly ! 
That is very true, my dear, ("replied 
the other^ and probably it was one of 
thofe poor damfels gave birth to an old 
favourite fong of mine ; which is fb 
^-propos to what you have been faying, 
that I muft fmg it to you. The words 
were thefe : 
Junlia^ 
OF A L MIR A, 59 
Jturelia^ pretty^ fair and youngs 
Out of her window faw 
A (age^ to which feme lime- twigs hung^ 
Unwary^ birds Po draw. 
yf . blackbird in the cage was put^ 
9d a£i the tempter there ; 
>4t I Aft a fparrcw^filly jlut ! 
Came hopping on the fnare. 
AlaSy poor bird ! Jurelia faid^ 
Confinement is thy fate ! 
fiut little thought the harmlefs maid 
That it would be herftate : 
^Till young Alexis , rich and fair ^ 
4urelia chanced to fee ; 
JVhofiWd her untaught heart with €are^ 
And fo entrapped was ftje. 
Almira thanked Cleone for the fong, 
^nd told her, (he believed it was her own. 
But Cleone aflured her it was not, and 
fhat (he had been told it was wrote by a 
young lady, when (he was eleven years 
old. 
But, to refum'e our former fubjeft^ 
^dded (he, fince you have always fufFcred 
<i» 
6o r^E HISTORY 
me ro*ufe a fifter*s freedom with you, 
joined to the friend's, I would advife Al- 
niira to fortify her heart with all its na- 
tive noble ftrength ! to ftand the repeated 
force of this young gentleman's accom- 
plifliments. For, unprepared with, ne- 
ceffary caution, many a general, as brave 
as you are, (v/horh I have read of) has 
been taken by furprize. While you re- 
main thus innocently unalarmed, believe 
me, you are in danger. 
But you muft certainly be fafe you 
think -j-^his forces are detached to other 
quarters. But tell me. Do you in rerfity 
defire to lee this lady ? or, would you 
not, at leaft, be as well pleafed with the 
continuance of his agreeable account of 
her ? firice, fhould fhe prove unworthy 
the comparifon of being like you, tne- 
thinks the affront would vex you -, and^ 
if fuperior to you, in your opinion, 
(whofe modeft impartiality, I know, 
might own it, tho* no other perfon might 
allow it juft) pray who would wifh, or 
court occafion, for thinking meanly of 
their own perfcftions ? 
But, 
Of ALMIRA. 
But, you will have this curiofity fooa 
fatisfied. He faid, (you may remember) 
that he fhould be, next Thurfday, more 
happy than all other companies on earth 
could make him; therefore, this all* 
excelling fair-one! will, I alTure you» 
moil: certainly be there. 
* . . 
; And doft thou really think Ihc will, 
Cleone ? (replied Almjra) If I was fure 
of that, I would not go ; for I, you know^ 
never loved mix'd company ; and (life is 
quite a ftranger to us all, (except indeed 
Florello) for even Amanda, whom flit 
IS to vifit, did not fcem to know her, 
when fhe was mentioned ; befides^ at 
prefect, I am ,npt fond of cultivating 
new acquaintance : when I become mor^' 
miftrefs of myfelf, than now, with any 
fa[tisfa«5lion, I can be ; I may, perhaps, 
think otherwife. No, my Cleone, thou 
.flialt go, I think, alone that evening, and 
carry an cxcufe for me : I fhall be bet- 
ter fatisfied with thy account of what has 
pafled, than if I had myfelf been prefent. 
♦ 
And were it to be fo, my friend, (replied 
Cleone, fmiling) and fhould this much- 
feared 
6% fHE HlSfOfeY 
feared rival, or*' what is hisr*namtf| 
appear i I know not whether friendfliip 
might not punilb me, as much as love 
might probably another perfon I could 
name. — There is a bird, I have heard of^ 
which (when it hides its head) imagines 
no one can fee it -, but, had that bird been 
blefled with reafon! would not youj 
yourfelf, have wondered more at fuch a 
firange fimplicity ? 
I think, (returned Almira) that no 
bird I ever heard of, could have a wildcf 
note than thine at prefent. Friendfhip and 
love, and birds that hide their heads ! 
Prithee, dear Cleone, fpcak intelligibly, 
that I may' better know how I fhould 
anfwer thee. , 
r 
That I will do, replied the other, when 
the rcferved Almira is pleafed to give her 
friend a better reafon for defiring to 
avoid this vifit. D6 you remember thefe 
two lines ? wrote by an author, I the 
hioft eftcem. ** The pidure of love," 
my dear^ the poem is called. 
M 
or ALMIRA. €i 
yffi that we Jpeak^ or koky or tbink^ or 
Is above thought^ and out of reafon*s 
V)ay. 
Then, cried Almira, thou haft cer* 
tainly confeffed thyfelf in love, CIconc. 
No, no, (returned the other) but thou, 
t^ithout confcfling it, art certainly in 
love, Almira \ fo it runs much better- 
But were It {o^ indeed, Cleone, (fince 
now I can a Kttle plainer comprehend 
thy meaning) is it not prudent, if wc 
fee a dangerous quickfand, to. keep clear 
of it, if poflible ? Should I allow your 
ilrange fuggeftion to be juft, thefe lines 
(cho' not fa good) may prove as applica- 
ble as yours, you juft now quoted. 
If IxfVi attetnpis to court the virgin's eye^ 
O, let ber^ quickfy^ from the tempter fiy ! 
But^Jhould be once difturb ber gentle rejij . 
Confine tbeprifomr clofe wit bin ber breaft. 
For buried lamps^ tbey fay^ for ages lie ; 
Butf when tbey are expcs^d tofigbt^ tbey die. 
Well, 
64 The HISTORY 
Well, now, my innocendy artful 
friend (replied Cleone), I find you then 
had only wifely fortified a heart you did 
not choofe to own there was the lead: 
neceflity for guarding; but, notwith- 
ftanding all precaution, this hero will, 
I fee, at laft be conqueror ! and yet, as 
certainly, you will fee this conqueror at 
your mercy, or I am much miftaken. 
Juft here, a hafty rap at the ftreet- 
door furprized them into filence ; and, 
prefently, a fervant brought up a letter 
left by a ftranger, who (he faid) had bu- 
finefs with his lady Crudeli^a, and of great 
confequence. 
The perfon hearing fhe was not at 
home, defired the letter niight be taken 
care of, that fhe might have it the mo- 
ment fhe returned. 
Almira faw it was her coufin Flavillo*s 
hand ; upon which, Cleone was curious 
to difcover the contents, if poffible, fay- 
ing, that from a quarter fo diverting^ 
they might find fomething to occafion 
laughter, and hardly (hould difcover any 
plot 
OF ALMIRA. Cg 
plot of much importance. She, there- 
fore, as it was made up negligently, and 
without a cafe, by turning it about, per- 
ceived that he was then in hands the 
tnoft ungentle, on fome affair of debt, 
being in a bailiff^s houfe, where he de^ 
fired immediately to fee his mother. 
Juft after they had fatisfied their cu- 
rioiity, Crudelia came home, and in a 
gayer humour than they were often ufcd 
to fee her ; — a kind preparative ! for the 
unwelcome oppofite fhe was to meet 
with ; but which is too obfervable in the 
occurrences of human life, where joy 
and forrow do as generally fore- run each 
other, as fliadow does the fubftance^ 
She did not prefently perceive the 
letter on the table ; which, when fhe 
had found, and read, her much diforder- 
ed features would have difcovered, that 
ibme unpleafing bufinefs it contained, 
had they not already known it. But Ihe 
Icemed careful that they (hould not dif- 
cern it ; and, putting it into her pocket, 
prefently withdrew ; and, as they after- 
vrards were told, ordered a hackney 
Vol. I, F coach 
66 The HISTORY 
ooaieh to be called inftantlf ; and for 
th^ atght they iaw no more of her, as 
it was very lafie when fhe returned 
The morning ioBowins, they beheld 
die ^angeft aheratibn in hier manaer of 
behartoun A confetous fattsfadlion, tas 
king pains to bide itfeif from obferva- 
tion^ then choughtfotnefi and doubt, 
fucceeded by a penetrating look of llrong 
enquiry, wouM (eem to ix her whole at^ 
cention on Almira ; and, with a kinder 
voice than ufu^, (he aflced her, if ffae 
did not wonder wh»« her coufin FiacirHh> 
W*5 ? * 
Alfflira answered her, that (he haA 
certainly no right to be inquilitive con- 
cd*ning him. 
At wbkh, CrodelSa laughed, and feid, 
YftlU but however, you will not be 
angry if I (houid telt you, I fhppofc ? 
He lent me word laft night, how much 
agamft his inclination he was detained 
by an^ acquaintance, who obliged hirh 
to go out of town with him ; but he 
propofes to return to day, and he dcfired 
me 
of ALMIRA. €7 
me to prefent his beft itipcAs and lovfe 
to yoa. 
The air and purport of this coimtef- 
feited ftory, you may fuppofe, amazed 
them iTot a little ; not could Almira, 
tver ftrenuous in her love of ti;tirfi, tdl 
how tb ^nfwer her civilly ^ and, there- 
fore, breakfaft being over, ftie rofe in 
haffe, and vr^nt td l^r apaitnlent, with- 
out making any anfwer to it. 
Crudelia, without ceremony to Ocbnc, 
X#hom (he both feared and hated) wcAt 
out direftly; tdlihg her fervants, fhe 
Ihduld ifcrt come home till ievenif%. 
It will be proper here, to Jet the reader 
Jcnow, to what this change, fo vifible in 
her^ #as owinc j tho* ft was long before 
Almira t$r Cleone could account for iti 
When file went out the night befoife, 
in order to releafe her fon fnSm a largp 
debt, fol- which his taylor had arretted 
iiitii, (Which funi (he haa given him long 
before to pay) he was no fooher cleared 
from that, than the fame officer pre- 
F 2 fentc4 
^ Th£ HIStORY 
featied lutn with fuch another biliet; for 
a gdidfmith's bill, amouating ta a hun- 
dred pounds^ for a gold watch, fnuiF- 
box, and a variety of womens trinkets. 
This iecond ffliock, his mother was no 
way prepared for ; fir^ as fhe had not 
brought a fum fiiffidenc with her, to 
difcharge it ; and fecondly, the ufe and 
nature of that debt (he had not been 
ttquainted with. 
; The Ion was lifcewifeas unprepared 
himielf ior this ; and knew not what 
io fay, for a confiderable time ; at laft, 
an eyil genius,, ever ready to affifl: its 
pupil, helped him out, and bade him 
' :6>rm the foUowing tale. 
That fioce the rafcal of a tradefman 
had, he faid, through his ioipertineot 
impatience, obliged him to dilcover it 
, befone He intended it ; why, he muft 
tell her, but he would ^on be even witii 
^ the iboundrel for it. Then taking ho" 
to the remoteUt part of the room, pra- 
* coedod thus : 
That 
or ALMIRA. 69 
That a]] thoic bauble^ were tlie pre- 
fents he had ma(k fats coulio Mira ; Imt 
that fuch was her peculiar way of thiak-* 
ii)g, that though ihe privatelv bad Ca£^ 
fered him to make his addrel]^s to her, 
fhe wotild not ghre him kave to make 
it known, not even to her, till fbc 
thought proper, and that he couki not 
tell how ibon he might be able to pro- 
nounce her his, tbofe prelents he had 
made her, having obliged her greatly ;' 
but, added he, you muft not, madam, 
for the world, take the leaft notice of 
it, for it would everlaftingly ofkod her. 
This ftory reconciled the partially 
weak-fighted mother, to the parting with 
her money,which, on the following day,; 
ihe carried to him, but told him fhc 
thought indeed the watch was needlefs, 
Alnura having a very handibme one be- 
fore, that was her mother's. That was, 
he faid, too large a fize, and now not 
fafbionable ; which anfwer fatisfied, and 
fhe was thus, at the (ame time, both 
plealed and cheated. But the lovely in- 
ofienfive fubjeft of this fraud, was to be 
F^ made 
70^ Thb history 
made too myph a fufferer by it, (h)9ugh 
ignoraat of ^11, £q/ d^ confi^eral^le time. 
FUvillo thought himfelf now under 
the neceflity^j in ord^ to prevent his be- 
ing dpteft^d by bis mother, tps glter hi^ 
behaviour, when obipryed by her i^ 
tall^it^g to his coufin \^ and being neve^ 
ufed. tQ join refpeft with love, M^hicl^ 
Igfl^ hp thought it wa^; neceil^ry for himi 
to aSedt a little qf^ Almira often waS| 
provoH^ed to repr%4i>d him wa^inly, fop 
tiip >Y^nt of fuch re^a,. which anger,, 
he pKvail(?d. on >y eak Crudeya to mif- 
conftrue, as a mark of her afFeftion for 
him* ^hich ihc: was, fo defirou^ to h?ve 
9Pn€e^if;d. He ^ye. a fampl^ of tjus 
coB^ud^ th^ very evening h^ was re- 
kaieds Y^hich both ^^}X2^ and Cljsoae, 
tQol^ at Erft ta b^ occ^H^n^d l?y ^ ^- 
ce& of joy, mingled with wi^* Qn fee- 
ing deliv^d from ^e ypplo^iKlng fip^^.- 
tipfi, which thegjfenpw be hi*d b,ee» in. 
l^\k fipc^ing ll^ QAnfinuap.ee pf it (feily^ 
^l^ra iwn begto t<j gEQj«r v^ryiHi- 
h^ppy^ a^d had been more ib, bMt th^^ 
flie p^i^ recollf^^d whaf he bad.difr 
cpy^d to her, th^t his afFeftions were 
before 
OF ilLMIRA. 71 
before ei^ged. This, as lie likewife 
well remembered, he W8i$ in great per* 
plexity, at being <4>l]ged to hazard the 
difobliging her, for jfear fbe fhould dif* 
cioie that fecret to his mother. And 
thus embarraOed by his own iimplidty^ 
he made a ftiU more aukward figure* He 
had reafbn to be certain, he fboold 
never gain her 2|qprobation of his match 
in view, of which the ibUowing ifaeets 
give a more fuU account ; his head noc 
being formed to make a polidcian, he 
found bimfelf embarked in an afiair that 
might turn out hss ruin, as Cmdelia's 
paffion, mod predominant, was avarice. 
But it was now too late to remedy aU 
that he wtihed unfaid ; and he muft 
BOW wade on through mire, with 
which he had himfeif fonmmded, cho* 
notbii^ ffMd^ be icared, could be ex« 
peded from it. 
But we will leave lorn for die piefent^ 
and attend Amaoda^s wedding day, 
which being ccme, Ckone f[> prervaiied 
with her preponderating friend, tdkat jQie 
cmifented to gp with her, tod, » AvMn^ 
4a tokl her, Ihe indeed appeared her- 
F 4 felf 
72 The HISTORY 
fclf the emprefs of a bridal day, tho^ 
every bride cannot be juftly compli- 
mented with the endowments and beha- 
viour of Almira. Her drefs was likewifc 
fuitable, being a new white fattin, juft 
made up, as fecond mourning for her 
father. Her head^drefs, therefore, was 
plain cyprefs only, on which that day, 
by way of compliment, Ihe wore white 
ribbands, in the place of black ; and 
as her perfon was above the aid of orna- 
ments, ihe looked as amiable as all the 
ftudied oppofites of colours, affifted by 
the richeft glittering of jewels, gold or 
filver, could have made hcr^ 
The company invited, were got there 
before .Almira and Cleone. Amanda 
met them on their entering the room, 
with that diftioguifhed eafe and complai- 
fance, which is peculiar to good breed- 
ing -, and Fidelio, her worthy Ipoufe, 
addreffed Almira to the following efFedl ; 
he told her, he had been premeditating 
fome revenge, but fince the fair defen- 
dant had appeared, he mufl: expe<5t no 
pardon from the company then prefent, 
ihould 
OF A L MIR A. 73 
ihouid he proceed to mention farther the 
accufation. 
She begged to know the intended fiif* 
ferer ? It is enough to tell you, that the 
liifFerers, madam, added he, would have 
included all who were here before yoy 
came, and my Amanda's heart mifledi 
her to believe fomething unwifhed muft 
certainly have happened ; when you, 
who ftood foremoft in her wiflies, could 
be the laft in gratifying them, for aji 
our little fenate are aflembled \ but this, 
he told her in a whifper ; though by the 
pkafed appearances of all the company, 
they might not, perhaps, have been dif- 
pleafed to hear the preference givet) to 
Almira ; for there wa? not a glance of 
envy feen that evening, to oppofe the 
admiration vifible in every countenance, 
towards that accomplilhed and defervin^ 
beauty, an inftance very feldom me| 
with even in the politefl: companies. Thi3 
party was indeed not large, as it con- 
fifted only of the following ten \ Aman^ 
da, and her fpoufe ; Almira and Cleone ^ 
Florello, and a lovely youth of fixteen 
years of age, the only child Amanda 
had 
74 Thz history 
Ivad been hlefiied with -^ Mariane and her 
fpoufe ; Horatio 'yad then married ^ Lvi« 
cretia, a young ]ady of good fortune, 
and uncommon underftanding, which 
j[ie was gping to give unufual proof of, 
by rewarding in Valentio, wit and me- 
rk, though unaccompanied with that, 
which does too often weigh both down, 
that .glittering drofs, which many of the 
vndeferying part of the world are made 
con^icuous by. He, her intended 
^uie, was Ukewife there, a gentleman 
of a diftinguiihai family,^ but trifling 
cftatse ; and fhe was miftrefs of a for- 
tune fufficient for them both, being an 
lieirefs ajt her own difpofaL 
As ibon as tea was brought in, Flo- 
lello knowing Amanda's tafte agreed 
with his, infifted he might have the ho- 
nour that generally is beftowed on fer- 
viants, to make their waiting needkfs. 
Almira now began to caft an eye of 
obfervation round, for the expefh^d lady 
beforementioned, who was fo much her 
)ikene& ^ but thcnight ihe was a ftranger 
to herfelf, or no one ibe faw thefc could 
be 
Of ALMIRA- J5 
be the pcrfw ; bawever, (h<; determined 
not to 2i^k A manda concernmg her, tho* 
full of fecret cunqfity and ejcpcclatioo, 
l^or were there ^ny, hy whole behavioyr 
fhe could be mifled to think, Ihe had 
difcove.red her, excepting Mariape, whp 
beipg acquainted iatimately with Flo* 
^s^lo, and having more of the free and 
faihionab{e deportpient, than Alnnrsi had 
been u^d to, that incHned her to a par'- 
tijculair examina^iQn of her, for fame 
time* J £b^ w^^ indeed agreeable, bui; 
w^thing more, nor could fhe long rc^ 
Ijn^ in thi$ fufpence, before flic found, 
by th^ reciprocal expreffion, my.dear^ 
Sh^t (be was married. That, my dear* 
is often a ki^id intelligible word ; and 
hm: £c»r that, \ii;e might ibmetimea be at 
^ lofs for a long while, to find the con- 
jugal alliance out, though thefe indeed^ 
were quite a happy couple, or at lead 
4^ h^ppy as any cm be truly faid to be 
Hoiratio was rather of toa referved a 
difpogtion, which rendered him not the 
beft quaUfied, either far making him- 
felf appear agreeable, or for fupporting 
converfatipn ,eloquently. This madti 
him^ 
7^ Tffi HISTORY 
6hif, after tea was oyer, propofe tEe^ 
calling in the aid of cards: to whtchr 
Amanda, with her ufuai frankneis, (acr- 
companied by a polite civility) replied. 
No, ifty good friend, I beg yoo to ex- 
cufe me ; for I will not thank yoa for 
that propoGtion now : cards may, I own, 
fometimes be found ufeful auxiliaries to 
ain aflembly, where the parties are un- 
able to ftrpport themfelves without 
themr ; but I have ever thought, it feem- 
cd ta argue a confcioufnefs of barren 
converfation, when they arc fnffered ta 
engrofs fbciety. And, therefore, you 
wilt now, I am lure, exclude them ; 
and allow Kkewifc, that this my plea 
needs no apology ; (confidering the 
company I here am favoured with) nor 
could I, at this time, forgive their rob- 
bery and interruption. 
He imifed, and bowed ; afking her 
pardon, and the whole circle; and 
Owned, that all fhe faid was ju&i yet 
looked a little as tho' he wiflied it other- 
wife, for he was very fond of that diver- 
£on. 
Mod 
OF A L MIR A- 77 
Moft of the company concurred ia 
l3ie fame way of thinking with Amanda; 
«ad Florello added, that he thought 
there were iboie other realbns which 
would juftiry her dw diXUke of them. 
As £rft, the interefted onotkre that is 
(oo generally annexed to playing at: 
cards : — ^the Hidden alterations made ia 
the fined forms and tempers, which are 
otherwife not bad ; which fhall, (con- 
jtinued he) as I was oncemyfelf a much*- 
iiarprized Ipcdator of, in a few mo.- 
ments, from^a run of bad foccefe, tranf- 
por^t a lady furioufly to jet h^r anger 
fall irom her fingers on the ears and face 
o( a young gentleman, who had indeed 
been impohte enough to beat her firft;, 
ivith his unfortunate good luck! that 
evening. 
4 
At this, Almira ftarting, cried. Can 
.4ihat be poffible ! And do you fay, you 
few it, fir ? But, pray^ what could that 
jpoox unhappy creature's education be? 
«> 
Madam, (returned Florello) there, in- 
deed, as you fufpeft, I find, lay the chij^f 
blame i and, it is to education often, 
many 
78 Titz HISTORY 
<nariy dre indebted fdr the unhajjpy 
ivives, which this great city (and many^ 
others} could Ihew us numbers of. Nor 
Is our fex lefs faulty, in my opinion -, fot 
thet^ are, I am afraid, an equal numb^ 
of bad hufbands : onl)^, that many vkes 
being, by cuftom, as well as reafbn-, 
deemed more excufable in ihen than ^6*- 
men ; foibles, in the one, are counted 
crimes ; which are not taken notice of, 
or only fmiled at> in the other. As ih 
particular, inconftahcy ; though, for my 
part, I own fincerely, that, when marriecl^ 
both the man and woman ought to bfe 
equally, I think, under the fame reftrifti- 
ons 5 fuch as wifdom, love, and rirtuiJ^ 
always Ibould approve of. 
O, fir, cried Mariane, your diicouffe 
on marriage brings to my remembrance, 
that I have never Ihewn you, (tho* I pro- 
mifed it) thofe verfes I was favoured 
with, wrote by a young lady to her ne#- 
married friend. They may be plleafir^ 
to this whole aflembly ; and there are 
fonfie, befides yourfelf, I know, here pre- 
fent, who are admirers of poetry. 
Then, 
OF ALMIRA. 79 
Then, taking them out of her pocket- 
book, fhe gave them to Florello ; whd 
(being de&ttd fo to do) rod them aloud. 
They* were as follow : 
O, mff gentk friend^ h blejt f 
*Tis a dtar but daring truft : 
Sbefinmld bappieji be^ vrbtl's btfi^ 
Were but love and fortune jt^. 
Buti in marriage, maids mufifieer 
On adark^ and doubtful fed ; 
iVbere too often rocks are near^ 
0^henfr4im danger all looks free^ 
Tit J if foul, and form y can tbarM f 
Tmtb and wit^ and honour joirCd^ 
ToUj my friend^ arefafe from tarm% 
Mifirefs of a grateful mind! 
Ijove^ from reafm^ borrows blifs ; 
*There^ fecure^ your triumph reigns t 
He^ who knows what merit isj 
Cannot wound your heart with pains* 
AU fmiled on Mariane jH^efently, be- 
lieving they were wrote to her, fhe being 
but lately married ; but fhe afTured 
Amanda, (when fhe afked her) that they 
were not j for, if they had, Ac fhould 
not 
to The history 
riot have had fufficient vanity to beat* 
fterfelf to fliew them, however proud 
file might have been of fuch a compli- 
Pcitnt. 
They all exprefled themfelves pleafed 
^ith the lines ; but in particular Lu- 
cretia, who likewife told them, flie had 
met with them before v and, as flie wasr 
feldom known to be a favourer of rhyme, 
(her genius being more adapted to the 
graver ftudies) her admiration might 
be partial ; as the fubjeft they were 
wrote upon affefted her not difagreea- 
bly ; for fhe was then, herfelf, juft go- 
ing to enter into the matrimonial ftate^ 
as was before obferved. 
I have been filently taking niyfelf to 
task, my dear Amanda, faid Fidelio, on 
thofe three words my friend Florello 
juft now made ufe of, — wifdotti, love, 
and virtue, in the married ftate j and I 
am proud to find myfelf fo equal to 
the examination, as to the laft two of 
them : but, as to wifdom, I am only 
certain, that I fet out with her in mar- 
riage i but, whether I have loft her in 
my 
Of ALMIRA. 8x 
jfyy journcyi that thou canft beft inform 
Uie. However, if I have, fince my 
Amanda never wanted her, we could, 
not be, r am convinced, without her. 
And if, (replied Amanda,) to have 
for twenty years been governed by the 
rules of love and virtue ! are not marks 
of wifdom on your fide ; pray, who 
would wifli to change the happy folly ?; 
This may, indeed, ;. be faid of wifdom 
(fingly), that k i^.AOt fufficient, always, 
to give happinefs. We have had, you 
know, too many proofs of that, in thofe 
we have been acquainted with ; where, 
from the one's being confcious of poflcf- 
fing thofe accomplifhments of mind the 
other wanted ; by the contempt, which 
that produced, both were too foon pof- 
iejfTed of lefs content than many an hum- 
ble cottager ; and were, at length, bereft 
of all domeftic comfort ! 
< 
Madam, replied Horatio, I now in- 
tirely acquiefce with you, concerning 
cards ; and am alhamed, when I refledt 
on my too thoughtlefs propofition. 
In donverfation, fuch as you yourfelf 
Vol. I. G oblig9 
^ I 
St Thb fllSTORY 
oblige US with, to lift^n is to t^ifft 
aod we, new- married auditors, I think, 
ihould only fiCi and filently applauds 
r- - 
That may be very true, my dear, 
cried Mariane, in your opinion i yet I 
mutl beg your pardon, for I. cannot in^ 
tirely agree to it ; at kaft, you know, a 
woman's privilege is fpeaking : a ftander-^ 
by, fonf)et|mes likewifei^ you know, fees 
more than thofe who {day,— <-tbey ofttn' 
do t therefore, why may we not be then 
allowed fuch privilege to ipeak, where 
to conceal our thoughts were inexcufa* 
ble } that is, obferve, fuppofing them 
worth hearing. And you, I think, have 
liftened now to fuch a good eS^ft, that I 
could not have pardoned you, had you 
concealed the influence which truth and 
juftice had upon you. The fubjeft we 
are now upon, is a-propos. Now it 
was always my opinion, madam, (to 
Amanda) that there can be no medium 
in the marriage ftate. Take care, my 
dear, (then fmiling on Horatio^ that I 
may never change that way crif think- 
ing. 
A batchelor 
«p almira; ti 
A biktchdor has littkr right to pfcad 
in fuch a caufe* where he can certainly 
have h^ no pradtice, f returned Valcntlo^ 
but what that lady bai^ been faymg 
f looking on Mari^ne^ ferves as my pled > 
trtd it IS with mc a query, Whether the 
medium, madam, is not much radiet 
to be wiflied for, than the extreme of 
h^pirtcfs ! which ought to terrifV' re^- 
^Bedton; fhtce thit cannot be lafting* 
Mdrttlity itfelf forbids it *, and, wheh 
we arc exalted to to high a pitch, how 
great mtrft naturally be the apprehenfioft 
tf a M, not poffible to be agsdn, on 
earth, recovered! 
' But ts not this ^n odd confejflflon of 
your fendmcnts freplied Fidelio; in your 
lady^s prefencc ? Nay, even before (he 
is your lady too ? 
This carried a general finile; to which 
Valentio anfwered, he (hould efteem him- 
fclf no better than a hypocrite, (a cha- 
racter he ever moft detefted) if he was 
cupaWe of uttering any other fentiments 
than thofe his heart fhould di£late. 
'G 2 Lucre- 
84 The HISTORY 
Lupretia replied, Ihe fhould never 
have thought fo favourably of him, but 
for that way of thinking. Nor could 
ihe pity thofe, of her own fex, who 
would be courted with hypocrify and 
flattery ; when, with the lover, they 
ihould loofe rcipeft and tendernefs. The 
bafis to build happinefs upon, is friend«> 
fliip certainly, not adoration. The pu- 
nilhmetit of fuch idolatrous devotion, 
too foon denotes the crime of fo mif- 
placed an adulation, to any mortal beings 
and, where fuch Ihameful facrifice is 
offered, the offerer is feldom worth re- 
ceiving. 
Madam, replied Amanda, thefe are 
fentiments as juft ^in my opinion^ as, I 
am afraid, they are uncommon, in the 
prefent age. But, it were to be wilhed, 
that fuch could be imprinted on the nie- 
mory of every fingle woman. 
» 
What a pity it was, that poor Do- 
rihda was not guided by fuch a happy 
depth of penetration I You have heard, 
ho doubt, her melancholy ftory. 
The 
or ALMIRA. ^5 
The other anfwering, (he had not, 
Amanda thus related it : 
. Dorinda was a lady of diftinguiihed 
beauty, fenfe, and fortune, and an only 
child to an indulgent mother, her father 
being dead. She was of an age fuf- 
ceptable of foft imprcflions, wanting 
feveral years of twenty, when her ill- 
fortune threw her ihto the way of one, 
whom fhe was foon, Ctoo foon alas \) 
prevailed upon to receive as the moft ar- 
dent lover ! and, confequently, ihe, too 
foon, became a lover too. His form, 
drefs, equipage, were all moft glaringly 
attrading ! and his fortune was repre- 
fcnted greatly fapcrior to the expcftations 
of her own ; tho' he indeed pretended 
it was in another kingdom. — Her mo- 
ther was' equally conlenting to their 
nuptials, Her wedding - cloaths were 
made, and day appointed i juft before 
which, a lady, bathed in tears, delired 
to Ipeak with poor Dorinda ; and, in a 
manner the moft moving, laid this dread- 
ful fecret open ! which fhe had before 
(by him) been frighted and perfwaded 
into keeping from her : 
G 3 . —That 
86^ The HISTORY 
-*-That (he bad been for many ycarsi 
the wife of him who was to be foon 
Dorinda's hufband ; which fhe con firmed 
the truth of, by her produced certificate. 
—That fhfi had living many children 
by him, and was obliged to ilruggle hard 
herfelf, in order to maintain them, be 
being not able : — And that the profpe^ 
of Dorinda's fortune was the motive of 
this bafe ad^ion ! which he had promifed 
her a part of for fecrecy ; but that her 
love for him, aqd hatred of fo black an 
ll^on, forced her to make this fad dif* 
tovcry 5 regardlefs of the confequences 
(fas to herfdff) if (he could fave an in- 
jured ftranger from fuch threatning fure 
deftruftion ! and prefe^ve her huibanc^ 
from fb deep a guilt ! 
And melancholy were, indeed, the 
eonfeqiiiences which attended it, to that 
unhappy innocent ! who, loyipg this im^ 
mpral monfteir> almo(^ \o^ diftraftion, 
fickened thro' grief, in a few days, with' 
' a malignant fever, which relieved her 
fbon from human bafenefs ; but, a fhort 
time before her death, flie gathered 
calmnefs fuited t« the ftate Ihe was the^ 
in. 
OF ALMIRA. 9f 
iri, and left that fortune^ as fhe ohoie^ 
amongft her kindred^ which had ib fyi* 
uUy proved her undoing ! 
They all returned Amanda thanks, 
for her relation of this ftory, notwith- 
ftanding it had coil: fome oi them tears, 
vho had hot been before acquainted 
with it ; among which number, Cleone 
itemed the i;rioft affeded, nor could fhe 
raife her fpirits nil that evening > which 
her kind friend Almira, foon perceivings 
rallied her upon, and told her, (he 
ihould believe fhe was related to, or elfii 
acquainted with, that lady, if fhe conci-f 
nued her concern much longer. . 
Cleone blamed herfelf for iiich an 
ill-timed weaknefs, and promiied to drivd 
it from her memory y but, added, that 
0)C never was indeed fo much affefted 
with a flory of a perfon fhe had never 
any knowledge of* 
. Fidelio then defired they might drop 
^his melancholy hrflory, by waiciftg oti 
the mufic that attended them in th« 
Im^ gallery ; where they rnwft all, he 
G 4 faid. 
88 The HISTORY 
iaid, oblige him with a dance ; as it 
was always his opinion, that the body's 
cxercife was full as neceffary as the 
mind's ; begging my own good ferious 
lady's pardon, there, ("pointing to his 
Amanda^ who, to confirm her readinefs 
to obey, gave him her hand to lead the 
way for all the reft to choofe their part- 
ners. Next Marianc, very willingly, 
gave hers to her Horatio : Valentio 
claimed Lucretia's s, and Florello court- 
ed with his eyes, as well as with his 
hand and voice, the partner whom he 
moft defired. The young Amintor was 
the only perfon left for Cleone : and 
thus they. all proceeded to the gallery. 
Their entertainment there, may better 
be imagined, than defcribed ^ it giving 
room for little converfation worth re- 
citing ; tho' agreeable to thofe concerned. 
After fome hours fatigue of pleafure, 
they left off awhile, 'to give fome relt 
both to themfelves and the muficians, 
whom Amanda ordered to go down for 
fome refrefliment. Mean while Ihe went 
likewife to give fome neceffary orders for 
the 
OF A L M I R A. 89 
the entertainment preparing for their 
fupper. 
This gallery was handfomely adorned 
with piftures by the fineil hands ; which 
foon attrafted every eye, then more at 
leifure to obferve them. 
Almira's whole attention, for fonie 
time, was taken up in contemplating 
and comparing the features of two cele- 
brated beauties ; infomuch, that not ob- 
ferving who it. was that flood behind 
her, and thinking that it was Cleone, 
(moft of the company being got to the 
other end of the gallery, examining ano- 
ther famous piece; Ihe cried, Do but 
obferve, Cleone, the difference of thefe. 
rival beauties ! How lovely is the look 
of modefty in one ! compared with the 
too confcious air of the other ! Is (he 
not, think ye, (pointing to the firft (he 
fpoke oQ the fweeteft form you ever faw ? 
Forgive me, madam, (in a low voice, 
replied Florello) that 1 dare difTent from 
an opinion, fuch as yours, in any thing? 
but tho' I both muft fee and 0\vn, that 
modefty has certainly the moft attraft- 
ing 
90 Thb history 
mg charms ; yet) I hs^ve (ten a mord 
engaging form that that, in my opinion v 
and then in much confufion, looking 
firft round, to fee if any one was near, 
he from his pocket took a box, fealed up 
in a paper -, and faid, will you forgive 
me this prefumption, deareft madam ? 
prefllng it eagerly in her hand; it is only 
to convince you, that I have in beauty, 
a better tafte than you, in all things 
elfe, I own myfelf widely inferior to 
you. 
m 
Almira, who by this time was co- 
vered with no lefs confufion than Flo- 
rcUo, from obferying her miftake, and 
his reply, was, with a trembling hand, 
juft going to open it, when he prevent- 
ed her by whilperjng haftily, not here, 
for pity's fake, dear madam ; and the 
company juft then approaching toward^ 
them, (he conveyed it to her pocket un- 
perccived, but could not hide fo eafily, 
the flutter it had put her fpirits into, 
which was not increafed a little, by the 
humorous fpeech Fidelio made^ who 
coming up to her that moment, ac- 
fofted her as follows. So, my fair friend! 
0;« 
OP ALMIRA. 9t 
Qne would bav^ thought the fun^ as lively 
as be looks to day^ 
Had wanted warmth^ without a lover's aid^ 
fo light up that carnation. 
It is well, good fir, returned Almira, 
there is / a prologue to your fpcech, 
whofe power has art in it to n;iake the 
yell be pardoned, for even raillery is fa- 
ered, when the i^^me of ' f ricndfhip is. 
annexed to it. 
And therefore, madam,; added he, I 
have a right, I hope you will allow, to 
be obliged in any rcafoaable requeft I 
make you ? There is a plot againft you, 
I was in trqth the author of it, but all 
here, are now made parties in it like- 
wife J you are" to prove, whether or no, 
this gallery defcrves the famous charac- 
ter it bears, for crediting the voice in 
finging. And yonder comes my wife^ 
to fecond me in this requeft, I am fure -^ 
which all there,, joining in the defiring^ 
of, Almira was prevailed upon to fingj 
the following fong. 
92 The HISTORY 
How wretched is the youthful mind^ 
Who^ to difcretMs diilates^ blind 5 
Will pajfions fiery courfe engage^ 
To w-n the follies of the age ! .... 
To hunt with rapture new deftres^ 
Which even in overtaking fires. 
No joy but fuch can hope to lafty 
As r eaf on finds ^ and fixes faff : 
As unallay^d and virtuous love^ 
' May copy from theftmple dove : 
Who void of mortals vice^ or art^ 
On one beftows its little heart, . 
O virtue ! what on earth can bCy 
So lovely as fweet conftancy ; . , . 
Where foulsy by marriage bands are joined^ 
Which time improves^ if thou, art kind \ 
But where thou^ virtue^ wilt not blefs^ 
T.he greatefi fiate is wretchednefs. . 
All were unanimous in their applaufe, 
and admiration of Almira's voice, ex- 
cept Florello j who could find juft then, 
no language fufficient to exprefs his 
thoughts in, therefore conveyed them 
only in a figh. And prefently the bell 
informing them their fupper waited, 
they forfook the gallery, and were par- 
takers 
OF ALMIRA. 93 
takers of as elegant an entertainment, 
as could be furnifhed, by a tafte fo equal 
to it, as Amanda's. It was enlivened 
by the band of mufick ; who were 
ieated at one end of a large room, where* 
in they fuppcd, and played at every 
health propofcd, till ordered to with- 
draw again, to give an hour's opportu- 
nity for converfation, and likewife, that 
they might again regale themfelves with 
reft and feafting, till they were to attend 
this little ball asain. 
While they were varioufly amufed 
with fweetmeats, wine, and chearfulnefs, 
Horatio ftarted the following health, 
fuch lading happineis to all the unmar- 
ried, who were then prelent, when they 
changed their ftate, as was pofTefTed by 
his t.wo worthy friends, the mafter, and 
obliging miftrefs of the ceremony. As 
for myfelf, faid he, I have not yet ferved 
my apprenticelhip, and therefore cannot 
yet, you know, fet up for an example, 
or a mafter. 
They who fet up too foon, replied 
Lucrctia, are too often very foon m ide 
bank- 
^4 tHt HIStQRY 
li)ankru{>ts } but I perfuade myfelf yoti 
are above the danger^ fir ; as well as 
thofe you have chofen for our patterns^* 
. O, madatn^ cryed Fidelio, k is tod 
bold, and even prefumptuous for any l^ 
us, to believe our/elves above it, or 
while we feel^ and think we really are fo| 
^e niuft, like prudent fbldiers^ ftand at* 
ways armed for unexpcAcd danger, for 
various and utidreamed of are the af^ 
faults which frequently deftroy, or ha*' 
zard the deftroying domeftick happinefs. 
Two friends of mine, experienced feme 
years fince^ how nccefTary it was to do 
fo, and thence defpifed an accident, that 
otherwife might probably have made 
them wretched. 
Aurelius and CordeKa^ were a couple 
who bad many years been known to h^ 
more bleil^d in matrimony, than moft 
this age affords examples of; hap^y 
enough to raife that ever ready fiend, 
fell envy, to endeavour ways and means, 
if poffible, to ruin it. How to attempt 
it, was the only difficulty, for they were 
never happy, but in each others com- 
pany^ 
or ALMIRA, 95 
'|)any. A friend however, or rather 
fuch a counterfeited one, as often takes 
the facrcd name of friendlhip, only to 
> prophane it, ]aid this cruel fcheme ; he 
influenced a wretched, low, and wicked 
woman, to pretend fhe had been de- 
luded by this worthy man, (whofc cha- 
rafter was an eftablifhed one, for virtue, 
and the abhorrence of fuch guilt, efpe- 
cially in wedlock) and that fhe fhould 
fend home an infant, whom fhe called 
his own, to be maintained by him : and 
many vile and falfe illiterate letters, 
were fcnt to Aurelius, all to this effeft. 
s There was that mutual harmony, and 
happy confidence, in both Aurelius and 
his fpouie, concerning one another, that 
no one part of either*s correfpondence, s 
ever was concealed from the other^s fight. 
He had no fooner read the fir ft of thefe 
mofl infamous epiflles, than ,with a 
countenance prolifick, equally of inno* 
cence, and great aflonifhrnent, he gave 
it to his Cordelia. But what a blelTed 
pre-eminence, has an eftablifhed virtue ! 
for fhe knew him juftly, and there was 
a fufEcient proof of its fuperiority given, 
ia 
S6 Thf history 
in her manner of receiving it \ fince all 
fuch artifice, could but imprefs her mind 
.with nothing more than due contempt^ 
and deteftation for the wretch, who had 
premeditated fuch an execrable villainy, 
againft her good Aurelius ; nor had it 
power to deftroy one moment of that 
felicity, whofe apparent brightnefs had 
drawn forth, fo dark a cloud of an in- 
fernal kind of ,envy ; for any other mo- 
tive of peak, or malice, &c. could 
never be difcovcred. But in a fhort 
time after, a more fuccefsful eneoiy tp 
earthly happinefs, divided theni effedtu- 
ally, and he was taken from all fenfe of 
fuffering, through human b^fcnefs, Al- 
mira much applauded the happy forti- 
tude of mind Cordelia (hewed, on this 
occafion j adding, that Ihe^ believed there 
were too many happy couples, who 
would be rendered ptherwife in fuch a 
cafe, though it muft argue fmall regard, 
fhe owned, or elfe a very mean opinion 
certainly of one another ; when either a 
hulband, or a wife, can be by others in- 
fluenced to think the leaft indifferently, 
of an objeft fo before approved, and 
dear, from an experienced merit. 
To 
Of A L NTI R A* 9 jr 
To which Florello, with an air of 
gallantry, replyed : 
Dijiruji is poor ; and a mifplac^ d fufpicion 
Invites andjuftifies the faljebood feared. 
So fays the poet, whom my friend Fi- 
delio juft now quoted, madam, I well 
remember; but though fufpicion often 
I believe invites, or is the caufe, it never 
can, in my opinion, juftify in matri* 
mony the fmalleft falfehood ; for, if I 
have a juft idea of that facred ftate, it 
is both emulative of a heavenly one, 
and ihould, as nearly as is poffible for 
mortals, approach, and repreient the 
likenefs of it, in purity and truth ; but, 
I am afraid too many of us, (et out 
quite wrong) while we are fingle ; and 
in our journey towards the married one, 
from falfe and glittering profpe6ts, then 
around us, deftroy our relilh, for the 
too generally plain domeftic manfion we 
are going to inhabit. For courtfhip is, 
in fad, with moft, mere mafquerade ; 
and wedlock, never fails to ftrip off 
foon, each parties mafque, and many 
are with reafon, (hocked to fee the ugly 
form a beauteous viiage had before con* 
Vol.1. H cealcd. 
98 The HISTORY 
coted. Yet, this worft.viiard of the 
mind, isu of fo thin. a fabrick, that if 
dim-fightednefa, was not too commonly 
a failing of the judgment, it might, I 
am certain, eafily be feen through, and 
I am vain enough to thinks I could my-, 
iclf difcovcr it. 
O no, fir, no ; you arc indeed mi- 
ftaken, returned Fidelio, that is not a taflc 
U> eafy as you imagine ; though I ooce 
thought the fame myfelf, but was pro- 
digioufly deceived ; as for example, nowjg 
I own in my Amanda, I expeded a good 
woman, or I would not have had her, buc 
flic has quite deceive me, and has proved 
beyond my expeAations of a mortal ! 
. The beginning and concIuGon of thia 
fpeech, had given a painter admirable 
room to cxercife his genius, from the 
profufion and coniraft of paffions, vi* 
fible in every countenance^ but love, 
and gratitude, would have beca repre- 
fcDted in the moft jull and amiable de* 
gree, in cafe the features of the ntoft 
fenfibly obliged Amanda, could have 
been truly taken ; fbc bluibed, and 
bowed 
or AI4MIR A; g^ 
bowed to him, with fmiling coniciouf-^ 
nefs of happy oblig^ition ^ bat J07, 
fometimes, cannot ('like other torrents) 
QverSow from fuUnefs into fpeech, and 
fhe could make no anfwer therefore to 
it, but fuch a» might be read through 
the mofl fpeaking eye^. 
Horatio, looking upon his Mariane, 
with an air of tendernefs 1 charged her, 
by her good friend's example, to con-' 
tinue to deceive him juft in the fame 
cunner. 
And now Florello grew impatient for 
apother opportunity, of frequently ap«> 
proaching the fair hand., whofe heart 
he wiflied to captivate^ and therefore 
thought it long before the mufick was 
returned, which he inadvertently dif- 
covered^ by often looking towards the 
ck>or, and hanging an enquiring ear that 
way 5 which the polite Fidelio obferv* 
ing, ftepped out and haftened the re- 
turn of. They danced out the re- 
mainder of the evenin:7, with general 
iatisfaftion, and audible delight 5 for 
diac diveriion, when conduced with the 
H 2 delicacy 
ICO The HISTORY 
delicacy of good breedings by a iele^ 
afiembly, polite as this was, is both a* 
greeable and healthy, and is a benefit 
cial relaxation to the mind, as fleep isr 
to the body. But it is too frequently 
made ufe of, I allow, to purpofes left 
innocent, and as one melancholy in^ 
ftance of the truth of that affertion, oc- 
curs this moment to my memory; it 
may not here be difagreeable to mention 
it, though foreign to my prefent ftory. 
Lucinda was a young lady of fmaU 
fortune ; who, havipg loft her parents, 
lived with a near relation, and her two 
daughters. She vifited with them ; and 
was relpefted, as if fhe had been their 
lifter, and lived with amity and fatisfac- 
tion, for a confiderable time. 
One evening they were all invited td 
a ball, to which, as ufual, they accom^ 
panied each other. 
Lucinda was unhappily the miftrefs 
of an attrafting form, I fay unhappily j 
becaufe, if that is not defended, by the 
ftrifteft prudence, joined with virtue, it 
muft 
br ALMIRA. loi 
9iuft be looked upon as a misfortune 
only. 
They had not long been there, before 
ihe was obferved by a young gentleman, 
whole glittering drefs, at leaft, befpoke 
him fuch, for he Was quite a ftranger to 
them, and he addrefled her for his 
partner. She too readily accepted him, 
^d fhe alone took up his .whole atten- 
tion all the evening ^ and he engaged 
fo much of hers, that all her ^male 
friends, feeing themfelves fo much ne- 
gleded, in comparifon with her, and 
the hour growing very late, propofed 
to her their going home ^ but fhe much 
more agreeably amufed, on one lide, did 
not fo readily incline to liften towards 
the other, till at the concluHon of an- 
other dance, which fhe was by him per- 
fwaded to join in. She found, in ihort, 
that her difgufted company had left her, 
and were gone away, nor was there, 
upon enquiry, any fervant left to guard 
her, or provide a coach or chair. This 
put her fpirits in the greatefl agitation, 
fear and furprize could give them, 
H 3 aided 
102 Thb HIS'TORY 
aided by no fmaH rcfentment, againft 
her female friends,, we may fuppofe, - 
The night being far advanced, and aa 
the weather was very bad, no chair, or 
coach, was to be got, though her affidu* 
ous partner, feemed to ufc his beft en* 
deavoursi to procure one for her. He 
would not fufFer her, by any means, ta 
venture home alone, at ftjch a time of 
night, therefore attended her himfelf. 
But how redoubled was her vexation^ 
and furprize, when fhe got there, to 
find, that no admifllon could be had, 
that all the family were gooe to bed, of 
would not feem to hear her. 
What could fhe do ? fhe knew it 
was too late to vifit any of her ac» 
Guaintance, nor could fhe bear the 
tnought of her appearance; draggled, 
and almoft drowned with the rain, and 
dirt, having had many ftreets to walk 
through, fhe would have refled at the 
door till morning, but, that young 
Vainlove, ufed his ableft arguments, in 
order to perfwade her from> by rouzing 
' oip ALMIRA.' 105 
up her pricfe againft a pad: fndig^ 
nity; that he, by ibothing her na- 
tural vanity, might lull her apprehcn- 
fion into an inc;^)acity of feeing thro' 
another, that was coo ibon intended for 
her. 
In fine, with much intreaty, and a 
great number of profeffions, intimating 
the mod facred honour, in his pretenfi^ 
ons, he prevailed with her at length to 
be condufted by him, to take Ihelter in 
his habitation, he having chambers not 
far off, in one of the inns of court ; and 
there, too foon, alas f by oaths of love, 
and conftancy, flie was deprived of inf 
nocence, and rendered thence incapable, 
through confcious fbame, of ever more 
returning to her relations ; whom Vain- 
love miflcd no opportunity of rcjM-e- 
lenting, as unworthy of her, from their 
having been the caufe, he faid, of what 
Ihe called her great misfortune, though 
his greateft happinefs, would fhe be per- 
fwaded likewife to find hers in it. How 
long he thought it fo, I have forgot, 
but from this dark blot, her charter 
was ever after ftained, and juftly over- 
H 4 Ijpread 
104 The HISTORY 
fpread with fhame and mfamy ! thougfr 
it muft be acknowledged, that if fome 
latent fparks of native weaknefs, had not 
poflefled her difpofition, flic would hare 
been proof againft intreaties, of fo in- 
delicate a nature as going home with 
him ; and refolutely would have perfifted 
in her propofition of having her relati- 
on's threfhold for her pillow, if none 
more eligible could have hep thought 
of for hen 
But to return to our much more a- 
greeable aHembly. Amanda's company 
broke up, before it was a proper hour to 
bid good morning to each other ; and we 
may believe, Alniira did not choofe to 
reft, till fhe had quieted hercuriofity, 
concerning what Florello gave her in 
the gallery ; and when fhe had broke 
the feal that held it, (he found it was a 
fnufF-box made of gold, the fhape of it 
a heart, adorned with diamonds, in the 
genteeleft and richeft manner ; but how 
aftoniflied was (he, when upon opening 
it, fhe found the lid contained her pic- 
ture, drawn in the drefs fhe wore at the 
play, that night Florello faw her firft. 
W ithin 
OF almira; 105 
Within the paper it was fealed, were 
wrote thefe lines : 
^bisj fweet enquirer ! only this can he^ 
The UkenefSy which idea gives of thee. 
Tet think me not to lovelier beauties blinds 
Refleifion^s abler pencil paints thy mind ! 
That lovely portrait ! foars above all art ; 
But glows with heavenly influence at my 
heart. 
Thefe, (when fhe had read them to 
herfelf) (be bid Cleone read ; who exult- 
ed not a little to find flie had, in love- 
difcoveries, been a wifer penetrater than 
Almira ; and, turning round and round 
again the paper, in rolling up the fnufF- 
box (when fhe had done admiring the 
beauty of its worknrianlhip) (he found, 
and read aloud, the following lines : 
" Think me not, deareft madam, an 
** intruder, too prefumptuous, if I dare 
** wait on you ! fince, from your ap- 
*' probation of this my too - afpiring 
" choice, my happinefs muft hence .ex- 
*» peft its date/' 
A foft 
io6 Thb history 
A fbft furprize and palcncfi irmric* 
diately appeared to over-fpread Almira's 
features. Which, when her friend per- 
ceived, fhe feared fomc indifpofition wasr 
the caufe of it ; not knowing, but that 
ihe had feen thofe lines before, Ihc gave 
them to her. 
Alas J faid fhe, my dear Cleone, what 
thou haft been reading laft, occafioned 
it. Thefe only z^xt the weak indifpofi- 
tions arifing from my fears perhaps; 
and yet there is a fluttering at my heart, 
which, as 1 never felt before, methinks 
fhould look like fome unwiflied fore- 
boding. This rigid aunt of mine will 
certainly affront him, if he comes here ; 
and I ihall make a filly figure to be 
obliged to fee it and permit it. Why 
does he wifli to add more fetters to a 
Ihackled flave ! but he, indeed, is igno- 
rant of my uneafy fituation What ntuft 
I do, my friend, in order to prevent thefe 
threatning troubles ? I muft, I think, 
fomc way put off this vifit he intends ^ 
tnc. 
Firft 
pF A L M I R A. 107 
Firft afk, ^returned ClceneJ that more 
judicious counftllor that juft now flut- 
tered fo ; and, if that feems to counte- 
nance this vifit, let not the ugly bug- 
bear of Crudelia's fordid mind, difluadc 
you from receiving it* — Compliablencfs 
of difpofition to oblige a friend, or a 
relation rather, I fhould call her, is cer- 
tainly as amiable, as it is praife- worthy ? 
But, if we offer to it, fb valuable a fa- 
crifiee as our own happinefs ; it then 
becomesj I think, a weakncfs, even were 
the objeft much more worthy than Gru- 
delia is ; nor can, in faft, a real friend 
defire it. But, if your grateful difpofi-' 
tion, induced by his apparent meiit,^ 
finds pity willing to repay, what he un-' 
bluftiing dares, I make no doubt, cal! 
love *, why fhould you fear aflerting to 
her, nobly and openly, that free choice, 
which nature planted in you firft, and a 
kind father taught to flourifli into the 
attainment of your wiflies. 
I thank thee, my Cleone, replied Al- 
mtra. All thy fentiments are juft, and 
worthy of thee ; and 1 fhould be too un- 
deferving of them, could 1 repay them 
with 
10$ 
The history 
swith deceit. Deceit is ever faulty : but 
to a friend fliip, candjd as thine, I feel 
that it would be inexcufable. Why 
fliould I fear, indeed ! at leaft to tbce, 
afferting all my thoughts. Yes, I con- 
fefs, I pity him ; I hope it is no more 
than pity !-~But he, replied Cleone, in- 
terrupting her : I will relieve thy tender 
delicacy, that other wife would have hefi- 
tated round about the truth, in uttering 
thefe few Ihort words : but he appears de- 
fcrving of my love; — and fo, indeed, I 
think him ; unlefs hypocrify has power 
to conceal itfelf behind the appearance 
of all human virtue ! And now take 
care you are not jealous of me ; as you 
know I am not often lavifh in the praifc 
of men. But he, in my opinion, feems 
po lefs a truly good and worthy man» 
than finilh'd gentleman. 
N9; if I know thee, and myfelf, I 
think that were impoflible, (returned 
Almira) thou couldft not give me.any 
caufe for jealoufy, (tho* thou haft, I 
allow, accomplifhments fufficient \) but, 
if thou could*ft, friend fliip would me* 
tamorphoifc 
OF ALMIR A. 109 
tamorphoife it^ I am perfwaded, into the 
tendered love and pity for thee. 
No ^ my Almira, cried Cleone, I 
fliould merit only deteftation from thee ; 
^s I am fure I fhould deteft myfelf, 
could I give room to any wi(h that 
clafhed with thine : tho* often we may 
fee the edge of poifonousjcaloufy. divide 
for-ever female intimacies ; friend(hip*s 
I will not call them, for fuch I hold 
more facred, and above the reach of all 
fuch low and grovelling opponents. 
It is, replied Almira, a reflcdion the 
moft degrading on the nobleft of our 
paffions ! that one fhould be annexed, as 
if iniepairable from ic, that is fo ignobly 
the reverfe of it. It is likewife an 
affront to our own judgment, when we 
fo eafily fufpeft an objeft is unworthy, 
whom we have thought before quite 
perfeA ; for, neither pity nor excufe is 
due to thofe, whofe folly places their re- 
gard, where merit does not firit invite 
and juftify them« 
AU 
no ^.nt HISTORY 
AH this founds well^ my dear, (re** 
turned Clcone, fmiling) yet, as the fay*. . 
ins runs. Much may be faid on both 
fides; -and fore- warned, fore- armed : 
therefore keep clear, I charge you, of 
this moft dangerous precipice, thatt lies 
in courtfhip*s journey ! The wife, and 
good, keep clear of it in matrimony 
always. 
Thus ended their diicourfe that nighty 
it being lao^^and both alike defirous of 
reft; for plcafure generally leaves fiit 
tigue behind it. Yet, notwithftanding 
that, fleep was for many hours a ilranger 
to Almira's eyes. — Florello held them 
open ; but (he pofieffed herfelf with the 
belief, that it was Crudelia only, whom 
(he had reafon to be fearful of. 
It was but a ibort time before Flot 
rello came s, impatient for the oppomi* 
nicy (that he was not fo eafily to have) 
of opening more his foul to her, whom 
be had, with his eyes, fufBciently ac- 
quainted of its fentiments. But, how 
fhall I defcribe the interview ! defcrip- 
tion muft fall fhort; therefore, the 
reader's 
Of almira; III 
itader's own judicious imagination muil: 
alfift my infufficiency. 
Crudelia, and her neice, were at their 
tea ; Cleone was gone out to vidt a fick 
fervaoc, who had formerly lived with 
Almini's father. Florello's name was 
ufhered in before him, by an attending 
footman ; and fhe had hardly time to 
anfwcr, ** Defirc him to walk up," be- 
fore fbe few him enter the room : nor 
had fhe power, or leifure, to fatisfy the 
bafty and half-angry queftion of her 
ftunt, ** Who is he, neice ? I know of no 
fochnamej" when he addreffed them 
both with fuitable refpedl ; but was un* 
able to conceal, in all he look'd and 
fftid, the paflion that accompanied it 3 
while paflions, of a very different nature, 
were working ftrongly on the features 
of Crudelia ; whofe penetration fcemed 
more intent to find Almira's ientiments 
concerning him, ,than to difcover whe« 
ther he was defcrving of her neice or 
not ; for that, indeed, fhe thought, no 
perfon but her fon could really be ; and, 
from his bafe delufion, fhe had for fome 
XxtM paft been eafy in her fears, but 
the 
Ill TU2 HISTORY 
the behaviour of Florello rouzed thcrtl" 
all again ; as Ihe had, by experience, Ikill 
enough in lovc-^afFairs, to fee and know 
that he was not a lover fo indifferent to 
Almira, as all before him were : and, by 
fome hints (he gave, it was plain, thac 
Ihe had not forgot her having fcen 
him at the play. 
However, (he took care to give no 
room for more than general topicks of 
difcourfe, by keeping fixed pofleffion of 
her feat, till at the expiration of two 
hours ; when Florello, with a deje<5ted 
air of difappointmenttookhis leave; but 
with flow-backening, and reluftant fteps, 
which fecmed confeffing honeftly, at 
every refpeftful bow, — I go 'tis true,-— 
tho' moft unwillingly ; — but leave my 
foul, and fenfes, all behind me ! 
And Almira, from conflifting paffions^ 
was, at his departure, not much lefs 
affefted ; ftie, every moment, was expeft- 
ing.thofc fort of leftures, which her aunt 
had a peculiar talent for, and which fhe 
thought her features fcemed prolific of: 
BuCf 
Of ALMIRA. 11^ 
Que, how agreeably was fhe furprized ! 
when fhe began as follows : 
I , . . . 
. " A very pretty gentleman, indeed ! 
but pray, haw long, .Almira, have you 
been acquainted with him ?'* 
s" ■ . . » 
She told her, but a little time *, and 
that he was her friend Amanda's particu- 
lar acquaintance ;-r-that fhe had feen him 
c^ten there, and in the Park with her; 
— and it was from that, he had claimed 
the privilege to vifit her. 
Crudelia's foul feemed at her. eyes 
while this was fpeaking, eager for more 
difcovery ; but artfully avoided letting 
her words betray fufpicion. But they 
pbferved fhe was in private with her fbn, 
in deep difcourfe, for a confiderable 
while that evening; yet feemed quite 
amicably gay at fupper : for, only at 
meal-times, they met ; Almira always 
hurrying to her apartment, as to a place 
of fandluary : and fhe was never there at 
any lofs for fut^eds of employment j 
readily and writing; needlework, and 
the diurnal that fhe always kept of every 
Vol. I. I thing 
H4 The HISTORY 
thing which had occurred worth notice, 
filled up her hours» when unengaged by 
company ; and much, indeed, took off 
her rclilh for fociety in general ; where, 
48 {he ufed to fay, the fweets lattending 
it are feldom powerful enough to aver- 
come the bitter. But, to proceed,— 
In a ihort time Crudelia and Flavillo 
were obliged to take a journey down to 
her eftate, to fettle fome repairs and 
leafiss, which juft then required their 
being prefent ) and: fhe u&d her beft en-* 
deavours to induce Almira to go with 
them. But (he defiVed carneftly to be ^ 
excufed ; alledging, that as it was. fo 
pear the feat which wasiier father's, (that 
they muft pafs even bjinhe door) Ihe 
yrould, at lead for fome tnpnths longer, 
choofe tx> avoid the ihock. which ieeing 
it mi^t give her ipirits. ^ 
And nowt Crudelia being gone, the 
coaft was clear, for our impatient lover 
to hope a proTperous voyage in love \ 
He, at Amanda- s houfe, foon heard, with 
joy, the news of their departure ; and, 
without iofs of time, repeats his vifit. . 
Almira 
ep ALMIRA; ti^ 
Almihi was alone, and reading, when he 
came ; and, being intently taken up by 
a pathetic ftory, which fhe was then juft 
entered on in Mrs. Rowe's Friendjbip in 
Deaths fhe did not hear or mind thq 
fervant*s opening of the 'door, or (hutting 
it ; nor knew that any body was near 
her, till fhe faw Florello bow before 
her; and, as fhe was attempting haftily 
to rife (with vifiblc confufion), hfe, on 
one knee, prevented her ; and, with the 
utmolt eloquence of eyes and 2ittitu.de 
befought forgivenefs, for the ardour of 
his lips upon her ravifhed hand. Then, 
for a few moments, bowing down his 
head, profoundly filent over it, he raifed 
and fixed his fparkling and expreiTive 
eyes on hers s, and woiald have made his 
opening lips 'relieve the overflowing ful- 
«efs of his heart ; but trembling timidity 
pofleffed the feat of utterance, till fhamc 
relieved him by a manly tear of love and 
joy ! fupprcfJcd by apprehenfion of of- 
fending ; which he would fain have hid, 
but could not ; and therefore, in a con- 
fufion much more amiable to fee, than 
eafy to relate, he rofe politely, and for a 
moment turned afide, to fummoh up 
I 2 fufficienc 
ii6 The HISTORY 
fuificient courage to pronounce the fol^ 
lowing fentence : (at leafl: to this eflfeft, 
for words arc feldom juftly literal, when 
conveyed by the remembrance of a per- 
fon fo concerned and circumftanced as 
it may be imagined Almira was juft 
then). 
s 
^ " Forgive me, deareft madam, if ex- 
cefs of rapture, from thus attaining the 
iong-wiihed-for bleffing of paying my 
relpeds to you alone, has carried me 
beyond thofe bounds, which my due 
adoration of your too powerful virtues 
ought to fet me ! Thofe virtues, madam, 
which my daring hope alpires to merit ! 
if the mod elevated fenfe of their fupe- 
rior force, can ever make a mortal mei it 
them. You are, I am certain, my deareft 
earthly angel ! And you muft have been, 
from the firft happy hour in which I faw 
you, acquainted with my paffion ; — that 
paf&on, which, on approaching your dear 
hand, a moment paft, almoft confumed 
my reafon. — May I have leave to hourilh 
this bold infant-hope ! Or, do you not, 
alas ! forbid me, as a wretch unworthy 
of fuch tranfcendent happinefs ! 
Almira 
01? almira; ti; 
Almira, here, only bowed gracefully, 
remaining for fome moments filenc ^ and 
then defired him to fit down, — making 
an effort to get up and reach a chair : 
but he, with a polite and interefted hafle, 
prevented her, by choofing one that 
ftood the ncareft . to her. He, when 
feated, turned towards her in a fort of 
profile pofture, amiably attentive i as if 
each atom of his frame was turning into 
ear, in expeftation of her anfwer. 
** Believe me, fir, (returned Almira) 
I am far from thinking you unworthy, 
of one much more deferving, than the 
maid pretends to be, whom your too 
partial praifes have juft now fo highly 
rated ! Arid I had always the greateft 
deteftiation for that too common (and, I 
think, difhoneft affeftation, and unge-. 
nerous) method of proceeding, too fre* 
quently made ufe of by my fex^ who 
think, that female modefty forbids them 
to declare the fmalleft fenfibility of me- 
rit in the other, tho' their judgment 
fees it ever fo confpicuous. *' 
I 3 O! (cried 
ii8 The HISTORY 
"O ! (cried FioreHo) hatching eager- 
]/ again her hand, and preffing it with 
ardour to his bending lips> fuficr me thu^ 
to fcal, and thus, — and thus, my ever- 
li^ng gratitude ! and Imdereft acknow*- 
ledgments! for fuch Unprefidented ex*- 
cellence of goodnefs ! To be approved 
by thee ! is more than man can merit. 
Yet my ambitious heart will not, alas ! 
be fatisfied with approbation only. But 
let it be^ hoic^orwatd^ my delighdbl 
talk, by copying thy refplendent virtues t 
to exalt it into a nobler and fofter 
name, lore ! only love I was formed and 
meant, my angel ! to be an adequate ro^ 
turn for lovt/* 
Here, bluihes ovcr*fpread Almira's 
cheek$; her eloquence was now all ii-^ 
lent ; yet Ihe attempted gently to with* 
draw the hand, which both Florelk>*s 
held ; as if thofe words, he uttered \a&^ 
had hurt it. And he, (being incapable 
of wounding fuch apparent delicacy) 
with looks of amorous contrition, pro^ 
ceeded thus : ** But, now, at leaft, jutf 
now, I will compound for pardon. Only 
fay but you pardon me!" 
To 
r 
iyr ALMIRA. 119 
Tp which ibc anfWisred^ (^witb a fmile 
of gentle dignity) I do; ifyouarebut 
as furc there is, in your opinion, occa- 
fion for your afldng it, as I am fearful 
you again may ftand in need of having 
it. And there can be no fmall hope of 
amendment, where the party is infenfible 
of any fault committed. 
Jufk then, Amanda^ with Cleone, 
breaking in upon them, put an end 
to a difcourfe, which notwithftanding 
left its tell-tale influence, on both their 
features, to occafion a vifible difcovering 
confcious fmile from both tbofe friends ^ 
whofe prefence kindly aided them with 
^neral topicks of con verfation 5 which, 
without them, would ceruinly much 
longer hare OHitinued agreeably parti-^ 
cular« 
And now, , Florello, having fo profpC'- 
rouQy fet out, proceeded for fome time 
in the purfuit of his amour uninter- 
rupted, and as happy as a lover in that 
fttuation ever can be faid to he ; for 
courtfhip, in its mod tranquil ftate, 
bears the fimilitude of all our earthly 
I 4 bleiTings! 
I20 .Th£ history 
bleflings ! where forerunning wilhes^ ea- 
gerly purfuing diftant happinefs,* treads 
down and overlooks all thofe which we 
already are in pofleffion of ; nor ever can 
make the accomplished prize fully repay 
our expeftation, for the pain, anxiety, 
and trouble it has coft us« 
Almira's heart, and reafon, received 
^im as a lover, and a beloved, and now 
Crudelia's prefence, who was foon ex- 
pefted. to return, was dreaded by both ^ 
Almira having let Florello know, how 
difagreeable a fituation, from her un- 
happy temper, (he was then in. But he was 
under the moft painful apprehenfions, 
from what Cleone, one day, without 
Almira's leave, informed him of, con- 
cerning Flavillo's being intended for Al- 
mira. And he endeavoured to demon- 
ftrate to her, how improbable it was, 
that ihe, Credulia, could long be igno- 
rant of that, \yhereon his future blifs fo 
much depended, and it was as certain, 
ihe would take . all proper meafures in 
her power, to fruftrate it, if pbflible. 
He hinted to her, that there was only 
one expedient, could with certainty, 
mui^ 
OF AX, MIR A. 121 
moft happily prevent her fchemes, for 
rendering them both perhaps unhappy ; 
his being lawfully the bleft proteftor of 
thofe charms, whofe influence, by all 
the laws of reafon, love, and nature, 
took up the whole attention of his foul 
already. 
But this, the nice punftilio in Almi- 
ra's way of thinking, could not the 
lead give into; for, though her judg- 
ment, and her love, had chofe him as 
their lord, (he would not more than no- 
minally call him hers, within fo fhort a 
knowledge of him as a few months 5 
nor would fhe let the glare of bridal ^ 
ornaments, extinguifli the remaining 
mourning which (he felt, fincerely, as 
well as wore, for an indulgent parent. 
What Ihould fhe therefore do? her 
open heart difdained hypocrify -, and 
weighing every reafonable circumftance, 
concerning her free choice, permitted by 
her father's will; what had ihe caufe to 
fear? alas! no more than a bad wo* 
man's rage of difappointment, in a fa- 
vorite view, of fordid intercft ; too often 
found. 
i« The history 
found, indeed, a powerful opponent a-* , 
gainft virtuous innocence, and gentle-^ 
nefs bf difpofition, fuch as Almir2i*s 
was i however, that ihc was determined 
to prepare her mind to meet with pa- 
tience. And then ihe entertained a, 
milder expectation of her, from the re-. 
colleftion of the favourable manner, in 
which (he fpoke to her, concerning Flo- 
rello, though (he had fecn fo little of 
him, and thought her good opinion, 
mu(l undoubtedly increafe, fronS havii^ 
a greater knowledge of his worthincfs. 
All this, determined her, in a (hort 
time after her aunt returned, to think 
of opening the affair with franknefs tQ 
her, but as the fequel will difcover an 
accident, unthought of, foon prevented 
it. 
One day, Florello, willing not to 
loofe one of thofe precious hours, which 
he could now enjoy uninterrupted, while 
Crudelia was from home, had made his 
vifit to Aimira earlier than ufual,^ and 
was to (lay and dine with her. 
Crude- 
or ALMIRA. 143 
Crudelia, being how grown quite im'- 
patient to return to town, though many 
thitigs Were ftill unfinifhed, wiich re* 
quired her attendance longer in the 
country -, Flavillo' influenced her, to let 
him wait their finilhing, which ftie con- 
jented to, and leaving for his ufc the 
coach and fervan ts, which went with 
them, took a place in the fta^e coach, 
from thence to London ; and choofing 
then to walk it home, left all thofe bun- 
tiles, which (he brought up with her, 
at the inn, till Ihe (hould fend for them. 
When fhe approached her door, fht 
found it moft obligingly left open, as if 
on purpofe for her coming ; but this 
was owing in reality to negligence, . not 
' duty, for none in town were made ac* 
quainted with the time fhe intended to 
fet out. 
ft 
Sufpicion always makes the greateft 
ufe, if not the beft, of eyes, and ears j 
ibe, unobferved by any of the family, 
crept foftly up the ftairs^ and (topping 
at the dining-room door, could plainly 
hear FIofclk)*s voice, for he juft then, 
unfortu- , 
124 The HISTORY 
tirrfortunately had refumed the former 
fubjeft, and with great eafneftnefs, and 
voice more raifed than ufual, was urg- 
ing ardently, Alxnira, in the fallowing 
manner. 
For heaven's fake ! my deareft crea- 
ture, if you allow me to believe my 
happinefs, or miicry, is not intirely in- 
different to you, perfift not in your too 
dan^^erous refolution, of revealing to 
, your defigning aunt, your generous pre- 
poffeflion in my favour. No, let me 
rather, painful as it is to think of it, be 
deprived at prefent, of the fight of all 
my eyes can fee with pleafure, or at 
lead as frequently as I could wifh to fee 
you, till thofe few months expire, which 
are the only bar to my felicity, when I 
may hope with rapture inexpreflible, to 
call you mine. 
In hearing this, Crudelia heard e- 
nough, but was prevented in her fatisfy- 
ing any further her curiofity, by foot- 
lleps founding from the upper ftairs^ 
which were Cleone's, who was juft then 
coming down, having been up to drefs 
as 
OF ALMIRA. 125 
as ufual, againft dinner; flie therefore, 
haftily and fohly ftept into her own a- 
partmcnt, which lay- acrofs the entry, 
and opening a clofet that fhe always 
kept the key of, concealed herfelf for a 
coniiderable time -, but watched her op- 
portunity, when dinner was fervedup, to 
ftep out unperceived ; and entering the 
room they were in, quite fpoiled the re- 
lifh of their meal, by her unwiflied ap- 
pearance. 
They all imagined flie was but that 
minute come to town, and general con- 
fternation fpread itfelf around their little 
table, for it contained only the lovers, 
and Cleone : however, fhe put on a car- 
riage the moft artful and amazing, and 
it was difficult to know, whether fhe 
was the moft obliging to Florello, or 
to her niece : nor did Cleone feem over- 
looked by her as ufuaL 
This made Almira's unfufpefting heart 
rebound with joy, and fmiles of grate- 
ful fatisfaftion light every feature, that 
but juft before had flackened at her pre- 
fence. But yet a thoughtful gloom 
feemed 
126 Th? history 
feemed to (it heavier from ic footi upon 
Florello's brow, which much amazed 
iVlmira. But her aunt obliged her, by 
the many little dories fhe had gath^^d 
in the country, to lend her chief atten- 
tion for fome houri to her alone ; and 
poor Florelloi quite unable to coUeft 
his didipated fpirks, from the fudden 
fight of one whom he fo much difliked 
and feared, thought it advUeable to take 
his leave, foon after tea was over. — Cru- 
delia would have fain perfwaded him to 
make a longer flay, but he obferving 
that Ihe ftudiouily avoided leaving them 
alone one moment, was determined to 
refufe fuch invitation, and alledged, as 
his excufe, that he had received a letter^ 
which he muft anfwer by that evening's 
pod, and it would require all the time 
he had then left. 
Joy feemed however, to fhcw itfelf 
apparently, from this his anfwer, with 
more fincerity than it perhaps had done, 
if . he had (laid for fome time longer j 
and Ihe, with much more complaifance 
than was expciJled from her, made an 
apology for being too much fatigued, 
her- 
©p ALMIRA. iij 
berfeif, to wait oq him down flairs, and 
therefore made a motion that Almira 
ihould. Cleone having left the room 
ibme time before. 
This overftrained civility, amazed Al* 
intra ! but (be, without reply, or much 
unwillingnefs you may fuppofe, obeyed 
her ; and immediately returned, meeting 
her aunt, who was with ieeming diffi* 
culty^ frdTm the efFeft the jumbling 
of the ftage coach had left upon her 
limbs, going into hef chamber to feek 
an hour^s teft, flie faid, in order to re- 
fiefh her fpirits. 
s 
Almira would have waited on her 
thither, but fhe repulfed her civilly, and 
(kfifed her only to call her maid to 
cover her; adding, go Mira into the 
library, for fuch they called the dining* 
room, there being a cafe of books Bxed 
at one fide of it ; and find fome enter* 
taining book to read to me, when I re- 
tarn ; for this was a requefi: fiie fome^ 
time) made, when in her kindeft hu- 
mour.— She, with much readinefs, ' in-^ 
dined to oblige her aunt in that requeft; 
as 
128 The HISTORY 
as reading was, indeed, the moft agree- 
able employment to Almira. She went 
direftly to the abovenaihed cafe, whofc 
clofe inhabitants, had it not been for her 
familiar hand, and like wife Cleonc's, 
might have long refted undifturbed. 
There, the firft book fhe fixed her choice 
upon, was, the Night Thoughts, by 
doftor Young, which Ihe remembered 
happened to open, where thefe lines firft 
met her eyes, in Night the ift. p. 1 1» 
How dim our eyes! 
The prefent moment terminates our fight ; 
Cloudsy thick as thofe on doom^s-dayy drowr^ 
the next^ &c. 
The melancholy juftneft of thi^ 
thought, fo much aSefted her; that, 
letting down the hand, which held the 
book; (he in a penfivc contemplating 
pofture, had fixed her eyes upon the 
floor; from whence, as £be was juft reco- 
vering them,- (he faw a paper lie, clofe by 
the place Florello had beein fitting in« 
A namelefs fluttering and finking feized 
on her heart immediately, as (he per- 
ceived it was dropt by him, it lying juft 
beneath 
s * 
OF ALMIRA. 129 
beneath his chair, which fhe had been 
obliged to move before . fhe could un- 
lock and open the cafe of books, but 
had not then obferved it* She opened it 
with great precipitation, finding it was 
a letter, though the direAion was torn 
off, and ieemed to be a wonaan's hand, 
if any hand at all, for it was wrote in 
characters the mod unufual, and the 
contents were found to be as follows. 
** Think not, thou moft beloved of 
mortals ! that it is within the power of 
time, or diftance, to efface the precious 
influence you have fixed upon my heart, 
nor can I fpeak enough my joy, at find- 
ing by your lafl, that you are ftill, and 
will for ever be, as your dear words 
obligingly exprefs it, the fame angelick 
lover I have ever found you. And to 
convince me of it, mifs not, I charge 
you, any opportunity of writing to me, 
till you blefs again the longing eyes of 
her, who neither will, or can be other, 
than eternally Florello's." 
This was fcarce read, before it inad- 
vertently dropt from her trembling 
Vol. !s . K hand. 
ijo The history 
hand, upon the ground ; nor could fhe 
any longer have prevented her relaxing 
nerves, from fbllowing it, had not 
Cleone juft that moment, fortunately 
came in to her afliftance, who running to 
her in the utmoft fright^ for fhe appear^- 
^d both pale and lifelefs, defired to know 
the caufe of fuch diforder i but (he foon 
too plainly iaw, that poor Almira had 
not breath enough to anfwer her. She« 
having with fome difficulty got her to 
the neareft chair, endeavoured with fotne 
reviving falts (he had at hand, to bring 
her to herielf ; which, in a (hort time, 
{beefFed^ed, and in the tendereft man* 
ner, cryed, my dcarcft friend ! what 
can have happened ? where is Florello* 
and your aunt ? I left you well, and all 
together.— At his name, fhe ftarted, as 
if jufl awake *, and looking on Ckone 
with looks of mixed diftradion, and be- 
feeching pity : replied^ there, don't you 
fee him ? pointing her eyes and hands 
towards the ground. 
The frantick air, and purport of this 
anfwer, fo much amazed and (hocked 
Cleone^ that Ihe at firft regarded not 
the 
or ALMIRAJ 131 
tte letter, till the fixt eye Almira lent it, 
guided her to take it up, but jull as fhe 
was going to read it, another fainting fit 
fcemedthreateiling her fweet friend, and 
therefore, (he imagined it moft proper 
topoftpone a little, her impatient curi- 
tifity, and in fbme minutes after,' led 
sher to her own apartment. — ^There foon 
afhower of friendly tears relieved the 
almoft burfting heart, when recollec- 
tion, ever upon ftich occafions, an un- 
welcome vifitor, and Ihame, at finding 
fhe had even to Cleone, difcovered fo 
much weaknefs, made her almoft re- 
lapfe again : however, foon (he gather- 
ed ftrength enough of fpeech, to afk *her 
for the letter, but Cleone begged (he 
might have leave to read it firft, for yet 
ihe faid, (he knew not the contents, 
though certain, that they muft be of 
very difagreeable importance, as now 
(he plainly faw it had occafioned her dif- 
order. 
No nOj pray give it me, (returned 
Almira earneltly) if thou art really now 
a ftranger to its contents, I beg thou 
wouidft not wlfh to know them, fince 
K 2 thy 
,132 The HISTORY 
thy foolifli friend muft pay fo dearly for 
it, in forfeiting thy kind opinion of her .; 
I would not have thee, even leflen thy 
too favourable way of thinking of my 
fortitude of mind, though I, alas ! have 
leilened my opinion of myfelf forever ! 
yet, be it as it will, methinks I fhould 
hide nothing from a friend like thee, 
and I will let thee read it, there thou 
wilt fee in thofe dark lines, the cleareft 
proof of the perfidioufnefs of man's 
bale nature ; I ever was averfe to letting 
my untrufty heart be open to that fyren 
love ; and he has now, alas ! indeed, let 
in a traitor. 
Cleone read the letter to herfelf, and 
afterwards remained dumb, and a();o- 
nifhed, for fome moments. And when 
aftonifhment gave way to utterance, fhe 
only cryed, with elevated voice and eyes, 
can it be poffible ? where found you this 
vile fcrole ? this fragment of a letter ? 
for there is neither name, I fee, or fuper- 
fcription. 
Almira anfwered, that it lay clofe by 
the chair he fat on ; adding, nor am I 
any 
OF A L'M I R A.^ 133- 
any longer at a lofs for the occafion of 
that too vifible uneafinefs that clouded 
his behaviour often, but moft this after- 
noon ; nor, what that letter was, which 
cau&d him to depart fo fbon to anfwer it. 
And now, I recollect a ftrange confufion, 
no doubt, from confcious guilt, when 
he faid that. I wiih thou hadft been in 
the room, Cleone, when he went away, 
to have obferved him, as I did. 
Alas, my dear, returned the other, 
you feem to have too ftrong a proof al- 
ready pf unexpected infidelity ! and yet 
Ctho' I abhor letting partiality miflead 
my reafon) there is a kind of callous 
tinbelief in me concerning this, which I 
cannot account for, or excufe, that fins 
againft conviftion : If there was not his 
name, I could, not be perfuaded it was 
wrote to him. 
No more, my friend, replied Almira, 
in an angry, tone of voice ; no more of 
that, I charge thee ; nor, from this 
hour, let me, I intreat thee, be offended 
by the found of his unworthy name j I 
will, ifpoflible^ forget it. — ^Thiswas, I 
IC 3 luakc 
134 Thi history 
make iio douht^ the objed; I have had 
the honour fo miKh to refemble. But 
why fuch mean recanting from the 
Truth ? I had, at firft, no right to 
blame him for fuch prepofleflion in ano-^ 
ther's favour ; and, than I have now, lee. 
me for ever blame my foolifh lenfibility^ 
that could (Cleooej lo mifguide me into 
an approbation of him. 
Yet, will you not (reply'd CleoneJ^ 
hear what he has the power to fay, wheix 
you ihall Ihew htm this ? No criminal, 
however guilty, ought, mcthinks, to be 
condemned without a trial: Appea- 
rence$, too frequently, deceive the wifeft 
of U3 mortals, 
Alas! I find they do Cretum'd Al- 
mira) but there is proof, I think, that 
needs no hearing. Had there not been 
his name (as you obferved juft now^ I 
owii 1 muft myfeff have doubted 5 not- 
withftanding it was plainly he who dropt 
this paper ; and there is neither date, or 
title to it. But, that very name, and 
the contents confidered, Jhould I now 
condcfcerid to fee, or hear him, weak- 
nefa 
OF ALMIRA; 135 
nds in me would ever after juftify his 
fal&hood ! No, from this day fareweU 
ill -known Flocello! And fare wel folly, 
in the fhape of treacherous and fooliih 
love. For now, my deareft friend, I 
will not fcruple to declare the honeft 
truth to thee, that I fincerely loved 
him ! and with a flame too pure, and 
worthily infpired, I thought to be this 
way extinguifhed ever. 
Thus poor Almira*s overburthened 
heart endeavoured to relieve its anguifli 
(nobly fcorning bafe difguife) but his 
impreilion was too deeply there engraved, 
to be with eafe erazed. A fixed and 
filent melancholy, from that moment, 
threw its fetters on her mind and fpi- 
rits ; nor could fhe be prevailed on, by 
either converfation, or any other amufe- 
ment, to attempt removing them : She 
for fome days confined herfelf inticely to 
her chamber, and Cleone's company : 
Nor did Crudelia often, difagreeably, 
attempt the breaking in upon her faid 
retirement ; a guilty confcioufnefs, no 
doubt, reftraining her, which will be 
prcfently explained. But we will leave 
K 4, them 
136 The history 
I 
them for fome time, while the ftiU more 
diftrcfled Florello calls for our atten- 
tion. He, upon recolledion of Crude- 
lia's very great civility, (tho* not en- 
tirely fatisfied concerning fuch a fudden 
change) determined foon to pay another 
vifit there-, as his whole Ibul fcemed 
lifelefs (as he ufed to fay^ out of Al- 
mira's company. How much more life- 
lefs then, muft it have been, on finding 
there was no admiflion for him at Cru- 
delia's houie : again, and feveral times 
again, he called y and was informed 
Almira was gone put : 'till turning up 
his eyes one day, as he approached the 
door, they met with hers, who in a mo^ 
ment difappeared. — And finding the 
fame anfwer given him below, as ufual, 
and that Cleone likewife always was 
denied to him, he gave himfelf intirely 
up to the moft exquifite defpair ! 
Amanda was gone out of town, to 
whom he would have flown for fome 
relief, from this new wreck of dread, 
and horrible uncertainty ! Nor could he 
think of any method, by which he coyld 
convey a letter to her ; the fervants 
would. 
OP ALMIRA. 137 
would, he found, refufe to give onc> 
by their behaviour to him } nor would 
he venture, for his own peace of mind, 
to hazard hers, in cafe it Ihould be car- 
ried to Crudelia's hands : for nothing 
more, could his imagination furnifh, as 
the caufe of this new treatment of him, 
but her commands, enforced with ri- 
gour, that Almira fhould not fee him. 
Nor will it be improper here to in- 
form the reader, injuftice to Florello's 
chara^er, that he was innocent, as well 
as ignorant, of the letter before-men- 
tioned ; and of too ftriift, and worthy 
veracity of heart, to harbour double 
love. That vile affair, the fubtile art 
of bale Crudelia had invented ; ,who, 
having wrote it in her clofet, during that 
time Ihe had concealed herfelf (at her 
return to town) took the opportunity of 
difpofing it, to anfwer her black pur- 
pofe, juft when Florello went away! 
And thence proceeded her alteration of 
behaviour, and requeftitig that her neicc 
th^t day would wait on him down 
ftairs. 
For 
138 The HISTORY 
For wickednefs i§ often too fruicfuX- 
of invention^ whilft virtuous, unfufpeft- 
ing innocence, confcious of no deceit ^ 
within, looks not enough without, to 
find it. 
However, 'twas not many days be- 
fore this wicked woman (while fhe was 
fecretly, no doubt> exulting, with felf- 
given applaufe, at finding (he was likely 
to fucceed to her beft wilh, by breaking 
off a love affair that feemed to ftrike at 
all her viewsj was vifited, by that all- 
feeing juftice, that penetrates the clofelt 
fecret of the human heart, by the molt 
violent indifpofition^ which firft feized 
on the ufe ot all her limbs ; leaving her 
mind, for fome time, unaffeAed s, as the 
propereftinflrumentofpuni(hment,,thro* 
fenfibility ! But that, from the conti- 
nuance of tormenting pain, in a Ihort 
time gave way s, and flie appeared (at 
leaft to thofe who were not well ac- 
quainted with her bafenefs) an objeft^ 
worthy of the greateft care and pity, 
Almira's heart, that generally ufed tQ 
err (as fome would think) in favour of 
Kuma- 
OF ALMIRA, 139 
liutnahity, and chriftian charity, could 
hardly all this while forgive herfelf, for 
an increafed difguft (he felt, nor could 
account for, againft her aunt, that in 
a manner, as it were, withheld her from 
approaching her bedfide, whenever (he 
rcquefted it. This, (he attributed to 
the dejeftion of her own fpirits, which 
could reUfh at that time, no converfa- 
tion but Cleone*s. (And how invalu- 
able indeed, is fuch a friend ! on whom 
we may, with fafety, reft the burthen of 
our bofoms in affliftion.) And then 
the frequent agonies of horror \ and 
feeming defperation ! which, at that time, 
po(re(Ied Crudelia, fo much furprized 
and (hocked her tender nature, that hap- 
pening, when (he by a (uperior trouble,' 
was ill prepared to bear it ; greatly 
threatened the overthrowing her own 
health. This made Cleone prefs her, 
in the ftrongeft manner, to quit the 
houfe immediately -, and try if change 
of air and place, could re-eftabli(h her. 
And this, Almira, with fome Pleafure^ 
Jiftened to : But faid, (he thought it 
would not be confiftcnt with humanity, 
to ki^ve her aunl (if not a kind and ten- 
der 
I40 Th5 history 
dcr one) in fo deplorable a ftace ! tho* 
fuch as ihe might, notwithftanding, la- 
bour under for a/confiderable time. 
But, while they were pre-ponderatiog 
upon this fubjeft, a fervant brought 
Almira up the following letter. 
sN 
" you will, I know, my deareft fer 
male friend ! cxcufe me, that I 
did not take my leave of you, before I 
left the town, when you are told my 
dear Fidelio's health required fuch hafte; 
and that this happy air of Hertfordlhire 
has quite recovered him. 
*' But you muft now farther forgive 
me.— I am about to chide you. What 
has befallen our good friend ? You mighc 
perhays be very angry if 1 had put a T^ 
to our ; tho' it is the only title now, hi& 
hope is proud of, I can afilire you. 
*' You will, by this time, know, I 
mean Florello. He has in treated me, 
fome days ago, to fend you the inclofcd ; 
(one of my fervants being to go to 
London) having no other certain means» 
he 
OF A L MIR A.' )r4t 
'he Aiid, of getting it conveyed^ with 
Jafety, to your hand. Whatever the 
contents may be, you are the propereft 
judge of them ; I am a ftranger to 
them ; but yet can give too fhrewd a 
griefs, that it is fome frown of yours, 
inftead of fmiles, has been the occafion 
of it i from one unhappy, unwi(hed cir* 
cumftance, that only mine can tell you. 
" He is, fince this came to my 
hands, fallen iiito fo very dangerous a 
dilbrder, both of mind and body, that 
hardly any hope is given of his recovery. 
Ypur name, is all he can be heard to 
utter, day and night ; tho* no one per- 
fon in his family ("for he is at his fa- 
th^r'sj feems to have been made ac- 
quainted with it before ; and they are 
almoft diftrafted to difcover wfio Al- 
mira is ; and what has fo unufually af- 
fected him. But I have hitherto avoided 
giving the fatisfaAion, I am fcarce able 
to keep from them, of hearing I am 
acquainted with you j I would not fay 
of hearing we were friends, for my own 
credit's fake ; as worthy friendfhip can 
admit of no fuch rcferve, methinks ; — 
remcm- 
^4a The HISTORY 
remember that, my dear. And joii 
have.been, indeed, too clofe in this af- 
fair ; and yet, you fee, you are deteded. 
But, if you value my forgivenefs or ad- 
vice, let me, I earneftly intrcat you, 
within three days at farcheft, fee you 
here ! For, I afTure you, in cafe of non- 
compliance, even my FideJio will, he 
fays, belive that women are all grown 
deceivers, fince the age we married in, 
** And now, you fee, it is the honour 
of your fex, thus put to ftake in you, 
demands this viQt, to my d^ar Almira's 
Impatiently expedbing friend^ 
And moft obedient fervant, 
AMANDA. 
P. S. I will expeft no anfwer, (there- 
fore have given orders that none 
Ihali be waited for) but that moflr 
wifhed, of feeing you." . 
Almira 
OF ALMIRA. 143 
' Almira, after having read this letter, 
gave it to Cleone, but with trembling 
fingers and features, truly fenfible of 
the contents : and, while Ihe was read- 
ing it, broke open that from Florello, 
which had been inclofed. It was as 
follows : 
" Moft charming and ador'd Almira! 
vrrH AT have I fufFered ! What can 
I have done ? Certain I am, that 
1 muft have offended j but how, alas ! 
is dark uncertainty. 
" How did your ever *s charming 
image, at the window, in one wretched 
moment, blefs and blaft me ! Too horrid 
inconfiftency ! And yet my tortured 
heart, wreck'd equally by doubt, defpair, 
and love ! from thence, to this unhappy 
hour, approves it juft. Yes, that lame 
rending heart, alas ! can even, in fuffcr- 
ing, acknowledge, that you are, you 
muft be juft ; — and yet refufes to in- 
form me, wherein I have deferved a 
treatment that, otherwife, you never 
could have brought your genrle foul 
to 
144 The HISTORY 
to give, the once moft happy ! but now 
wrecchedeft of mortals ! who will, how- 
ever, while he can fay he lives at all, 
fubfcribe himfelf, as he muft ever be. 
Unalterably yours, 
FLORELLO." 
Cleone, having read Amanda's letter, 
murned it to Almlra, with a fmile of 
thoughtful melancholy ; and afked her. 
Whether fhe thought it would be now 
the moft confiftent with humanity, to 
leave Crudelia ? or to fee Amanda ? — 'I 
dare not fay,,FIorello, added Ihe, the* 
pity might advife it. 
I will determine how to anfwer that, 
Creplied the almoft - fpiritlefs Almira) 
when I have had your thoughts on this b 
('giving her Florello's letter). 
Clcone having well perufed it, cried, 
Excufe me, my dear friend ! nor afk 
my farther thoughts. The feeming 
ftrength of truth and tendernefs which 
this contains, I own, enervates me to 
weak- 
OF A L MIR A. 145 
iKneaknefs y nor would I bias wrong,- a 
confidence and judgment like Almira^s« 
I blame not your compaflion, my 
Cleone, (returned Almira) 'tis laudible 
as *tis difinterefted, — it therefore may be 
trufted. I ihould, I own, have doubted 
the integrity and worth of mine. But j 
tho' appearances and reafon join to clafh 
with it, I will, if poflible, force truth 
alone to be the arbitrator ; and, by that 
nobleft of decifions, will henceforth de- 
termine, 
t s 
I have a thought, this moment crolling 
my imagination, that perhaps may prove 
propitious to my view. It is, you will 
think, a very odd one ; and will much, 
I know, offend the nice punftillio of the 
over-delicate. But Florello's prefent cafe 
makes fuch apologies unnecefTary to be 
thought of now 5 nor \fhould I take the 
ftep I am intending, were nor his life 
(as I am informed) in danger* 
Do you, my dear, give out, thro* all 
this family, that you have prevailed on 
me to vilit honeft Prue for a few days i 
Vol. L L, — and 
>46 TftS HISTORY 
s<^and there, this eyening, T mean to fp^ 
But mindt no coach or fervant (of our 
own) muft attend us thither. 
This perfon was a favourite fervant, 
who had lived many years in her father's 
family^ and waited on Almira; whofe 
health pBcrmitting her no longer to con- 
tinue in that way of livelihocxl, had fet- 
tled on the borders of the town (not far 
from them) in a fmall branch of bufi- 
neTs, but depending chiefly upon the 
letting her lodgings ready - furniflicd* 
And thither, in a few hours, Almira 
and Cleone went. 
Nor was it needful to acqimint Cm- 
delia with their departure ; her fenfes 
being then too much afitfted> for her to 
have underftpdd whatever had been faid 
to her; 
They took a habkhey coach, which 
carried a portmantua with them ^ and 
they contrived to make it almoft dark 
befose they a-itghted at her houfe* 
Now» 
OF ALmJ'R A. »4^ 
' NbisF, diis good woman, (fortufiatd/ 
for them) at chi& time was free from an^ 
lodgers, and had only in the houfe a 
daughter of her own, v^ lived widk Ker^ 
pad affifljed her in chebM(kie&. 
Prudence ^ no fboner faw them enter 
iier (mall parlour, thcui (with tears of 
ioy and finder) L ran to kifs Almira, 
crying, with uplift^ hands, What can 
have brought my dear young lady to 
iny ebttage, at this time of nig^ ? How 
do yoQ do i HoW have you done fince I 
.Jiad iaft die (loaour of feeing you ? 
Almirl fd(i!l,a(x|Uaii^ted h^r with all 9 
^d ifaewed her plainly, that the diferder 
het idbd was in, oceafioned this late 
vifit. . Aod flue opened more fully to 
Cleoae, than &e ^ad before, (and her 
new confidents ) viAic fiie had been f^ 
folving on. Which was, to have two 
fuics of mens apparel got jfiamediately ^ 
one fbr Cleone, and {be other for her - 
fdf V in order to fet out, next day, to 
tnake the recpefied vifit to Amanda. 
And Charlotte^ the good woman's 
^daughter) being about the age and ila- 
L a ture 
148 The history 
cure of Almira) wasto go and purchaie 
them at a fale-fhop, with all things be- 
sides that . might be neceffary for them. 
Almira inftrufted her to fay, Ihe was to 
buy them for a prefent to her ("fuppofed) 
two brothers in the country -, — one of 
them fomewhat (horter than herfelf ; the 
other her own fize exaftly. Her's was 
to be a fuit of fine black cloth ^ Cleone's 
likewife fine blue grey. 
But, (at the firft declaring her inten- 
tion) fhe intreated Cleone not to accom- 
pany her in this romantic expedition, if 
it was di&greeable to her : fince Charlotte 
feemed very defirous of waiting on her 
upon this occafion ; and of putting oa 
again, a drefs fhe feemed to think be- 
came her better than her own. But 
Cleone would not fufFcr any perfon to 
attend her but herfelf. 
.1 
And thus, by next day's noon, all 
things were ready for their journey : 
and, as the houfe flood near no other, 
they were free from the impertinence of 
obfervation. But honefl Prudence fent 
forth many a careful figh of apprehen- 
five 
"^ iT 
OF ALMIRA- ^ 149 
live fear, concerning this ftrange meta- 
morphofis ! mingled with prayers and 
earned intreaties, that fhe might hear 
from them ! to be affured of their ar- 
riving fafe, fhe faid, thro' their new ex- 
pedition. 
Almira promiled her fhe fhould ; and 
left her a direAion, to inclofe a letter 
for her to Amanda, if any meflage or 
enquiry fhould be made, or fent, from 
home concerning her. 
This done, and both thus every way 
equipped, to look like gentlemen, they 
hired a poft-chaife ; and, by the follow- 
ing afternoon, got to Amanda'iS feat. 
The young Bellmont (for that was 
now to be Almira*s name) had wrote a 
Knc or two, in order to prevent her 
friend's furprize, or their difcovery ; and 
this, a fervant of Amanda's carried in, 
before they would a-Iight. The note 
contained as follows : 
" My dear Amanda muft not be fur- 
prized, if fhe, beneath the borrowed 
L3 names 
150 Tnt HISTORY 
names of Bdllnldnt; afK} Alexis, fboiiI4 
find the real ones> Ckonci and Almira* 
** I K^ve, I hope, obeyed : you,-— twily 
to fupport tba honour of my kx^ thua 
put to ftake, you fay, in me. . I havcj^ 
for once, laid the appearance of my fex 
ifide, and fakch up the other. But let 
no eye, nor ear» be witnefs of it^ but yoUt 
own. Andi therfcH^, let youf gardeil be^ 
our place for converfttibn v — there Ic^' 
us be defired to wait your corning. 
" Difguife, in all rfefpeds, nfiuft filre 
be guilty ! elfe^ why thi^ (hame and paii^ 
attending it? 
YourSa^ 
AI.MIRA/* 
This, when Amanda had read, they 
Were accordingly condufted, by a fer- 
yabt, to the garden* where fee immc^ 
diatcly attended them, 6nd led them to a 
fummer-houfe i ^here, unperc^ivcd by 
any of the family, they might difcourfe 
with frfeedom. And thete AimirA pre- 
fently WY^Qfomed her intention kx taking 
OF ALMIRA* tsi 
<]p that drefi,^ which had, at firft, 
Aooaz'd Amanda greatly. 
I win, (faid fhe) my friend, widi your 
kind aid, and this difguife, endeavour to 
accompliih more than ever my own habit 
could do for me. I am, you iee, by 
what I have htotod to you« in the pur^- 
fuit of truth ; ^nd where is now the 
coaid &e does not choofe (efpecialiy in 
iovie; to 0y from ? I have not time ait 
pre£bQt (or inclination you will forgive 
me) further ix> explain myfel£ Let it 
fuffioe, that I will fee Florello ; but you 
anuft introduce me to him, or properly 
ftfiepare the way for me. -^ I would ap- 
pear to be nearly allied to ycHi, a ftud^nt 
in philofophy or phyfic ; or elfe divinity ! 
<that I Ihould firft, indeed, have named) 
m all, if found of ufe on this occafioo. 
But you xnuft, Itkewife, recommend 
jUfi to a houfe, where we may lodge unr 
jncticed i nor prefs me farther, i intreac 
you, to continue now in yours ;— fome 
word may probably efcape us, and dif- 
cover us at once. 
L 4 ' Amanda 
152 The HISTORY 
Amanda having giving her a moi^ 
particular account of the unhappy ftatse 
Florello was then in, tears unavoidably 
ftole down young Bellmont's unmanned 
cheeks ; which made the former willing 
to change the fubjeft for the prcfentv 
She then propofed to them a place, juft 
by her houfe, where they might lodge, 
with privacy and fafety. It was a little 
cottage, on a river's bank, that ran two 
fields beyond Fidelio's garden, which he 
had given to his fhepherd and his wife» 
who generally were abroad all day. And. 
there fhe could, without reftraint or no- 
tice, go frequently herfelf, and lend 
whatever might be neceflary for them 
by her fcrvants. 
It was propoied, likewife, by that 
. good lady, that they fhould pafs for 
brother- ftudents, but juft come from 
college ; but of a diipofition much more 
folid (added Ihe) than is often met with 5 
as preferring ftudy and retirement to all 
other pleaTures. 
Almira then defired Amanda to fend 
a fervanc to difcharge their chaife ^ and, 
aftcir 
OF ALMIRAr 153 
i^fter thanking her for all her ofFered h^ 
voursy intreated that Ihe would condu6fe 
them to their intended retreat immedi- 
ately; which Ihe obligingly confented 
to. 
s 
They found the honeft, ancient mif- 
trefs of it, fitting, without her door, 
employed in ipinning. Amanda told 
her, fhe had brought two of her kinf- 
men, for fome little time, to lodge with 
her 5 and charged her to take care of 
them, for fhe fhould often call, an4 
would herfclf reward her diligence. 
Paftora Ihewed them into her beft 
apartment, confifting of two little 
rooms ; where every thing as much ex- 
celled in neatnefs, as palaces excel 1 in 
Iplendor. And there, in a fhort time, 
Amanda left them ; giving directly or- 
ders to her houfekeeper ("who was in- 
trufted) to carry thither fuch refrefh- 
ments as were proper for them. 
Amanda then, as was agreed upon, 
fet out, ^th her Fidelio, to fee Florello ; 
confulting with him, as fhe went, ("and 
open- 
154 The HISTORY 
opening the affair to him) how dtcy. 
Ihould ad in this, to anfwer bcft their 
wifh concerning his recovery ? 
Fidelio apprehended danger from fuch 
delay, as this difguife portended : and 
Amanda knew too wcU Altnira's delica- 
cy, to propoie a thQUght that might 
offend it. The ftrideft fecrccy had bcco 
enjoined ; nor could (he, on one fide of 
friendfhip, make a wound, in forder to 
heal the other. 
s 
They a- lighted Ibon at tkUmoft't 
houfe. Bellona met them in the hall j 
with both defpair and grief, t©o vifible 
ppon her features, for tiicm po hatic n 
doubt concerning the condition of feefr 
fon : but Bellmore iirft informed them, 
that he grew every hour worfe, thtf he 
had the afUflance of the ableft phyficaan^ 
far and near ; who all declared, it was 
not in the power of their (kill to he^ 
him, as his malady lay far bejsood the 
reach of medicine ! 
Some affliAion fthey fakl) l^ad touch* 
#d his mind ^ and, by the obfcrvatioi^ 
they 
r 
OP ALMIRA* 155 
(Jity had made, it certainly was love ; 
but it had gone too far, they feared, for 
bim to overcome i; ; having not only 
preyed upon his breaft, but aJmoft over- 
thrown his fenfes : adding, that they 
had often prefied him to difcover, to 
ibme friend^ what was the caufe of this j 
but he feemed quite regardleft of what-' 
«ver had been faid to him,— ftill talk- 
ing tO) and anfwering htnifelfj tho* ge*^ 
lierally unintelligibly- 
What can be further done ? ("conti- 
nued Bellmore>» Think for me, I be- 
fcech you, my good friends! th^t I 
may fave my <tear, dear boy ! tho* my 
whole fortune were to he ^ tccom- 
pence, 
Amanda engerly embraced that op- 
pqrtunity^ and told them^ if they would 
choofe to tfuft their fon in the fafc 
hdnds of one^ who looked indeed like a 
«0Gr young prajftitioher, flie would en- 
gage to aiifwer for the confequences : 
for he had greater fldll in fuoh difordera 
(tho' they were deemed moft difficult to 
cure) than many other members of the 
faculty. 
is6 Tmb history 
faculty, much older than he was, could 
ever pretend to. — But, that he never 
ivould be called in confultation ; and 
was generally very fhy of fpeech, ex- 
cepting to his patients, whom he always 
calked with much -, depending upon dif- 
courfe, more than medicines, often, in 
thefe fort of cafes ; having long ftudied 
natural philosophy ; which, fometimes^ 
greatly helped him to tScA a cure. 
This promifing account of him, made 
the funk eyes of Bellmore brighten thro* 
their cloud of grief, with joyful hope \ 
prompt gratitude, and every amiable 
ienfation, (fuitable to the occafion) that 
could effe£t the hcarc of a fond parent \ 
and, jumping from his feat, involunta* 
rily, as if to make more hafte in fetch- 
ing him, he cried. But where, for pity's 
fake, my worthy friend, where does he 
live ? Where fhall I find him ? What 
is his name ? I will fend aWay, this mo- 
ment, for him. Some guardian angel 
may, perhaps, have fent you to reftorc 
my dear FlorcUo to me. 
Amanda 
. OF ALMIR A. ' 157 
Amanda undertook to fend him fpee* 
dily, adding, that fhe would talk with 
him before he came, concerning what 
had been already done. And hearing 
that Florello, by the help of a compo- 
iing draught, had fallen into a doze» 
they did not lee him, but thought pro- 
per to defire, their having been there, 
might not be named before him ; nor^ 
that this young phyfician was recom- 
mended by them, for fome days at leaft, 
for reafons, which fhe would one day or 
other acquaint them with, 
Bellona anfwered, that fuch caution 
was unneceflary, as he neither fcemed to 
know, or care for, any perfon now ; 
nor had fhe truly any hope from trying 
more advice, fince he could, for fome 
time pafl, hardly be perfuaded to fwal- 
low any thing. But that, while there 
was life, there fhould be hope indeed ; 
therefore fhe joined with Bell more to 
requeit, he might be fent as foon as 
poflible. 
s Amanda 
^5» Tai HijsroiiY 
Amanda and Her fpoufe then took 
their leave ; ihe haftened to our yQUng 
phy(ician, before (he flept, in oider to 
prepare him for his vific; requefitng^ 
that her chariot might attend httn. But 
Bellmont fearing much, with reaipn, 
froa^ the known oiriotity of fcrra^ics, 
ivheiv they meet ( chofe rather, as it wa$ 
b}it a fmall and pleafant walk, to take 
no perfon but Alexis with him, and cp 
go on foot f the' not unconfcioas that 
the ablett head, in pradifing of phylic, 
feems to want weight, unlefs it is fup* 
ported by the dignity of coach and fer- 
vants*) Kor would he go till the next 
day, havirtg hcaid he was in bed, atui 
under the ^fffecSt of opium -, and it wa« 
befides too late* B^it on the folimviog 
morning, having firft properly difguifed 
his fice, as much as wjas thought jieccf- 
fary, by darkening its cokilpiexion, and 
eyebrows s, and [xutting on a perri^ig 
that fliaded half the cheek, they both 
fet out for Bellmore's. But Alexis judg- 
ed it mod proper, that he fliQuW wak 
Bcllmonc's return at a fmall diftance 
from the houfe 5 ailed j^ing, that the pre- 
fencc 
or A L MIR A* 15$ 
fence of a third pcrfon might fruftrate 
her dcfign in talking with him* Noi* 
could her going alone make any breach 
in prudence, when his deplorable con- 
dition was confidered, as (he had once 
herfclf acknowledged. 
s 
- The imagined doiflor was received 
with the fincereft welcome, when he told 
them, Amanda had requefted him to 
wait upon them ; and he defired to be 
conduced to the fick gentleman's apart- 
ment. 
-Bellona would hcrfelf attend him 
thither, but Bellmore's grief kept him 
below. Florello was jult taken up, and 
fitting in an cafy chair, his back tum*d 
towards the door they entered at ; and 
fo intent on fomething he was looking 
at (which they at firft believed to be a 
book^ that, for fome moments, he 
feemed ignorant that any one was near 
hiin. 
BcUmont however, moving very flow- 
iy round to his chair, made a fhort halt, 
and fent a penetrating eye before him, 
to 
i6o Th£ history 
to obferve what book it was. But h<W 
agreeably was he aftonifhed, to perceive 
Almira's pidure, looking full on the 
original. 
Now, had our phyfician need of all 
the (kill he was come there to exercifc 
upon another : he was obliged to fum- 
mon all the fortitude, indeed, of manly 
refolution, to conduft him fafe thro* 
this adventrous undertaking, where there 
was no retreating handfomely. 
Bellona having told her fon, that fhe 
had brought a gentleman to fee him^ 
who was perfuaded he could minifter re- 
lief, if he would patiently be guided by 
him ; he (hut the pitlure up with great 
precipitation, as if afraid they were in- 
tending to take it from him, and turned 
his head averted from them, and de- 
clined it on his chair, returning not a 
word of anfwer. She then gave way 
for Bellmont to approach him -, who, 
having found it moft convenient to ap- 
pear juft then a quaker, kept his hat 
upon his head ; and, with a pulfe no lefs 
difturbed himfelf, attempted to examine 
poor 
K)f ALMIRAi i6t 
poor Florello's ; and knowing, in. a 
oioment) more of it, and his diftemper, 
than many of his brethren, could in two 
or three, with a decifive nod and fhake 
of head, he told, his mother (turning 
fkfl: away from him) that phyfic would 
be here of very little fervice he perceiv- * 
ed; that 'twas the mind, alone, flood 
much in need of alterative evacuations $ 
and fuch affiftance, as he believed, had 
not yet been thought of, or attempted^ 
in his cafe, by thole whom they had be- 
fore confulted. 
Sellona told him^ in a whif|)er, that 
if he thought that only neceflary, there 
was a very worthy clergyman, their mi- 
nifter, whom fhe would get to talk with 
him immediately. 
No, by fto means, at prefent, I in- 
treat you, madam ^ truft him intirely to 
my care -, I am not quite a novice in that 
fcience neither^ Thea turning . round, 
and taking, very folemnly, again Fk)- 
rello's hand, he fpoke to him with a 
more elevated voice, the following 
words. 
Vol. I. M Young 
i€i Tbz history 
Youag gendem^n, be comforted; for-^ 
tune, I hope, has fent me into Herty- 
ibrdihire, to efUbUfh your Fecovery foony 
if 'tis not yoiur own fault. 
Belimont had no fooner ipoke thisv 
than up Florello darted, forward fron^ 
his chair's back, like one awakened out 
oi a trance ; and looking wiihfuUy and 
wildly round him,, as if for ibmebody 
fae could not find, funk back ag^n, and 
fighlng,^ itcompofed himfelf. 
s s - ■ 
Belimont obferving this,and fearing left 
Bellona fhould be alarmed at it, defircd 
to be left ak>ne with him a little while : 
and when ibe had left the room, having 
drawn a chair ek^ to him, be began 
to bathe hi» temples with ibme reviving 
fcentSj prepared on purpofe, to appear 
fomewhat in eharader^ and then ad« 
drei&l hinft thus r How do you find 
. your head, fir, is it any better fince I 
bathed it i Again Florello ftarted, and 
looked up,, as he did juft before, and 
fixing ftedfaftly his eyes upon him, cried, 
in an earneft manner^ Was it you, fir, 
who Ipokc to me ? 
BellmoiK 
r 
" ft* almira; it5 
feelltnont replied^ it was. — He tfien 
Ugain looked as if loft in thought, and 
fighed ; looked wildly t^j and cried, I 
fee, alas ! I was miitaken ; eyes, and 
cars, confpirc only to deceive me, like 
Almira! Then looking up again, on 
Bellmont, for ibme moitients, with hi^ 
eyes overflowing, as it were, with rhin- 
gted grief and languor, he bcgg*d ta 
know hi3 name and bulinefs witb him. 
He replied j My name is Beltoiont, 
lir ; my funftion was intended to be only 
phyfic, but, prompted by a natural and 
more extcnfive curJofity, I have dived 
as deeply into feveral other ufefol fci- 
cnces ; nor could ckie fo agrecaMe, m. 
natural philofophy, efcape my applica- 
tion. Your malacfy was lately mentioned 
fo me (for I have nor been long away 
from the college I belong to) and 1 was 
bold enough to think, it was within the 
power of my art to help you. 
Believe me^ fir, (fjkintly returned Ffo- 
rello, feeming more compoftd a little) 
my aifili^ioQ lies beyond all art, nature 
M 2 will 
x64 Thjj history 
will here not yeild to its poor flaw f 
yet I will own, you feem to me to" be 
the ableft proficient in your fcience that 
has yet been brought to me. 
s Bellmont at that look'd down, and 
blufliing, bow'd, and thanked him for 
his favourable prepofTeflion, which he 
hoped (he faid) would turn to his own 
advantage, by facilitating greatly his re- 
covery. 
Florellq thus proceeded* There is a 
kind of foft perfuafive balm difFufed thro* 
all you fay to me, that forces me to lend 
attention to you, tho* too unhappily 
convinced, that 'tis not in the power of 
man to give relief to maladies like mine ! 
Perhaps, fir, (cryM Bellmont) your 
confcience (I pray cxcufe me) may, be- 
ing over nice in fome light love affair or 
other, touch you too fenfibly ; if fb, 
concealment will but help your ruin. 
Deal plainly with me, I intreat you, fir ; 
\u me firft probe a wound I come to 
cure 5 love is, I plainly fee, your cafe. 
— I have at prcfcnt one beneath my care, 
whofe 
OF ALMIRA; i6s 
whofe ftory, if you'll- give me leave, I 
will acquaint you with, in order to di- 
vert your thoughts from contemplating 
too intenfely on your own grief 5 but 
you'll allow me to conceal his nanje. 
Sometimes much comfort can be drawn 
from only the comparifon of woes. (Here 
Bellmont ftopt, and prefently Florello 
raifed his head, and begg'd him to go 
on.) 
This gentleman is young, and of an 
honourable Family, accomplifhed by an 
cxtenfive education, agreeably polite, 
and of a form adapted to engage the fe- 
male approbation. Some time ago, he 
made his addrefles to a young genclewo- 
man, not much beneath him ; who was 
weak enough to think, and hope, that 
flie had influence fufficient to engage 
his whole regard. But, jofk when he 
had urged from her fo high a declara-- 
tion in his favour, that they were fhortly 
after to be married, a former miftrefs 
proved her prior claim to him ; which 
having reached the ear of her, whofe 
Ibul, it feems, could brodc no rival in 
her love, Ihe never after would receive 
M 3 his 
^ I 
i€6 The HISTORY 
his falfe addreflfes. Yet, notwithftand^ 
tug this divided inclination, it has lb 
much affefted him, that like the fimple 
a(s^ the fable meationa, between thefe 
two, he feems to threaten being very 
foon deprived of both (or that both (hall 
be deprived of him) for he has taken it 
fy much to heart, that there has been 
t)ut little hqpe of bis. recovery for fomo 
time paft. And give me leave to fay» 
that your diforder, fir, and his, in my 
opinion, feems to fpHng from the fame 
fiM of caufe, tho' fome circumftances, 
I allow, may diSer much. Come, place 
your confidence in me, and truft me 
you fhall fliortly own yourfclf the better 
for it -, while you conceal this enemy in 
filence, it preys upon your fpirits, and 
muft baffle all attempts to help you. I 
have an art, you are not yet acquainted 
with, by whiqh 1 mean to ferve you, if 
you can confide in me, 
Florello feemed to liften, during thb 
difcourfe, with melanchc^y pleafure and: 
attention ; mingled with, now and then,, 
a heavy figh ! looking on Bellmont fre-> 
quently, as if it was not difagreeable to 
him 
OP almira; ^ i^ 
# 
Uxa to give attention to this ftory : 
which, being ended, he reached out his 
hand to him, and ihaking his, in the 
xnofl: friendly manner, (while an involun-^ 
tary tear or two, flood trembling over 
his fight, as if aftiamed to fall) he faint- 
ly ahfwercd him as follows : 
. I thank you, fir, &K your kind care of 
jui* unhappy man, whofe welfare merits 
not at all (miK:h lefs from you, who are 
fo much a .flranger to him j fuch tender 
pains to&ve him. Nor does he wifh 
for life, (to «wii tlie truth to you^ un^ 
leis that bliis of mind could be reftored, 
on which the body's health alone de« 
pends. But, if it were in art to com-^ 
fOrt me, you ceit^nly^ { fiiould believe, 
was lent, by fome kind angel, to efie6i: 
iny cure. For, while you talk to 
me, methinks, I feel my ibul revive, 
as tho' it bid me hope again. Nor havie 
I feen a perfon, till you came, wiiom I 
could force myfelf to open my diforder 
to ; yet I will own it all to you ; for, 
either I deceive myfelf, or there is a 
iriendifaip, in your foul, as well as in 
M 4 your 
i68 The ETISTORY 
ypyr countenance, that juftifies my (fon5 
fidence. 
Your penetration has been juft, con- 
cerning me. Love is, I own, the caufe 
of all J fufFer; — a love! at once the 
pureft, yet moft hopelefs ! But, alas ! 
fir, your other patient's cafe differs, in- 
deed, widely from mine. I fhould ima- 
gine, I deferved not even pity, did^ not 
(as you conjeftured) the circumftances 
of our ftories greatly differ : nor can I 
well conceive, how one fo falle, as he 
appears to be, could be fo much affe£led. 
-:— No 5 I am more unhappy, fir ! I have 
long adored a lady, every way the moft 
accompliflied to infpire the tendereft 
{iafilon. Reafon, or felf- partiality, al- 
owed me to believe, that I was not the 
ft in her efteem ; and we were foon to 
^ been united by the folemn tie of 
l^ nony. I thought myfelf the hap- 
Ii^y^ nortals ! yet, from this blifsfol 
jj^atrih '^^ ^^^^ down at once ! — re- 
pieft of K ^ the fight of her, in whom 
profpedfc * u ^ered to conceive wherein 
peatedly deuie. ^ » ^^* ^^"^^^ ^^^^ ^ 
I lived r« nor ftL ^*^^- ^ ,. ^ 
I had offended ks, ^^^'^^^ 
muff fomewayofrv 
*>F ALMIRA. 169 
Believe me, fir, I have no wifh for 
4ife, unlefs to live for her. Excufe my 
weaknefs, if you think it fuch. She is 
dcferving of it. And my v/ant of me- 
rit, not my want of juft efteem and 
love, muft certainly have loft her. 
Here, grief and weaknefs, almoft over- 
powered him for a few moments j whea 
be thus refumed his fubjeft : 
— Nor wonder t am thus affefted, 
when I tell you, that fhe is not only 
miftrefs of every amiable attradlion ! but 
that Ihe is the firft of women, who could 
ever influence my foul, to make mc 
know it was fufceptable of love, among 
the many I have feen in diflerent nations 
and at home-, where feveral, thought 
the moft agreeable by others, have beea 
propofed to me. 
s The touching manner this was fpoke 
in, almoft overthrew poor Bellmont's 
fortitude j and, inadvertently, called up 
fo much the tender paffions to the eyes 
and features, that .Florello ftarted! as 
he 
f70 Thi HISTORT 
he caft his eyes that moment towards 
him ; and, gazing for fome time upon 
him, with a kind of penetrating eager^ 
iiefs, he alked him, if he had not a 
filter ? for, either the delufion of a ftrong 
idea, (ever foremoft.in his mind) danced 
then before his Hght, or he. perceived a' 
likeneis -the moil dear to him ! 
Bellmont, tho* half confounded 1^ 
this queiiion, refumed immediately the 
man again, as much as poflible ; and 
found it very lucky for him, that .no 
ftronger light (than was admitted thro* 
cne Ihutter) had been allowed to enter 
at the windows of his chamber | an4 
anfwered him as follow:^ : 
s 
No, fir ! indeed, I never wm fo hap-r 
py s, at leaft, I never knew a fitter.. But; 
I conclude, by what you faid, in cafe I 
had one living, your ditturbed imagina- 
tion was perfw^ading you, fhe was this 
favoured lady, jull now mentioned* 
However, I am proud, I will aflureyoui 
that you have found fo good a reafon 
^for me to expeft, and hope, a place in 
your 
or ALMIRA: jyt 
your regard ; tho* I muft only thank thp 
-unknown lady for it. 
Florello then (ighed deeply ! and re- 
plied, Excufe me, fir ; my dear Almira^ 
I remember now, often lamented that 
(he had not a fifter. 
. Well, fir, (refiimed our young phy- 
iician) I will now infift, you give me a 
fmall inftance of your favour, by calling 
for a diih of chocolate ; for nature (lands 
m need of more fubftantial fuftenance, 
than the etherial one that (I am informed) 
you let her be fupported by. And, if 
you will promife me to take, as fre- 
quently as fliall be required, thofe rc- 
quifite refrefiiments, which I mean to 
order for you, — ^they fliall not be un- 
pleafant I ofliire you. And, like wife, if 
it Kes any other way^ within my power, 
to be of fervice to you, (in this unhappy 
cafe you have let me into j you may com- 
mand me freely ; and depend upon my 
Jionour, and the faithfulleft endeavours, 
to reftore your health, and happinefs of 
mind again. 
Flo- 
172 The HISTORY 
Plorello thanked him in the kindefl: 
manner ; and confented, firft, to his re- 
queft concerning the chocolate, provided 
be would bear him company, and take 
a difh. himfclf \ which (the beil being 
rang for) he drank,, with greater relifli 
than, he declared, he had ror any thing 
fincc the beginning of his indifpofition^ 
He then began again, to this effeft : 
I will accept your friendly offer, fir, 
of farther fcrvice : it is in your power 
to oblige me greatly, (for I have made 
none of my family acquainted with this 
ftory)v And would you, therefore, wait 
upon a neighbouring Udy, (for whom 
I have a great efteem} io my name, and 
only beg to know, if fhe has yet re- 
ceived an anfwer to a letter, wrote bjr 
me, fome time ago ? it would, good fir, 
forever lay me under the higheft obli- 
gation to you. Should you be fortunate 
enough to hear fhe has, and it fhould 
be propitious to my ardent wifh ! you 
Deed prefcribe no other cordial to me^ 
If not, and then a figh prevented 
liim from faying more. 
Bellmont 
or -A L MIR A.' 17J 
Bellmont aflured him, that he would 
go immediately ; and, having taken his 
dire&ions (as if neceflary) to Amanda's 
houfe, took the moft friendly leave of 
him ; and gave an inofFenfive verbal 
recipe beiow, more nourilhing than me- 
dicinal, which he defired Bellona to pre- 
pare for him^ and (ee him take, as of teti 
as diredled. But he refufed the fee (he 
urged him to accept. 
Florello fccmed to part with him .with 
much reluftance ; and enjoined him in 
ft promife to repeat his vifit on the fol- 
lowing day, if poflible. 
He haftened to his friend Alexis; 
fwho waited with impatience his return, 
iri an appointed field, juft by) and cried, 
Alas ! my friend ! I am almoft con- 
vinced already that I have wronged 
Florello, even in oppoGtion to my rea^ 
fon mil. 
' The other, (when the above-mention- 
ed particulars were told^ replied, I am 
perfwaded that your reafon, very foon, 
will 
\ 
lf4 tus Ht^TQtr 
will be obliged to aik your own, and 
{KX>r Fk>rello*s pardon* But they then 
made all the hade imaginable home to 
meet Amanda, who had piomifed to be 
there eicpeding themi 
. And Ihe (with her fon) was waiting at 
their cottage : for it had been agreed on 
that they Ihould intruft that innocent 
and amiable youth, with their difguife^ 
to give lefs caufe for wonder, when that 
lady vifited two gentlemen fo frequent- 
ly> tho* they were called her kinfmen. 
. BeUmont related to her all that had 
paft. And thus, that wife and charitat^ 
friend ('after hearing it with fixt atten^** 
^on) replied. 
Indeed, my dear, you have^ I think, 
in this affair, been cruel < and too rafh, 
^ paffing fentence on him. f'al&hood 
will, very often, nicely counterfeit the 
truth, in order to deceive. — But noble^ 
fclf-fufBcient truth ! difdains to wear the 
other's odious mafque ; and, therefore, 
cafily is known from the other. Flo- 
rello muft, J am fure^ be innocent 1 
bow- 
Irtwret^r that vile Icrole, that moft un- 
happy circumftance, came to appear 
againil him. Let fne^'I intreatyou, g^ 
to him ; with leave, from you, to feai 
fats pardon : tho% for ought I know, the 
pardoner of him, may, by and by, (land 
inore in need of his -, or I will own my« 
Jblf miftaken greatly* 
Alexis cried^ I heartily concur in th£» 
opinion. 
But the ponderatmg judgment of 
poor Bellmont, between hope and fear,^ 
hung tinioroufly doubtful ftill : for there 
is, generally, planted in our nature, ao 
unhappy aptitude, that labours to tor- 
ment us i — that makes us moft incline to 
think thofe things are true, which moft 
we wifh fliould not : and (he determined 
to be ftili more fully fatisfied ; alledg- 
tng, as her reafon, that all doubt of 
conftancy, muft be entirely difGpated iik 
her fcheme of h'appinefs. 
She< therefore, would make a farther 
trial of him, — throwing off her difguife ^ 
as (he was fenfibk) (he laid, his fufierings 
for her were apparently lincere. 
She 
ijC Thit HIStORlf 
She then determined, that Alexis only 
fliould go, the morning following, and 
give Florello this note froni Bellmont ; 
which, by Amanda's fon, was firfl: tran- 
icribed \ whofe hand was quite unknown 
to him. 
* 
*' TF, fir, you find your health and 
fpirits, will, to day, permit you to 
be condufted, in an eafy airing, by the 
bearer of this note, to my abode^ it will 
be of fervice to you ; and I hope to give 
ypu fome account, not difagreeable, con- 
cerning my vifit to the lady. 
. " The air, and gentle exercife, I can 
^ aflure you, will be of great effedl to you j 
nor will the journey be fatiguing, as the 
diftance is a fmall one from your houfe. 
s 
" You will foon know the reafon of 
this unexpeded, ftrange requeft ! and 
will, I am certain, then excufe the free- 
dom of it, in 
Your fincere well-wifher, 
BELLMONT/* 
Alexis 
OF ALMIRA. 177 
Alexis went next aborning, and, after 
fending in this note, was ibon defired to 
walk up, in order to attend Florello ; 
who dked him very kindly after the 
health of Belhnont, hoping that no ac- 
cident or ficknefs had prevented the vifit 
he had that day intended him ; adding, 
that he had found himfelf fo wonderfully 
and beyond expe^Ution mended, by his 
vifit and advice, that he was able to think 
on the journey with much pleafure i and 
immediately defired the coach might be 
got ready for them. — But the requcfl: fo 
much furprized his mother, that (he in* 
fifted, for feme time, that fome of them 
might bear him company, for fhe was 
fure his head was now jnuch more dif- 
ordered than it was before. But Ke, de- 
clining that propofal, told her, he chofe 
alone to talk with his new do&or, who 
had done more for him, by only talking, 
than all, before confulted, had been able 
to effed.by many difagrceable prcfcrip- 
tions. 
Upon which his father interpofed, and 
beggM her to defift j crying, I think he 
feems quite well already. 
Vol- I. N Alexis, 
r;9' Tut HISTORY 
Alexis^ not difpofcd to fee him dttfs 
himfeif (or rather be aflifting in his dref- 
ling} deiired to view the gardens^ tilt 
he was ready ; where we will leave them 
to purfue their lictk journey. 
Amanda and Almira (the laft of whom 
was now no longer to be called Bell-* 
B30nt) were confulting how they might 
hefl: r«:eive Florello, if he fbould come ^ 
aod at iafi it was agreed between them» 
that the former only fliould appear at 
firfh And fhe accordingly^ alone re-? 
ceived him, and told him not to be ibr* 
prized, for Ike was kindly fent for thi- 
ther, by his new phyfkian, to partake 
the pleafure of his amendment, and the 
favour o£ that vifit ; as there was fome- 
thing to diicover, that would give him 
pleafure Ukewife. Nor could the doflor 
have (fhe faid^ the fatisfaftion of at- 
tending him, having been called another 
way, but juft before he cancre, on very- 
urgent bufinefs. 
Fbrello feeined much conned at this, 
but begg*d immediately to be inform^d^ 
if there was any letter for him from 
Almira. 
Almira. To which Aniainda anfv^rcd^ . 
there was one indeed^ and of impor- 
tance ! that (hould be (hewn to him^ if 
he would arm himfctf with nectflary for* 
titude before he read ky fmiling at the 
fame time fhe fald it, with a look of 
hope and contort towaitte him. 
On hearing this he figh'd^ and fiknt^ 
ly looked round s, feemingly with impa- 
tience, as if wifhing for the fight of Beil- 
mont, and fearing to requeft the ktter *, 
when the door opening, from the other 
room, prefented his Almira entering to 
them, with a melancholy fmile, of digr 
nity and graceful pity ! He ftarted at 
the fight of her^ as if he really thought 
her apparition (only} had vifited his 
fancy : but when ibe had advantcd 
fome paces forward, he atcem^^ed to 
fpfing from h@ fea^ as if foirgetful and 
regardlefs of his weakened ftate of healthy 
and ran, as well as be was able, to meet 
her, with a bended knee, fnatching her 
hand with trembling, rapture^ awed by 
<liffidence and overjoyed furprize ! Am 
I^ cry*d he, awake ! or does this hea^ 
%senly dream deceive my fcnfes ? No^ 
. N a no. 
x8o Tfix HISTORY 
no, 'tis my Ahnira ! tins dear haad I 
this form ! cannot deceive me. But ta 
find you here, thus unexpededty, thus 
happily, I hope, to call to Ufe again a 
wretch who ha» fo long, alas ! exifted 
but to mifery ! ever fince his eyes were 
fufFered to meet thofe angelic beams with 
pleafure. How it can bq, muft equally 
aflonilh and, delight me ! 
You fee, replied Amanda, kind}y, 
whatyouoweintirely toBellmont. fOb- 
ferving that poor Almira was quite fi- 
lent, and to appearance unable to reply/. 
To Bellnaont, cry'd Florello, is that 
poflible ? good heaven for ever blefs that 
matchlefs wond'rous friend ! a friend fo 
newly found, and yet thus foon, and" 
thus amazingly, to heap the firfl and 
bed of obligations on me ! How has this 
been, or can it really be ? Where is he, 
madam ('turning to Amanda^ that he 
ihould be prevented thus partaking in 
my prefcnt bappinefs ? My overflowing 
gratitude ^if it is to him I owe the 
fight of my Almiraj burns with impa- 
.tience to make fome return. Tho* in^ 
fufficient. 
OF ALMIRA; x8t 
fufficient, all my thanks muft be, for 
fuch unhop'd relief ("from him^ as this. 
If foch you call it. Sir, you owe it 
all indeed to him, return^ Almira, and 
only him;, nor let me take a merit that 
is fo much another^s. *Twas his report 
concerning you, alone prevailed on me, 
who happened to be at my friend Aman- 
da's, to come in perfon, to account for 
a behaviour, which were inexcuiable in 
me, had I not thought there was appa- 
rent reifon for it ; and which, if that 
paper does not juftify, I own myfelf to 
feek for an apology^ for giving you pain 
I never wiflied you. She th^n deliver'd 
to him the letter before - mentioned, 
' wrote by Crudelia, which he imniediate- 
, \y pcTufcd. And in that moment A- 
mintor f who had been walking for fome 
time in an adjacent orchard, by his mam- 
, ma*s defire, as fhe imagined it might not 
be agreeable to both thefe lovers, to 
have him there as witnefs of that amia- 
ble weaknels, that is feldom wanting 
upon fuch occafions^ brought up a let- 
ter to Amanda, wluch one of her fer- 
vants had juift then brought. She, ha- 
N 3 ving 
j«2 The history 
ving opened it| found it wa$ within di^ 
reded to Almira, and gave it her j who 
faw immediately that it came from her 
jold honeft fervant Prudence. And the 
contents were thefe : 
cc 
My dear young lady. 
? Hope that theefe wil finde you wel in 
helth. I have don nothin elfe but 
dremedofyou, by day and nite, fince 
you fat off from us : fure nothin bad 
can have bcfalin you, that my poore 
Jiart fhoould ake aboute you fo. How- 
fever, that is not the onely mater of my 
riting nether ; for, good lac a day, wha 
woouid a thouht it ! but your ant haa 
takin fomwat now fo much to hart, and 
thinkin that as how may hap Ihe haa 
not longe to live, hopes peteufly to fee 
yoti, 
** Her favarite maed has been up and 
downe with me, a powr of times, ever 
finfe you went, aboute you. And here-* 
ing you were out of townej^ and that I 
knew indede as whare, and woouid nof 
tcl her 5 maddam berfclf, whoofe finfes 
fudingfy 
luding^y catDS to her, m e^ece woM fir- 
prife, has lent this leter for you, an4 
difired me to fende it to you with ^11 
fpede, and fhe did hot foigit me nether 
for it. 
<' Do, I beg you, my gpod lady, come 
and fe her, out of onely charitee ; for I 
faaveheerd ftrang thinges aboute her» 
— al canot be rite. 
Yours, for- ever to comande^ 
Tel deth, 
PRUDENCE. 
P.S. My dater Sharlpte gives her 
umble dutee to you, n>y dear lady» 
and to good miftres Ckona,'* 
N /J. inclofed, 
i84 . TifE HISTORY 
Inclofed, thete wias the foHowusJ^ 
letter : 
cc 
My dcareft neke. 
T Am, I find now, drawing very near 
my end ; but cannot die in peace till 
I have your forgivenels, and yoxir prayers 
for me. 
" My unkind ufage of you, often, 
has dcferved your leaving nie, at fii'ch 
a time ; nor can I blame you for it. Yet 
you are ftill a ftranger to the worft of it; 
which the inclofed unhappy paper will 
too well acquaint you with. I fend it 
you, for fear I (hould not live to fee 
you ; that I, in death, may clear the 
innocent, whom I,^ in life, haye injured. 
s—Prevail upon Florello, if poflible, as 
well as your dear felf, to pardon me. 
Guilt is, itfelf, the ftiarpefl of all piinifh- 
ments. O ! that I could have known 
that fooner ! I never have enjoyed my 
health, or peace of mind, fince I per- 
petrated that laft black deed ! for Pro- 
vidence, alas ! is juft in all things !— 'and 
I have more to anfwer for. 
^* I have 
«)r 'ALMIRA; 'tis 
*^ I have yet more, my dear, to fry 
to you, than I have power or ftrength to 
write ; for it is with pain and difikulty 
I can write at all. The little power, 
chat has juft now been lent me, is to. do 
juftice only, I am certain. 
*s For pity^s fake, I beg it of you, 
lef me fee you quickly ! if you have any 
pity for your too-undeferving, but now 
iincerely penitent, and 
Mod: affeAionate aunt, 
CRUDELIA.'' 
Florello, who by this time had twice 
read over, with vifible amazenicnt, the 
letter which Almira had juft given him', 
waited impatiently her having finifhed 
the reading of hers; and the firft mo^^ 
ment he met her eyes recovering their 
lids from off the paper in her hand, he 
cried. For heaven's fake ! madam, what 
does all this mean ? I am a Granger to 
thefe bafe contents s, tho* fome vile hand, 
I fee, has named me in them. Tell me, 
I be- 
tU Th* HISTOKY 
1 befeech you, where it came from ? 
for X am all aftonifhment \ 
Juft then, Amiuida, who had obferv^ 
his frequent change of countenance, in* 
iifted on his caking a glafs of wine wkk 
fome reviving drops. 
O, fir, Crerurn^d Almiraj I am as 
greatly overjoyed to have it in my power 
to anfwer that juft queftion, as I am 
overwhelmed with recollcftive fhame), 
that I Ihould give» too eafily, fuch cre- 
dit to it. But let thefc- letters be my 
beft apology at prefent. I will after- 
wards inform you how^ and where, I 
found the othen 
She then gave him thofe letters Ihe 
had juft received -, and was obliged to 
quit the room immediately : for the va- 
^riety of ftrong confliding paffions (he 
had to encounter^ all at once, threatened 
the over-powering of her almoft-fainting 
fpirits. Amanda, feeing this, went to 
her, and conduced her into the other 
room J where tears foon proved a kind 
itlicf to her. 
Flo- 
6t ALMIRA. is; 
Florello being intent upon thofe pa-^ 
pers flic had given him> did not obferve 
ter difcomporure. — And Cleone, (who 
was DOW no longer to be Alexis) being. 
in the adjacent chamber, refuming her 
own habit, prepared a glafs of water, 
with fome drops, for her ; which fo re- 
ftored her fpirits, that ftie was foon ena- 
bled to return to her deferred lover; 
who with mingled joy, and curiofity, 
(to be ftill more informed concerning 
what he had now read) was waiting with 
ioipatience for their coming in again. 
Amanda begged Almira to return 
rione ; being convinced, that, upon fuch 
occafions, a third perfon's company can 
willingly be fpareid ; adding, however, 
that ihe would preientiy be with lier, 
to engage them both to let her dear 
Fidclio be a, fharer in the joy of fuch a 
happy rec<kiciliation ! as fhe might-now,' 
Ihe hoped, infift on feeing, 
Almira bowing, fmiled confeot to it» 
and left them. — But fhe had no fooner 
fliewn herfclf again, to the expefting 
eyes 
t88 The HISTORY 
eyes of poor Florello; than, as Ad 
croflcd the room ^with a confufion that 
admits of no defcription, but which de* 
prived her of the power to let her eyes 
meet his) he ran, tho* faintly, and 
catched her in his arms, with filent rap- 
ture ! and, for fome moments, preiled 
her to his rebounding bo{bm, while his 
head reclined upon her fhouldcr, to re- 
cover breath and ftrcngth from cxtafy ? 
Then, foon alTuming courage, from 
exulting confcioufnefs of happy inno^ 
cence! (and willing to demand his own 
imagined due reward; he fealed repeat- 
edly upon her lips, his happy fenfe of 
reftoration to her favour :— while Ihe, 
depreffed by confcious fhame, (^finding 
bcrfclf now his inferior, from her having 
accufed him v/rongfully) wanted both 
the power, and will, then, to repulfe him 
ftrongly. So great an influence has 
every fenfe of felt s defefts, or wrong 
done j:o another, on a refleftirij^ virtuous 
chriftianV mind. 
I fee, cried he, my deareft angel f 
now, with joy unfpeakable, that I am 
the happicft man alive ! You have, un- 
knowingly, 
ki^owingly^ convinced mt of it.-r-No, 
I ihould be the bafeft wretch on earth, 
could any charms, but thine, gain en<» 
trance to my heart ! believe me, I have 
there no room for more. And this too- 
plaufible diftruft, and due refentment, 
all (however painful to mc hitherto) efta- 
blifhes my blifs upon a happy bads. 
Could you have acted otherwiic, when 
under fuch feemingly juft fufpicions, I 
bad been now lefs happy ! for I am, by 
this, convinced^ Almira cannot, does 
not hate me. 
And when, returned Almrra, I inform 
you, that I found that paper clofe by 
the chair you rofe from, wheh you 
went away, the day you vifited me laft, 
find fome excufe for my credulity, Alas ! 
I cannot, for myfelf, one more fufficient. 
Tho* I am now, I own, lefs fatisfied 
with that, than I have been. 
No, no, returned Florello; I will 
find no excufe, no pardon, for it; buc 
Upon one condition. — You have hurt 
my honour^ in its tendereft part» I can 
aflure you, and doubted its devoted 
love 
I90 The HISTOR^^ 
love of you ! and I inlift on having fil^ 
tisfaftion for it. — You muft, this very 
day, permit me to prefent you to my 
.parents \ as one, who could alooe, thro* 
heaven ! reftore again, to life and healths 
and them, their half-loft fon; 
The time, my charmer, is almoft ex- 
pired ; why would you fix fuch cruel 
letters on it! Will you not lighten it 
one week, for all I have lately iufiered ? 
I may, replied Almira, if Florella 
a(ks me j after I have reminded him 
that I had once hi8 promiie, he would 
not defire to deprive me of a day, with- 
in the limits of my refolution. I muft, 
you fee, immediately return to town ; 
and yet, alas ! how ihall I bear to fee 
the grief of this unhappy aunt, ^ tho* 
happy penitent ! But you muft, iir, fup* 
port me in it ; and, as a principal con- 
cerned, your prefence may, indeed, be 
neceflary to her quiet. My friend Aman- 
da will, I am fure, oblige me with 
her company ; and I^lhall ftand in need 
of all fuch kind afliftance upon this oc- 
cafion. 
Amanda^ 
" 
OF ALMIRA. 
tg% 
Amanda, juft then came in, and told 
them ftie was fent for home to dinner, 
where fhe infifted they fhould all ac- 
company her ; which, they confenting 
to, Florello's coach conveyed them thi- 
ther in a few minutes. 
END of VOL. L 
