THE LIBRARY, 
THE 
L O V E S 
oF
CHAEREAS and CALLIRRHOE 
Written originally in Greek 
By Chariton of Aphrodisios
Now firft tranflated into Englifli. 
IN 
TWO VOLUMES. 
«■ 
VOLUME n. 
.■.. L , 
LONDON: 
Printed fprT.BECKET, and P.A. Dfe Hqndt. 
in the Strand. MDCCLXIV. 
CHOREAS and CALLIRRHOE
SOOlC V. 
/. ^Nwhat manner Callirrhoe, the lote^' 
Heft of women, was joined in wed- 
lock, under the aufpices of Venns, 
to Chaereas the moft handfome among men i 
and how, being thought dead on occafion of 
a violent blow given her by Chaereas, in tf 
Vol. II. B fit 
»V/ > 
fit of jealoufy, fhe was magnificently inter- 
red : How afterwards recovering, pyrates 
drew her, in the dead of night, ©at of the 
fepulchre ; and cr offing the fea, fold her in 
Ionia to Dionyfius : Wis paflion for Callir- 
rhpe 5 her fidelity to Chaereas j and the necef- 
fity fixe was uader, on. account of her preg- 
nancy, to marry again : Theron's confeflion j 
with Chaereas's voyage, in order to feek his 
wife : His captivity with Polycharmus; 
and their being fold in Caria : How Mkhri* 
dates knew Chaereas again* juft as he was 
going to fuffer ; and the ftrong endeavours 
nfed by the former, to- unite the fevered lo- 
vcxs : la what manner Dkmyfius, having dif- 
covered tbefe particular by means of Jet- 
tqrs, as cufed Mithridates to Pbarnacss ; and 
how the latter informed againft Mitbridate* 
fe the ki&g. La&ly* how the monarch, fata- 
OQBe&batbr tke.jp actus to take 'their trial:— 
All 
C 3 ] 
AH thefe incidents have been related; and 
we now proceed to the fequel of the flory.— 
Callirrhoe was not difpleafed with her voyage 
till her arrival in Cilici?, as foe had hitherto 
heard the Greek language fpoke ; and could 
fee that 'part of the ocean which flows to-* 
wards Syractffe : but when (he came to the 
Euphrates, on the other fide whereof is a 
continent fubjeft to the king of Perfia, ftretch- 
ing out a vaft length ; Qxe then began to figfe 
for her native country, and lxer relations ; and 
defpaired of ever returning again to thenj. 
Hereupon, Handing on the basks of th« 
river, ftie ordered all her attendants to retire, 
her faithful Plangon excepted, and then 
poured forth thefe words;— r—O envipu^ 
Fortune! too obstinately beat to perfecutf 
a haplefs, forlorn woman. Thou didft font 
me up in a fepulchre ; and deliver me thenee, 
qot out of pity, but to put me into the hands 
B 2 of 
C 4 J 
of pyrates. Theron, and the ocean, divick 
id my flight between them. I, though the 
daughter of Hermocrates, was fold ; and 
what is ftill more grievous to me than bon- 
dage, have been beloved ; and, in Chaereas's 
ftfe-time, married to another man. Yet 
thou now envieft me even thefe nuptials. 
Thou doft not banifh me to Ionia. I 
there, indeed, was in a foreign land; but 
then its inhabitants were Greeks 5 and I had 
the fond conferiation to dwell m the neigh* 
bourhopd of the fea. Thou doft now force 
s 
\ , 
me from the accuftomed air which I ftrft 
breathed j and a whole world lies between 
me and my native country. Thou doft drive 
inefrom Miletus, as before from Syracufe. 
lj born an iflanderi am dragged over tte 
Euphrates; and (hut up in the interior parts 
of a barbarous country \ which no fea wafties* 
What hopes have I, that a Sicilian (hip wrtt 
' evejr 
[J] 
t ». 
T 
ever fail this way* Omy Chaeneas ! lam 
eyen fevered from thy fepulcbre. Excellent 
Manes ! Who will henceforward offer up (a- 
crifices to thee? Ba&ra and Snfa will, for 
ever' after, be my habitation and my grave* 
Q Euphrates! never (hall Icrok thy flood 
again. I do not fo much dread the length 
of the journey, as the misfortune of my ap- ' 
pearing, there, beautiful in the eyes of focne 
one.— —Having faid thefe words, (he kifled 
the earth; and then going bn board, eroded 
the river. Didnyiius had a grand retinue, 
and fplendor (hone in every part of it ; he. 
being refolved to exhibit, to Ms wife, the. 
utmoft magnificence on this occasion ; which 
alfo might make him more acceptabta to the 
king. He met with univerfal courtefy in 
his progrefs; the people of one province 
conducting him to the next ; and each go- 
vernor recommending him to the neighbour- 
B 3 ing 
t 6 1 
idg one : for Callhrhoe's beauty fafcinated 
afcd enflaved every beholder. Thofe Barba- 
rians were likewife in hopes, that this wo- 
man would one day be very powerful. Hence 
all were extremely defirous of entertaining 
them in their houfes ; and, by laying her 
under obligations, they expe&ed a return df 
favour. Thus were matters circumftanced at 
this juncture. 
H. But Mithridates was more expeditious 
ih his progrefs, which was through Armenia ; 
he being apprehenfive that, fhould he go the 
fame road with Callirrhoe, . and immediately 
after her, this would be reprefented, to the 
king, as an argument of his guilt. He alfo 
was very defirous of arriving firft, in order 
that he might have time to prepare every 
thing neceffary for, and of advantage to, his 
trial. Being come to Babylon, where the 
king 
r ? ] 
king their relided ; Mithridates ftaid at home 
all that day, and devoted it wholly to reft ; 
each governor having his particular quarter 
affigned him. On the morrow he went tfe 
court, where he firft vrfited thofe of his own 
rank, who are called Homotbni. After fair* 
iog faluted the eunuch Artaxates, and prie*. 
feated gifts to him ; he being in a mofk ex- 
alted ftatioa, and very powerful with t^t 
king ;— Artaxates 1 (faid he) fpeak thufc 
to my liege. Mithridates, thy fervant, is com* 
hither, in order to clear hhnfelf from tht 
accufation brought againft him by the Greek ; 
and to fall proftrate before Ms fovereign.— — 
Artaxates coming out a little after, brought 
the following anfwer :*— -That the king ad- 
4 
vifed Mithridates not > to prevaricate ; and, 
with regard to the trial, that it would be 
entered upon fo foon as Dionyfius fhould ar- 
rive.— —Mithridates then paid his adoration, 
B 4 and 
i « 3 
and went away. Being returned to his lodg- 
ings, and alone, he fent for Chaereas, and 
fpake thus :— I am perfecuted, and charged 
with a defign to reftore Callirrhoe to thee ; 
for Dionyfius declares, that the letter which 
thou didft wrfte to thy wife, was. drawn up 
by me ; and imagines, that he has got evi- 
dent proofs of an adulterous commerce. He 
is firmly perfuaded, that thou art dead; and 
let him continue in that belief, till the day 
of the trial; that thou mayeft then appear 
pn a fudden, and unexpectedly. One re- 
queft I have to make, in return for my great 
kindnefs to jhee, viz. that thou wouldeft 
have fo much patience as to lie concealed $ 
and to forbear feeing Callirrhoe, or even 
making the leaft enquiry concerning her.— - 
Chsereas obeyed, though with the utmoft 
relu&ance ; and fpite of his violent ftruggle, 
%o conceal the fecrets of his foul, yet tears 
ptfhecj 
{ 9 ] 
gufiied infenfibly from his eyes ; whereupon 
he thus replied;— r My JLordJ Thy com- 
mands fhall he obeyed.-. — Then retiring to 
the apartment where he, and his friend Poly- 
char snus, lodged; Chaercas threw himfelf 
on the floor, and tore his garments j after 
Which, 
Diflrafied : nuitb his hands he ejhesfeoofd 
Of jetty hue j then caft them o'er his head ; 
And thus the beauty cf hi* fa* deform d, 
' Then weeping, faid: O my Callirrhoe \ 
yft are near ; and yet muft not fee each 
other. But this is no ways thy fault, as 
thou knoweft not that Chaereas is Hill alive. 
But I am the moft wicked of men, who, 
i 
. being bid not to fee thee 5 am yet fo much 
2 coward, and fo fond of life, as tamely 
' #> fubmit to a tyrannical order : whereas, 
had* 
[ io 3 
had fach an injunction been laid on thee, thou 
wouldeft have died. — Polycharmus employed 
the mpft foothiog wofds, in hopes of con- 
foling him ; about Which time Dionyfius was 
advanced pretty near to Babylon* Fame had 
previoufly filled the city with the news of 
the approach of the woman, whofe beauty 
was not human, but rather of the celeflial 
kind ; and fuch as Sol did not behold in his 
mighty progrefs. As the Barbarians are, by 
natpre, dift railed ly fond of females, every 
houfe, and every ftreet echoed with this re- 
port ; which reaching the king's ear, he 
alked the eunuch Artaxates, whether the Mi-, 
lefian woman was come. Dionyfius had long 
felt great uneafinefs, on account of his wife's 
being fo univerfally talked of; a circumftance 
that prevented his enjoying, with fecurity, 
the happinefs he really pofleft; but when 
lie reflected that he was going to Babylon, 
he 
t » ] 
he was ttot merely grieved, but all on fire ; 
whereupon, venting a deep iigb, he groaned 
thus within himfelf : Thou art not now 
(O Dionyfius !) in Miletus, thine own coun- 
try. Even, there thou wert afraid 4 of fe* 
ducers. How then conldeft thou be fo rafli, 
fo thoughtlefs of futurity, as thy felf tm 
take Callirrhoe to Babylon, where are fo 
many Mithridates -s ? In Sparta, that city fo 
renowned for the chaftity of its tnorafc, Me- 
nelatjs could not keep Helen wholly to him* 
felf; but found a rival in a barbarous (hep* 
herd. Many a Paris is fatl with in Perfia. 
Percciveft thou not the dangers ? Seeft thou 
ftot the prelude to thefe things > Entire cities 
tome forth to meet us, and governors Iavi(h 
their favours upon us. This has already 
(Welled CalUrrhoe's pride, though t,he Itfng 
has not yet feen her. The only way then left 
f&r thee to keep thy wife, will the to conceal 
her. 
[ I* ] 
her. If (he can bat be hid, I (hallfecure her 
to my felf. Having thus reafoaed in his 
own mind, he mounted on horfeback, and 
left Callirrhoe alone in the chariot, after 
drawing the curtains round her. And had 
it not been for an incident which happened, 
his defires would very probably have been 
accompliftied. 
III. The wites of the greateft Perfian 
Lords went to Statira, the king's confort, 
when one of them thus addreiTed her ;— 
Royal lady ! a contemptible, female Grecian, 
our enemy, who ha9 long been the fubje<2 of 
uoiverfal admiration, is coming hither. We 
are in danger (and that through our own 
fault,) of lofing, in this age, the glory which 
fo highly diftinguifties the Perfian fair. Let 
,us rouze then, and confider how we may pre- 
vent our beauty, and the reputation of it, 
from 
C '3 3 
from being obfcured by this female fo» 
reigner.—  The queen fmikd at thefe words* 
(he giving little credit to the report, and 
fpake thus : The Greeks are vain, and 
pay no regard to truth ; they making the mod 
trifling things the fubjeft of admiration; 
whence they loudly pronounce Callirrhoe 
lovely, and Dionyfius rich. When therefore 
/he (hall be arrived in the city, let one of us 
come forth, and eclipfe at once the imaginary 
charms of that mean, infignificant (lave. — 
All the ladies paid adoration to the queen ; 
and admiring her wifdom, they cried aloud, 
as with one voice : Would (O queen !) 
that thou mighteft be feen in public. — — 
They afterwards differed very much in opi- 
nion ; on which occafion mpny women, re- 
nowned for their exquifite charms, being 
named ; they proceeded to the cleftion, as 
in a theatre) when Rhodogune, daughter 
to 
r 14 i 
to Zopynu, and wife to Megabyzus, was 
chofeit ; fhe being a model of perfect beauty, 
and as renowned all over Afia, as Callirrhoe 
was throughout Ionia. Hereupon the ladies 
led forth the chofen fair* and began to deck 
her ; each contributing fome trinket, or other 
ornament, for that purpofe. The queen 
alfo prefented her with bracelets and collars. 
Being thus fplendidly arrayed, arid prepared 
for the congrefs ; (he fet out, in high fpirits, 
to meet Callirrhoe ; which (he likewife was 
induced to do from a family motive i Rhodo- 
gune being fifler to Pharnaces, he who had 
writ to the king concerning Dionyfius* All 
Babyloa came forth to this fpdftacje ; info*' 
much that the crouds ilopt the paflages at the 
feveral gates. Rhbdogune being conduced 
out of the palace, and attended by a princely  
train, flopt on an eminence very vifible on 
every fide ; when, affuming the moft affected 
2 airs* 
[ »5 3 
airs, (he feemcd to challenge the approaching' 
ftrangen Inftantly (he attra&ed all eyes, 
when one faid to another : We are con- 
querors ! The Perfian lady will eclipfe the 
foreign woman. Let her vie with Rhodogune 
if flie can : Let the Greeks now learn, that 
they are a compound of pride and vanity. — 
While they were thus talking, Dionyfius ar- 
rived ; when being informed that the fitter 
of Pharnaces was prefent, he alighted im- 
mediately froni his horfe ; and went up to 
her^ to. pay his refpefts. Rhodogune, half 
bluftiingj faid: 1 muft falute my fifter; 
and thereupon flew to the chariot. It was 
now impoflible to conceal Callirrhoe any 
longer behind the curtains ; fo. that Dionyfius 
was forced, though with infinite reluctance* 
with fighs; and through fharae, to defirc 
hisLwifeto alight. Inftantly the multitude 
UQt oaly dire&ed their graces* hut fixed 
their 
j 
t it 1 
their very fouls, on Callirrhoe ; infomucri that 
they aimed fell over one another j every onef 
longing to fee her firft ; and to get as near her 
as poflible. Her face then (hone ; anji its 
lightning dazzled the eyes of every beholder ; 
like as when a flrong effulgence burfts fud- 
denly from amid the gloom of night. The 
Barbarians, now feized with aftoniftiment, 
worftripped her; and no one thought that 
Rhodogune was prefent; who finding her 
felf vanquished ; being unable to go forward, 
and- yet unwilling to ftay behind, (he ftofe 
into the chariot to Callirrhoe ; and thus fub- 
mitted to be carried off by her conqueror. 
The chariot (whofe curtains were ilill drawn) 
went v forward : and the people, being now 
deprived of the fight of Callirrhoe, blew' 
kifles after her. The king hearing of Dio- 
nyfius's arrival, commanded Artaxates thd 
eunuch to make the following declaration to 
i " him: 
him  ■ ■■ A s thou haft brought a charge, 
againft a man whom I entrufted with the go- 
vernment of a large province ; thou fhouldeft 
not have been fo flow in thy journey. How- 
ever, I pardon thy fault, as thou didit travel 
with thy wife. I now celebrate a feftival* 
and am chiefly employed in facrifices. Thirty 
days hence I will hear thy fuit. Dionyfius 
paid his adoration, and withdrew. 
IV. Preparations for the trial began pre* 
fently to be made, on both fides, as for a 
mighty war. The Barbarians, in general, 
were divided into two parties. All the go* 
vernors, and , thofe who had any dependanot 
on them, were for Mithridates; he being 
originally a Ba&rian; and lately come inter 
CarLa. Dionyfius had the, favour of the 
4 
common people; as fnares had been laid fpr 
him, on occafion of his wife ; and fuch a 
- Vol. II. C wifi 
wife as CaUhrhoe: and efpecially at gretf 
injury feemcd to have been done him, con* 
trary to the laws. Neither were the Perfia* 
women eafy on this occafion, they alfo being 
divided in opinion. Such of them as were 
* ■ 
proud of their own charms, envied Callir- 
rhoc $ and wifhed, that (he might be brought 
to cpnfufion at the trial. Bnt molt of the 
reft, being jealous of the baauties of their owq 
country, prayed that the foreigner might 
fHll maintain her Aiming reputation, and bear 
away the palm. Both parties thought them* 
(elves fore of the victory. Pionyfius truftod 
in the letters which Mithridates was fuppofed 
to have writ to Galfirrboe, in Charcas'f name* 
whom he imagined to be dead : While, on 
the other hand, Mithridates could produce 
Chareas him&lf ; and thence was firmly per* 
feaded that no evil could befal him. He yet 
(treHended fear ^and engaged many ad vocates» 
& in 
V  
r '9 3 
tn order that the unexpcfted iftue might make 
his defence the more glorious. During thefc 
thirty days, the Perfians, both men and wo- 
men, talked of nothing but the trial ; fo 
that, to fay the truth, all Babylon feemed as 
one tribunal. The day appointed for the de- 
ciiion appeared to have been too long de- 
layed ; not only to all the people, but even 
to the king himfelf. What Olympic games, 
tyhat Eleufinlan nights, were, at any time, 
fo impatiently expected > But now the day 
of trial was come ; when the king took his. 
feat, in the apartment appointed folely for 
hearing caufes ; it being the moft fpaciour, 
and moft magnificent falcon, in the whole 
palace. In the center of this faloon flood the 
throne, with feats on each fide for the king's 
friends ; and for thofe who, either on ac- 
count of their rank, or of their virtues, pof- 
feffed the firft employments in the govern- 
C % tnent? 
t *> J 
neat. * Round the throne flood the centu- 
rions, the Tribunes, and the mod honourable 
among the king's freedmen : whence it might 
juftly have been {aid, of this aflembly, that, 
The gods bigb-feutedf round imperial Jo e v$ 9 
Wirt met (h council* 
The perfonages allowed feats, were introdu- 
ced with, filence and refpefh The morning 
being come, Mithridates firft entered the court, 
accompanied by his relations and friends $ 
not fplendidly dreft, nor with an open, 
chearful countenance ; but, on the contrary, 
difcovering fuch a miferable afpelt, as feemed 
to pronounce him guilty. Dionyfius follow- 
ed in a -Grecian habit, wearing a Milefia* 
robe, and holding the letters in his hand; 
Being introduced, they paid their adoration, 
when the king commanded the fecretary to 
read the letters > that of Pbarnaces, and the 
anfwcr 
anfwer to it : in order that thofe who, with 
himfelf, were to judge the caufe, might be 
made acquainted with the origin of the pro- 
cefs. The letters being read, the aflembljf 
gave the higheft teftimonies of applaiife; All 
admiring the moderation and jufiice of their 
prince. Silence being proclaimed, Dionyfius 
was to be heard firft, as the accufer ; when 
all eyes were fixed upon him. Neverthelefs 
Milhridates fpake thus : (O my Liege I) 
1 would not anticipate my defence, and know 
well the order to be obferved here ;* "but be- 
» ... 
fore we* proceed to the trial, it is neceflary 
that all the parties fiiould be prefcnt. Where* 
then is the woman who gave occafion to this 
conteft ? whofe prefence thou (Royal Sir ! j 
didft think neceflary; whofe appearance thou 
did ft commands and who is come to this 
city accordingly* Let not then Dionyfius fe- 
crete the perfon who is the chief, the firft 
C 3 caul* 
t « 3 
C*ufe, of the prcfeat feffion.— — Here D!o- 
nylius replied ;— — It is a&ing too like an 
adulterers to infill upon the bringing forth 
another man's wife, before a gazing multi- 
tude, contrary to his will , ihe being neither 
the aceufer nor the perfon accufed. Had & 
been fedaced, ihe then ought to have been 
prefent, as a culprit ; but thou didft endea- 
vour to corrupt Callirrhoe* who was wholly 
Ignorant of thy machinations* Byt I do not 
now want her, either as a witnefs or as an 
advocate. What neccjEty .then is there for 
her forth coming, as ihe is wholly unconcern* 
ed in this procefs?*— Thus argued Dia- 
ayfius, as a man well verfed in the civil law 3 
but his fubtilty and fpecious eloquence had 
not the gift of perfualion, becaufe all longed 
to fee Callirrhoe. ' As the king, though he 
wifhed for the fame, yet did not think it be* 
coming hr$ dignity to cown?nd her appear- 
ance j 
N 
aftce ; Ms friends artfully referred to his let- 
ter, by which her prefence was declared ne~ 
oeflary.— Would it not be extremely abfurd 
(cried one) fliould this woman, who is come 
frdm Ionia, and now in Babylon, pot make 
her appearance at the trial ?— It being then 
*efblved that Callirrhoe fliould come forth ; 
t)ionyiius, who had not told her a word con* 
cerning this affair, hut <evea concealed the 
true motive of their journey to Babylon; 
tearing his wife's juft anger, as (he could not 
but think herfelf iropofed upon, fliould he 
take her into court, without previoufly ac- 
quainting her with his reafons for this ; he 
therefore put off the trial, till &ext day, and 
the court broke up* 
« * 
V. Dionyfius now returned home; and 
being a wife man, and a fcholar, he held 
£ftch difcourfes with his wife as foited <$jbe frc- 
C 4 Cent 
X M 3 
» » - « ' . . 
feet exigency. His arguments (eemed plaufi- 
ble and perfuafive 5 he informing her, very 
readily and with great compofure of mind; 
of each particular. Callirrhoe could not hear 
him without tears; and, at the name of 
Chaereas, (he fighed and wept bitterly. And 
now, fhuddering at the thoughts of the trial, 
thefc words burft from her : To complete 
my 'wretchednefs, the only thing wanting 
was, for me to be dragged before the judge. 
I have been laid in the fepulchre as 'dead, 
and taken from thence by robbers: I have 
been fold; have been in flavery: and now 
(O Fortune !) I muft be forced to appear in 
a court of judicature. It was not enough 
that thou didft induce Chaereas to think me 
guilty ; but thou alfo muft expofe me to be 
tried as an adultereft, now I am married to 
* ■ «■  * . 
Dionyfius. By thy triumphant calumny, (6 
Fortune !) I then was carried to the tomb ; and 
now 
r '2 5 r 
■ i 
now to the tribunal of a king. I am become 
the jeft of Europe and of Afia, With what 
eye fliall I behold the judge? What words 
mud I be conftrained to hear ? O treacherous 
beauty! beftowed upon me by nature, only 
that I might be loaded with (lander. The 
daughter of Hermocrates is fummohed to a 
trial, where flie has no father to plead her 
caufe. Others, when they come before a 
court, fupplicate its favour and good-will; 
whereas.* haplefs I, am afraid of appearing too 
agreeable in the eyes of my judge. Cal* 
lirrhoe thus bemoaning herfelf, paft the whole 
day fadly dejefted in mind. N.ght being 
come, fhe was conveyed in a dream to Sy- 
racufe, where, in her virgin ftate, (he feemed 
to enter the temple of Venous; and, on her 
leaving it, to feeChaereas; fhe likewife per 5 - 
celved her nuptial day, and the whole city 
browned with chfcplets-j with* her pareim 
«. -" - leading 
i: * i 
leading her to the bridegroom's fiorie. And 
now going (as Ac thought,) to kifs her dar* 
ling Chftreas, (he ftaited fadflctly from her 
, Jfamfcrs, and Called . to PUngon ; for Dio- 
vyfius had rifaa before, in order t* meditate 
tepon the trial, ftangoa after befog told the 
dream, (pake thus :— Be conlforted (nay 
good Lady !) This vffion is aufpfcious bod! 
to thee, and to Qiaereas. Let nothing trouble 
thee. All that thou faweft in thy deep, thot 
wilt behold when awake. Go then to the 
tribunal of the king, as to the temple of Ve- 
nus. Remember who thon art, «nd refume 
thy bridal .charris.— Saying tliefe words, flie 
dreft Callirrhoe tefy ipkndidly, who, from 
* fecrfct impulfe, gvew chearful on a fuddeo, 
as an omen of her future felicity. In the 
morning numberlefs multitudes flocked to the 
palace, all the aremies to Which were aow 
crowded, Efrery oae feemed demons of 
fceaiing 
f »7 ] 
hearing the trial j but the real motive was tg 
get a light pf Callirshoe ; nor were they 
deceived in their expeftatiofti ; fo far from 
it, that (he then as far furpafled herfelf id 
beauty, as (he before out- (hone the reft of 
her Tex, As thd divine poet * feprefents 
Helen,, appearing fuddenly before Priam, 
Panthous* and Thymoetefc when debating: 
Such Catiirrhoe entered the court. Her pre* 
fence caufed uaiverfel ^ftonUhment apd & m 
Jence; and all, 
Wijftd to pojfe/i the trea/ure of her charms* 
And had the ccrcrfe of the proceedings re» 
qtrired Mithridates to fpeak firft, he would 
have been bereaved of voice 5 as his former 
paffiott, for Callirrhoe, had now received a 
far deeper. wouncL 
* Homer. 
VI. Dlo- 
1 
VI. Diotyfius began his harangfte in man* 
ner following. Moft gracious Sovereign !. 
I return thee all imaginable thanks for the 
honour thou "haft done me ; and not only 
me, but virtue alfo, and all married perfons 
in general. For thou haft not contemned a 
private man whom one of thy chief officer* 
has greatly. injured; but, on the contrary, 
haft fummoned him hither, to punifti him for 
Jusleudnejs, and his infolent conduct towards 
me ; and to prevent other men from attempt** 
ing the like anions for the 'future. But this 
crime calls for a more fevere punifhment, as 
he who committed it is of high, rank. Mi- 
* 
thridates, who far from being my enemy, 
was once my gueft and. my friend* endea- 
voured to rob me, not of any part of my 
cftate, but of what I prize beyond body and 
foul, even of my darling wife. This very 
man ought to have aided me, had. any other 
pcrfoa 
t *9 3 , 
jjcrfon offered fuch an infult; if not for mf 
.fake, at kail out of reverence to thee; (my 
Liege !) Thou haft entrufted him with the 
government of a mighty province; of which 
he has proved himfelf unworthy ; and there- 
by betrays, and even refle£h difhonour on 
Jthofe who repofed fuch confidence in him. 
J am not ignorant of the felicitations, the 
power, and pomp, of which Mithridates 
avails himfelf on occafion of the prefent 
procefs. . I know that I am not upon an equal 
footing, with him, in thofe refpefts : I yet 
rely, (O mighty Princ*!) on thy juftice j on 
the facred ties of marriage ; and on the laws 
which thou doft adminifter impartially to all; 
€houldeft thou difmifs Mithridates, it were 
much better that he had never been fummon- 
ed hither ; as otherwife all men would 
have concluded, that injuries and infults 
could never efeape punUhment, when brought 
before 
c 3* i 
before thy tribunal. But on the contrary* 
(hould Mithridates, after being judged by 
thee, be fuffered to depart with impunity \ 
thou wilt henceforward be contemned. My 
caufe is clear and conctft. I am hufband to 
Callirrhoe, and flie has made me a father* 
I married her, not when a virgin, but the 
Widow of a certain Chaereas, who died fome 
time fince; and whofe Maufolfcum is now 
fianding in our country. Mithridates being 
In Miletus, and my gueft ; and haying by 
that means an opportunity of feeing, purfuant 
to the laws of hofpitality, my wife ; he did 
m 
pot behave afterwards as became a friend, a 
j&odeft, or # worthy man ; nor ad thou re* 
quireft thofe to do, to whom thou doft en* 
truft the government of thy cities s He, on 
the contrary, a&ing with great indolence and 
tyranny. Being afterwards fully convinced 
of Callirrhoe's ftrift virtue, , and her great 
lore 
r *r j 
love for me, her hufband $ and thence doubt- 
ing whether it would be pofEble for him to 
win her, either by perfuafions or by rid* 
gifts; he (a mod crafty man I) hadrecourfe 
iq wonderful artifices, as he imagined 
them to be* Mithrrdates pretended that 
Chsercas, her firft hu&and, is ftill living; 
and having forged a letter, to my wife, in his 
&am*» he feat H t? her by hi? fervaots. Thy 
fortune (mighty Monarch!) faccopred mc r 
who, (I truft) am not pnworthy of thy 
countenance . and, by the providence of the 
Godf, this letter was dHipovered : for Biat^ 
Prater of Prknc, fent h me, with the fer** 
vants who had it in charge. Having thus 
detected Mithridates, I informed Pharnaces* 
governor of Lydia and Ionia, of this matter r 
when he acquainted thee (O Prince !) with 
the fame. I have here fet forth the whole 
# 
feft, of which thou art to judge. The 
proofs 
r 3* i 
proofs are ioconteflible ; for either Chaerca* 
mutt be proved to be ftill living : or Mitftri- 
dates mufl be convi&ed as an adulterer. He 
cannot fay, that he is ignorant of Chaereas's 
death ; as we have raifed ? monument, to his 
memory, in Miletus. Mithridates himfelf 
was there, and accompanied the funeral pro- 
ceflion. But whenever he wants to feduce 
another man's wife, he can eafily raife the 
dead. I will now only mention the letter 
which he difpatched, by his ferVants, from 
Caria to Miletus. Do thou (fecretary !) read 
it :■ -/, Choreas, am /till living. Let Mi- 
thridates prove this, and then be fet at li- 
berty. Reflcft (O my liege !) how audacious 
that man muft be, who dares to invent a fal- 
fity, even with regard to a perfon deceafed.— 
Thefe words, pronounced by Dionyfius, 
firing the whole affembly, every voice wa* 
inftantly in his favout: whcu the king, in- 
flamed 
f 33 3 
flamed with anger, darted a fierce and me* 
* 
naciog look at Mithridates* 
VII. And now Mithridate?, } being no ways 
difmayed, replied : — I befeech thee (O my 
king !) as thou art juft and merciful, not to 
condemn me unheard : nor to permit calum- 
ny to triumph over truth; by thy giving cre- 
dit to the malicious fiflion which a worthlefs 
Greek has artfully invented concerning me. 
I am fenfible, that the exquiflte beauty of 
Callirrhoe, may naturally raife a fufpidon of 
me ; as it does not feem unlikely, but that an 
attempt may have been made to fedtice her. 
My part life has been chafte and temperate ; 
and I was never expofed, till now, to the 
darts of (lander. Befides, had I been of a 
lafcivious and abandoned difpofitioh, your 
cntrufting me with the government of (o 
many cities, muft have reformed me. What 
Vol. tl. D man 
r 34- j 
nfeir could be fo void of fenfe, as to loft fa* 
many precious advantages, merely for the fake 
of indulging in one pleafure, and that of the 
Erutal kind ? Had I been confeious to my felf 
of the leaft guilt, I might have lawfully ob- 
jefted to the concerning my felf with this* 
trial. For Dionyfius does not charge me 
with endeavouring to feduce a woman whom 
he had lawfully married ; but' one who had 
been expofed to fale, and purchafed by him. 
Now (lave* are not comprehended in the laws 
relating jo adultery* Eet him firft read to 
thee the itfftrument of manumiffiotf, and' 
fyeak of the marriage afterwards. And dareft- 
thou to call this woman thy wife whom thoth 
didft buy for a talent, of Theron the pyratej 
after he had ftole her from the fepulchre f 
But thou wilt fay thus: She was free 
when I bought her. In that cafe thou* 
wouldeft be a woman-Aealer, rather than a- 
hulband* 
r 3s j 
hulband. Keverthelefs, I will now prove 
my innocence, as though thou wert really 
one. Suppofe, for a moment, that the pur- 
chafe was as the marriage, and the price, (a 
talent) as the dower ; and let her, though 
born in Syracufe, be considered as a Mile* 
fian t I yet would have thee (my Liege !) to 
know, that) I have not injured Dionyiius, ei- 
ther as a hufband or as a matter. In the firft 
place, he accufes me of an adulterous aft not 
yet committed, but intended : and not being 
able to prove the h&, he produces a vain 
letter that proves nothing. Now the laws 
punifti fafts. Shouldeft thou bring forth 
the letter ; I then could juftly affirm that it 
did not come from me. Thou haft not my 
hand-writing. Chaereas is in fearch of Cal- 
lirrhoe. Charge him with adultery. Yes, 
(fayeft thou) but Chaereas is dead ; and thou 
would eft feduce my wife uudir his name.—' 
Da O 
t 3« 3 
O Dioftyfius : Thou haft made tut a chal- 
lenge, which will no ways turn to thy advan- 
tage. I conjure thee, as thy friend and thy 
gucft, to withdraw the charge, Befeech the 
king to (top all proceedings. Recant all thy 
injurious expreffion* ; and fay thus: Mi- 
thridates is innocent, and Iaccufed him with- 
out foundation. But Ihouldeft thou perfift 
in thy obftinacy, thou wilt repent it, and 
pronounce fentence againft thyfelf. I foretell 
thee, thou wilt lofe Callirrhoe, and the 
king will find thee, and not me, to be the 
adulterer,— Here Mithridates ftopt:when 
the eyes of the whole aflembly were turned 
to Didny fitis ; they being anxious to know, 
whether, as it was left to his option, he 
would withdraw the accufation, or ftrongly 
perfift in it : for they were flrangers to what 
Mithridates had hinted at obfcurelyj but 
imagined that Dionyfius underftood his mean- 
ing 
* . t 37 J 
ing perfe&ly. Now the latter, who did not 
know, nor could in the lead fufpeft, that 
Chsereas was dill living, cried thus : Say 
what thou wilt ; Thou (halt not impofe upon 
me, either by fophiftry or by fpecious threats $ 
nor (hall it ever be proved, that Dionyfius 
is a falfe accufer. Here Mithridates, raif* 
ing his voice, like as when the pried, foil of 
the God, is going to offer up facrifice, uttered 
thefe words : « Y e regal, cekflial and in- 
fernal Deities ! O ! fuccour a virtuous man, 
who, with pure hands, has frequently ad* 
drefled his vows to you ; and offered up the 
mod fplendid facrifkes in your honour : Do 
ye, as a reward for my piety, wipe off each 
provoking, each flanderous afperfion. O! 
lend me Chsereas, at leaft for this trial. Ap- 
pear, thou excellent (hade ! Thy Callirrhoe 
calls thee. Stand, ftand between Dionyfius 
D 3 and 
C 3« J 
and me ; ahd tell the king, which of as twqr 
is the adulterer I 
VEIL Mithridates had fcarce ended, when* 
as had been concerted, Chaereas himfelf came 
forth, Callirrhoe, at the fight of him, cried 
out :— And doft thou live, my Chaereas ?— 
five was flying to him, when Dionyfius, rufti- 
ing in between, prevented their mutual em- 
braces." Now who could reprefent, in due 
colours, the face of this aflembly ? What 
poet ever brought, upon the ftage, fo un- 
common, fo marvellous an incident? Thofe 
prefent might imagine they beheld a theatre, 
where a thoufand oppofite pailions, all the 
* 
impulfes of the foul, were vifible ; fuch as joy, 
grief, aftonUhment, pity, diflruft and defire. 
They proclaimed Chareas bleft ; they con- 
gratulated Mithridates j they pitied Dionyfius* 
but, 
1 '39 
'but, with regard to Callirrhoe, they we« 
in doubt what to fay, or how to aft ; be- 
<caufe (he, being all amazement and ftruck 
dumb) fixed her ardent eyes on Chaereas 
only. It is my opinion, that the king himfdf 
^vould gladly have been Chaereas. Rivals are 
ever ready to wrangle with one another ; and 
the presence of the inchanting prize heigh- 
-tened the interefting contention ; infomuch 
that, they would cerfainly havefpught* had 
not the reverence, fpr their foverelgn, re- 
strained them. However, their quarrel went 
no farther than words.; when the following 
- dialogue ^nJuesd *■ :«~~ I am the.firft huf- 
Chsereas and Pionyfius are imagined, to fpeak 
alternately, in the following dialogue; and may be 
eafily diftinguUhed, by the words they are fuppofed 
to utter refpf&ively. 
C 40 ] 
1 
band. But I am more conftant, I having 
never drove away my wife ; whereas thou 
didfi: bury her. Shew me the inftrument 
of divorce.-— — Seeft thou the fepulchre ?— 
Callirrhoe's father difpofed of her, to me, in 
marriage.— But (he gave herfelf to me. — 
Thou art unworthy the daughter of Hermo- 
crates. ■ ■ Thou art ftill more fo, thou 
fliackled flave of Mithridates ! —I am come 
to demand Callirrhoe. — But I poflefs her.— 
Thou withholdeft another man's wife,—— 
Thou didft kill thine.— Thou adulterer !— 
Thou murtherer ! ■ Thus did they con- 
tend with, and reproach each other. In the 
mean time Callirrhoe, with downcaft eyes, 
fiied a flood of tears ; (he loving Chaereas to 
the foul, yet bluftung on account of Dio- 
nyfius. 
C 4i J 
nyfius. The king then having commanded 
the contending parties to withdraw, he be- 
gan to deliberate with his friends, not on 
Mithridates, who had made fo noble a de- 
fence ; but whether it would become him, 
to pronounce definitively, which of the two 
hufbands had a right to Callirrhoe. Some 
were of opinion, that it would be beneath 
the king to take cognizance of fuch a fuit.— 
Thou haft heard very juftly (faid they) the 
charge brought by Mithridates, he being a 
governor 5 but the other two are private per- 
fons. — Neverthelefs moft thought diffe- 
rently, both on account of Callirrhoe's fa- 
ther Hermocrates, who had formerly been 
of fome fervice to the royal family : and be- 
caufe the king would not, on this occaiion, 
judge a new caufe ; but one, part of which * 
he - 
f 42 1 
lie had already heard. However, none of 
them cared to difcover the true motive of the 
fldvice they gave, which was, that they could 
-not bear to be deprived of the fight of Cal- 
Jirrhoe. The king having fent for thofe 
whom he, a little before, had commanded te 
leAve the court, fpake thus : 1 now ac- 
quit Mhhridatcs, who may fet out for his go- 
vernment to-morrow, after having received 
theufual prefents. As to*Ch«reas and Dio« 
nyllus, they may lay, before me, their re- 
fpe&ive claims to die woman ; for I ought to 
yroteft the daughter of that Hermocrates 
who, in a naval engagement, vanquished the 
Athenians, the moft hateful, the moil trou- 
'blefome enemies to me and to Perfia. 
.Artaxerxes having pronounced this fejitence, 
^Mithridates paid his adoration j but the other 
jKtrties 
t 43 3 
parties were greatly furprizcd and exafperat- 
ed, and knew not what to doj which the 
king perceiving, — I fliall not (faid he) haften 
ye ; but on the contrary, will allow ye five 
days to prepare for the trial ; and, when ye 
are ready, return hither. In the mean time 
Statira, my confort, fhall take care of Cal- 
lirrhoe : it not being juft that a woman, the 
pofleffioa of whom is contefted by two huf-  
bands, fliould be brought intp court by either 
of them,— T{ie aflembly then broke up, 
with forrow and diflatisfa&ion in their coun- 
tenances, Mithridates excepted, who was all 
joy; and who, after receiving the royal 
gifts, flayed that night in Babylon ; and next 
morning fet out for Cana, with greater fplen- 
4or than before. 
IX. The 
C 44 3 
IX. The eunuchs to whom Callirrhoe was 
delivered, conduced her to the queen, with- 
out firft informing her of their coming ; the 
king never fending previous notice, on any 
occafion whatfover. Statira, at the fudden 
appearance of Callirrhoe, ftarted from her 
bed ; imagining that (he faw Venus ; a god- 
defs to whom (he paid peculiar worfhip. 
Immediately Callirrhoe proftrated herfelf be- 
fore the queen, whofe error and furprlze being 
perceived by the eunuch : This (faid he) 
is Callirrhoe. The king has fent her hither, 
in order that (he may be under thine eye; 
till the day of trial.-— Statira heard this with 
pleafure ; when fupprefling all female envy, 
(he (hewed greater kindnefs to Callirrhoe, on 
account of the honour which Artaxerxes had 
done her, in giving fo exquifite a beauty to 
hep 
C 45 3 
her in charge. The queen indeed was 
charmed with Callirrhoe, when takiog her by 
the hand : — -My dear woman (faid fhe) be 
comforted, and^dry thy tears : Artaxerxes is 
the mod benevolent, the moft gracious of 
princes. Thou (halt poflefs that hufband 
who is neareft to thy heart ; and, when the 
trial fe over, thy nuptials (hall be folemnized 
with greater magnificence than before. Go 
now and reft thyfelf j as I perceive that thon 
art much fatigued* and thy mind vaftly un- 
eafy.-i — -Callirrhoe was glad to hear thefe 
words, fhe wifhing much- for repofe. When 
{he was put to bed, and every one retired, 
laying her hands on her eyes : And have 
ye really, (faid (he,) beheld Chaereas ? Was 
it my own Chaereas ? or was it an illufion ? 
Perhaps Mithridates, in order to favour his 
7 fuits 
C 46 ] 
(uit, called up this phantom at the trial j 
for it is faid, that there are magicians ia 
Per&u But then it fpake. It related every 
particular, as though it. had been an intelli- 
gent Being. Yet how could he refrain from 
embracing me i We even feparated without 
a kifs. While Callirrhoe was ruminating 
on thefe things, (be heard the found of feet, 
and female voices ; for all the women flocked 
to the queen ; imagining that they might be 
indulged the full liberty of ^gazing on Callir- 
rhoe. But Statira faid :— We muft not 
difturb her : (he is not well : there will be 
days enough for us to fee, to bear, and to 
converfe with her. Yet all went away 
greatly diflatisfied, but returned on the mor- 
row ; and crouded, in this manner, daily ; 
fo that the palace was much more frequented 
thaa 
r at r 
tiian before. The king himfelf came oftner 
to the apartments of the women, upon pre- 
tence of vifiting Statira. Many rich gifts- 
were fent to Galltrrhoe, bat fhe conftantly 
refufed them all; fbe flill appearing in the 
garb of an unfortunate woman \ being clad 
in mourning ; unadorned ; and fitting on the 
ground; notwithftanding which fhe appeared 
ftill more beautiful. Being aiked by the 
king, which of her hufoands (he would pre- 
fer; {he made no anfarer, but burft into tears* 
Such was Callirrhoe's fituation, while Diony- 
■ 
Iiu9 drove to bear his misfortunes like a man > 
be being endued with uncommon fortitude 
of foul, and devoting himfelf to the ftudy 
©f moral philofophy. But fo great, fo un- 
ufual, fo unexpe&ecl a woe, as that he la- 
boured under, might eafily have overpowered 
the 
C 4« 1 
the ftrongeft brain. His love was far more 
Violent, than when he lived in Miletus ; as, 
in the infancy of his paffion, beauty only had 
attracted him} but now he was inflamed 
ftill more from many other caufes; fuch as 
familiarity and cohabitation with Callirrhoe : 
Affection for the fond pledge fhe had brought 
him ; his fear left fhe (hould prove ungrate- 
ful, and forfake him for another : Jealoufy 5 
and, above all, the extraordinary cjrcum- 
fiances with which this incident was attended. 
X.' Dionyfius would often cry out on a fud- 
den: Who is this Protefilaus returned 
again, at this time, to life? What infernal 
Deity can I have offended, that I thus find 
a rival in one deceafed, whofe fepulchre ftands 
to my land ? Thou (O Venus !) haft laid 
fnares 
t 49 3 
fdahes for me, though I coofetrated thee 
In various parts of my eftate, and offered 
tip a multitude of facrifices in thine honour* 
Wherefore dldft thou (hetf me Callirrhoe, 
If our union, was not to be lading ? Why 
make him a father, who Is not a hufband?— 
Then clafping his fon, and fhedding a flood 
df tears :— *-Ah I haplefs infant, (cried he,) 
thy birth feemed aufplciousi but thou 
now art a burthen to me ; a fad inherit 
» 
tance left me by thy mother; a monument 
of an ill-fated paffion. Thou, though a 
child, yet art not altogether infenfible of thy 
father's fufferings. We fet tat, with aa 
evil omen, on - our journey * and fhould 
sot have left Miletus.- Babfon ha* bctjx 
Vol. It. £ our 
A 
C 5° ] 
oar ruin. I loft my caufc in tb<? firfl: hear- 
ing, when Mithrkiatcs was my accufer j. aq4 
my chief fear arifes from the fccond, for 
there fxirely is not lefs danger in its and I 
entertain no hopes from, tjne banning of the 
trial* My wife has beea. tome from me ? 
though I am yet un-fentenced j and I now 
contend, in great peril, with another man ? 
for the poffeffion of h<?r ; ao4, what is flilj 
more aggravating, I knpw not op. which of 
the two her choice may fall. But thou 
(my darling child !) mayeftleara it from her f 
as (he is thy mother. Go then, and fupplir 
cate hej: for* thy father. Weep; kifs her; 
aiid fay : Dearcft mother ! My father loves 
thee. But take care that thou employ not 
any 
[ 5* ] 
any injurious or reproachful dxpieffiofls. 
But (Pedagogue i) why do I talk thus Wild- 
ly? No one ^ill permit us to enter the jp*- 
lace. O barbarous tyranny ! to {but out a 
fori who carries, froth his father, a moft 
tetrder mefl&ge to his oth*r parent.— In 
this manner did Dionyfros pafs his time, tlH 
the day of trial j he afling as judge io thfe 
conteft between lore and reafonj and re- 
foWtng to beftcrw ' the palm on the viftoi 4 . 
Ori the other hand, Chaereas, oppreffed whk 
griefs Was q»I« incoofokble : when feigatog 
liimfelf fiek* he ordefed Pofycfcarmos t6 
accompany Mithridates, their common be- 
nefa&or, who was fctting out. Being flaw 
left alone, he fixed a halter* when* fptfnglng 
forward, in order to perpetrate a horrid 
£ 2 deed, 
'f S^ ] 
deed, be fpake thus :— I fliould have quit* 
4cd life with lefs rclu<5lance in Carta, when 
being a flave, I was there fattened to the 
Crofs, on a falfe accufation: for then I 
fhould bavfe died in the fweet delufion that 
Callirrhoe ftill loved me ; whereas I now 
ihall not only lofe niy life, but alfo the, con* 
folation I muft otherwife have found in death, 
Callirrhoe faw me, and yet did not come 
forward. She did not kifs me; but &ew~ 
*d, in my prefence, a regard for another 
man. However, Ihe ihall behave fo no more, 
I will anticipate the fentence, and not wait 
for an inglorious end. Poor and inconfider- 
able as I am ; a foreigner, and quite un- 
Jcnown, I muft neceflarily be an unequal com- 
petitor with Dionyfius. Yet mayeft thou 
live 
f 53 1 
live happy (O my wife !) for wife I ftill call 
thee, though thou loveft smother man, I 
V i 
Hull now depart, for ever ! and not inter- 
nipt thy conjugal felicity. May riches for- 
round thee ! Mayeft thou luxuriate in do 
■ * * * > 
Jights ! and long, long crioy the fplendor* 
of Ionia. Poffefs then the hulband who 
is dear to thee. The laft boon, which the 
dying Ch*rea* has to requeft is, that thou, 
when I fhall be no mor*,,mayeft approach 
my corps; and (hed, if pofliblc, a tear 
over it. I fhall prize this more than Im- 
mortality. Reclining gn the pillar of tpy 
fepulchre, pronounce, aj leaft, the follow- 
ing words ; even though thy hufband, even 
though thy infant, ftiould fee thee; ■ 
Thou iiow, (O Chsereas!) art really gone; 
' thou now art dead. Hadft thou lived, and 
E 3 die 
t 54 3 
the king fat as judge, I then would have 
made choice of thee for my hufband. I 
ihail hear thy voice (O wife!) and, per* 
hap6, believe thee ; 'and, by thy means, I 
may acquire authority, and appear glorious 
in the eyes of the infernal Deities : 
Altho* the deady when wafted to the realms 
Of Pluto f lofe tbtir memories ; -yet Til there 
Recall to mine, myjcy! fnyfoul! my wife! 
Thus bemoaning himfelf, he kifled the rope, 
crying out : Thou art my confolation ! 
Thou my patron ! By thee I fhall triumph 
over every woe ; thou loveft me more than 
Callirrhoe.— Then fpringing forward to 
the halter, and fixing it round his neck, Po- 
lycharmus entered on a fujldeo > and with- 
. held 
C 55 1 
held him, as a man out of his fenfes ; and on 
whom neither foothing words, nor' good 
counfel, had the leaft effeft. £nd now the] 
day appointed for the trial was at hand. 
End of th^ Fifth Book. 
E 4 THE 
\ 
4i 
J-. 
f 57 3 . . 
. ■j l I II I I I I ■ 1 1 ' ' 1 I 
THE 
LOVES 
O F 
CHOREAS and CALLIRRHOE. 
BOOK VI. 
I. A S the king was to pronounce the 
1\ day following, whether Charm or 
Dionyfias fhould be the huiband of Calljr-' 
jrhoe, all Babylon was in fufpence \ pvcry one 
laying, both *t home and in the Greets : 
To- 
£ 5$ i 
To morrow will be the nuptials of Callir- 
rboe. Which of the two will, at laft f he 
the fortunate man ?■■ N ow the city was di- 
vided into two parties. Thofe who favour- 
€d Chsereas, faid : —Re is the firft huf- 
band : he married Callirrhoe, when a virgin ; 
loving her, and being beloved. He received 
Callirrhoe from her father. She was buried 
by her country. He did not forfake his 
wife, nor , (he abandon Him. Dionyfmsnei* 
ther bought nor efpoufed Callirrhoe. Rob- 
bers fold her ; but it is not lawful to pur- 
chafe a free-born woman. On the other 
hand, the advocates for Dioftyfius fpake 
thus: He refcued Callirrhoe from py- 
rates, when expofed to their murthering dag- 
gers ; and gave a talent for her redemption 
He firft faved, and then took her to his bed. 
■ 
Owe- 
[ *9 ] 
Choreas* after marrying Callirrhoe, killed 
her. She cannot have forgot her nuptials* 
One ftrong argument that is apparent to all 
men, and which muft fecnre the vilfaory to 
Dionyfius, is, her having home him a foo, 
who is Dill living.— -Thus reafooed, among, 
themfelves, the men* As to the women, they 
Hot  only addrefled Catlirrhoe with the moft 
animating exhortations ; bnt alio gave her 
advice* as though (he had been prefect— 
Do not quit ((kid they) the huiband who 
efpoufed thee, when a virgin. Take thy 
firft lover, thy fellow citizen. Thus mayeft 
thou again behold thy father : otherwife thoo 
wilt live, a9 an exile, in a foreign land.—— 
Others faid : 7—— Prefer thy deliverer ; he 
who faved, apd did not affaffihate thee. Should 
Choreas be fired anew with rage, thou theo 
wouldeft 
vouldeft be again consigned to the 1091b. 
Do not betray thy fon, but honour his fa- 
ibci; *— Such , was the general difcourfe, 
throughout Babylon, which appeared as one. 
court of Judicature. It waj now the night 
which preceded the day of trial, when the 
king and queen resolved, as they lay in bed* 
reflections of a very different nature* The 
queen wMhed earneftly for morning, in .order 
to get rid of CaUirrhoe, who was now a 
kind of burthen to her; as the exquifite 
beauty of this Greek, gave rife to compan- 
ions no ways advantageous to th* queen, 
"ftrhen both ^urere fcei| together. Farther *: 
The frequent vifits paid by the king, and 
bis great courtefy at unufual hours, raifed the 
queen's fufptcion s as he, till then, had been 
rarely feen in the apartment of the women : 
but 
I 6i J 
but evef fince CallirrhoeY refidence in this 
palate* he Was running to them perpetually. 
She alfo obferved, that while the king was 
conterfing familiarly with Callirrhoe, he 
would frequently ogle Her^ and dart fecret 
glances, which were directed to her from an 
involuntary impulfe. For thefe reafons, Sta- 
tira Was overjoyed at the near approach of 
the day of trial : while far different thoughts 
employed the king ; he not deeping a wink 
all that night, but 
Now turning on bis Jidt, now lying prone. 
Perplexed with a variety of thoughts, he was 
continually faying to himfelf : The day 
of trial is near ; and I was too precipitate 
in not fixing it later* What muft be done 
to-morrow morniog i Callirrhoe will certain* 
6 lj 
r ,6a 3 
ty return* either to Miletus or to Syrftcufd. , 
Tbere^ now remains a very fhort fpace of 
time; a fpan, for me to feaft on an inchaat- 
iog object ; after which, my fervant will be 
happier than I. Gonfider, (O my foul !) 
what is to be done. Be ever prefent and 
prepared. No one fpreads fnares agatoft 
thee but thy felf. Cupid is now the beguiler 
of love. Firft then anfwer thefe quefiiofi* 
to thine own heart ; ■ Who art thou ? 
The lover of Callirrhoe, or her judge ? But 
impofe not on thy felf. Thou art deeply 
fmitten, though thou knoweft it not. -Of this 
thou wilt be fooner convinced, by not em- 
ploying fonfe againft her. Why 'then thus 
torment thyfelf ? Phoebus, from whom thou 
art defcended, chofe and allotted, for thee, 
a creature the moft lovely, the moft perfe&» 
' his 
C H 1 
his eye ever beheld: and yet thou'doft rejeft 
the gift of this God. Thou art anxious for 
thy mean Haves, Choreas and Dionyfius; 
At a, Time that thou art to decide, which of 
them (hall conquer in this trial, and be the 
huiband of Callirrhoe. I, the mighty king, 
am a&iag the part of an antiquated Pander. 
But then I have undertaken to judge this 
caufe, and the whole world, knows it. But 
my greateft uneafmefs, on this occafion,. 
arjfes from StatMja. Do thou therefore nei- 
ther divulge thy paflioo, nor put ap end. to 
the trial. It will be enough for thee to gaze 
upon Callirrhoe. Poftppue therefore the dq- 
cifion, fince a Plebeian judge might do this. - 
* r 
II; As foon as it was day-light, the offi- 
cers prepared the royal hall, when vaft mul- 
j » 
i , titudes 
titudes flocked to the palace. All Babylott 
Was in motion ; and; as in the Olympic games* 
the champions went to the field of e&ercUe, 
followed, by a long train; our two ri*aU 
were" cfcorted in like manner. Dionyfius w*s 
accompanied by Perflate of tank j while Ghae- 
reas was attended by the populace. Ten thou- 
fand voices and joyful acclamations were heard, 
of thofe who favoured the refpeftive parties, 
and wifoed them fuccefs ; crying : — Jufticfe 
is on thy fide. It is thou wilt conquer. - 
The prize, on this fignal occafion, was not 
an olive leaf, nor apples, nor the branch of 
a pine-tree ; but the firft beauty in the world, 
for whom the gods themfelves might juIUy 
have contended. Now the king, having call- 
ed for the eunuch Artaxates his chief favou- 
rite, fpake thus to bim:— the celefUal 
D.eitw? 
r 65 3 
pdties having appeared to me on a fudden, 
in a dream, and required vittimsj I there- 
fore muft acquit myfelf of the duty winch, 
piety, towards them, demands. Be then aU 
Afia enjoined to celebrate a folemn feftiva!, 
during thirty days ; and let every kind of 
bufinefs, all law proceedings, be fufpended 
during that time. Artaxates publifhed the 
royal ordinance > when immediately the city 
was crouded with multitudes, crowned with 
chaplets, and offering up facrifices. Nought 
was heard but the warbling of flutes, and 
the found of rural pipes, intermixed with 
voices* Incenfe was burnt in the courts be- 
fore each houfe, and banquets were feen in 
every ftreet. 
Turn d to thick /moke 9 tht fragrmnct of tbt ojfmngt 
Tf files n/cindtd. 
Vol. II. F The 
i 66 i 
The king prcfcotcd fplcndid viftims at the 
altar. He then facrificed, for the firft time, 
to the God of Love, among other Deities; . 
and frequently addreffed Venus, befeeching 
.that goddefs to interceed powerfully, with 
her fon, in his favour. Amid this general 
joy, three perfons only were in the deepeft 
affliflion ; Callirrhoe, Dionyfius ; and, more 
than either, Choreas. Callirrhoe could not 
fcow her grief, as (he was in the palace 5 
but then (he groaned bitterly in fecret, and 
vented dreadful imprecations againft the fefti- 
Val. But Dionyfius called for curfes upon 
himfelf, for his having left Miletus : — Wretch 
that thou art, (cried he) fubmit patiently to 
evils which thou haft brought upon thyfelf I 
Thou mightcft have pofleffed Callirrhoe, even 
though Chzreas bad been Jiving: Thou 
waft 
[ 6 7 ] 
waft the matter in Miletus; and not a letter 
n could have been delivered, to Callirrhoe, with- 
out thy confent. Who could have feen ; who 
could have come near her ? Thou now haft 
thrown thyfelf, fpontaneoufly, into the midfl: 
of thine enemies ; and would it were thy 
felf only, and not the objedt w;ho is dearer to 
thee than thy foul ! Hence art thou furioufly 
attacked on every fide. What fayeft thou 
(Madman!) Chaereas is thy adverfaryi and 
thy fovereign is become thy rival. The king 
now fees vifions; and the gods demand of 
him thofe viftims which he Sacrifices to them 
daily. Shameful conduit! for a man, who 
has the wife of another in his houfe, to pro- 
tract a trial, and yet fet up for a judge.— - 
Thus did Dionyfius lament his wretched fate i 
during which Chaereas, refufing the leaft 
F z fuftenaace, 
\ 
* 
,[ 68 ] 
fuftenance, and being refolved to give up life ; 
he thus addreffed his friend Polycharmus, 
■who would not permit him to die of hunger.—  
Thou, under the femblance of a friend, art 
my greateft enemy i becaufe thou doft keep 
me Ta .torments, and art delighted with my 
pains. Wert ,thou my friend, thdu wduld- 
eft not envy my. attempt, to free myfeif 
from the cruel tyranny under which, by 
the malevolence of I know not what 
Deity, I fo fliamefully groan. How often 
might I have been bleft, had it not been 
for thee ? Thrice happy were my lot, had I 
been buried in Syracufe with Callirrhoe ! But 
when I wiflied earnefUy to die*' thou didft 
withhold my hand ; and thereby deprive me 
of the fweeteft companion to the (hades be- 
low. Perhaps {he would not have left the 
■ I 69 2 
fepulchre, nor have abandoned me, though 
dead. And had (he quitted me, I now fhould 
be lying peaceably in the grave ; and thereby 
have avoided flavery ; the band of pyrates ; 
chains ; and, what is dill more grievous, to 
me, than even crucifixion, the king. 
Death would have been welcome to me, 
for then I fhould not have heard of the 
fecond nuptials of Callirrhoe. And, flnce . 
the opening of the trial, fhould I not 
have left the world, hadft thou not pre- 
vented me ? I faw Callirrhoe, but could 
not approach, nor kifs her. O unparalleled 
and incredible incident ! It is difputed in a 
court of juftice, whether Chaereas is, or is 
not, the hufband of Callirrhoe. But envious ^ 
fate will not' permit this trial, whatever may 
N be the refult of it, ever to come to a period. 
I am hated by the' gods, both fleeping and 
F 3 wak- 
■[ 7 ° .3 
waking: Chsereas haviog uttered thefe 
words, was going to rufli upoa his fwprd; 
when Polycharmus flopped his hand,; and, - 
holding him faft, thereby prevented his de- 
ftroying himfelf. / 
III. The king having fent for his mod 
faithful eunuch, was at firfl: afhamed to fee 
jiim : when Artaxates perceiving his confu- 
fion> and the difficulty \tfith which he utter- 
ed his words, faid thus Why doft thou 
(O my liege !) conceal any thing from thy 
fervant, who wiflies thee every felicity, and 
can faithfully treafure up a fecret ? What 
mighty evil can have befallen thee ? Much I 
fear,  that fnares are fpread for thee : 
Very dangerous ones, (replied the Monarch) 
are preparing ; yet not by a mortal, but by 
9 ft- 
r 71 3 
a. Deity. Who Cupid is, I had already learnt, 
both from profe- writers, and from poets* 
and that all the gods are fubjeft to his em- 
pire, and even Jupiter :— But then I doubted, 
whether any of them was mightier than roy- 
felf. But that God is now prefentj and, 
with the ftrongeft impetuofity,' has taken 
pofleffion of my whole heart. It is grievous 
to confefs it ; and yet I mud be forced to 
reveal the truth, which is, that I am the cap-, 
tive of this god: — In uttering thcfe words,, 
a violent flood of tears burft from him, 
and flopped his tongue. And now Artaxates . 
difcovered, by the king's fudden filence, who 
it was that had wounded him > for his tears 
Were not feigned, and the eunuch had before 
obferved his rifing paflion ; and indeed it was 
obvious, and beyond all doubt, that Artax- 
F 4 erxes, 
t 7* 1 
*rbt$, whenever CaJiirrhoe was prefent, 
cbuld fcot be enamoured of any other wo- 
man. Neverthelefs the eunuch, pretending 
Ignorance on this occafion, faid What 
fair-one (Oking J) how charming foever, can 
have enfiaved thee, whom all thiogs beauti- 
ful obey? as gold, filver, rich veftments, 
horfes, cities, nations ; and many lovely wo- 
ipenj efpecially Statira, the moft charming 
of her fex under the fun, and who is enjoy- 
ed by thee only. Thou indeed mayeft not 
now covet her, as pofleflion is apt to take 
away defire ; except that fome goddefs fhould 
be defcended from the ikies, or another 
Thetis rifen from the ocean : for it is my opi- 
mon that the Deities would with for thy con- 
verfe. — — Perhaps (faid Artaxerxes) thou 
baft now fpoke the truth, in fuppofing this 
, woman 
[73 3 
woman to be a divinity, for her tjeatity is 
more than human. However, (he will not 
own this, but feigns herfelf a Greek of Syra* 
cufe. Now a circumftance which fecms to 
indicate deceit, is the precaution (he has 
taken, to prevent her being dete&ed in a 
falfity j I mean her not mentioning a city 
within our empire ; but fixing the fcene of her 
flory beyond Ionia, and crofs a wide-extended 
ocean. She is come hither upon pretence 
of a trial, but the whole is a fiction of her 
oWn invention. I am amazed how thou canft 
caUrStatira the mod beautiful among women, 
when Callirrhoe is prefent. But I mud free 
my felf from this anxiety. Do thou employ 
all the powers of thy imagination j and dis- 
cover, if poffible, a remedy for me.— — My 
Liege ! (replied Artaxates,) the remedy thou 
feekeft 
r 74 3 
fcekeft is to be met with equally among the 
Greeks and Barbarians. The only cure, for 
thy paflion, is to poflefs the beloved objeft. ' 
This doubtlefs is the meaning of the renown- 
* 
ed oracle, viz. They who inflift a wound 
can alfo heal it. The king, aftiamed' at 
what he heard, cried : Prefume not to 
advife me to feduce another man's wife. I 
well remember the laws which I myfelf fra- 
med, and the juftice I exercifeonall occafions. 
I cannot charge myfelf with intemperance of 
any kind s nor am I captivated to fo violent 
a degree.— — Artaxates fearing that he had 
fpoke too inadvertently, turned his difcourfe 
to praife, by faying : My fovereign ! ge- : 
nerous, and worthy of thy felf is thy way of 
thinkitfg. Apply not that remedy to love, 
which is, employed by other men ; but a 
more 
I 75 3 
more efficacious, a princely remedy, I mean, 
the combating thine own inclinations ; for 
thou, fingly, mayeft vanquish that Deity. 
Devote thy felf to pleafures of every kind. 
Hunting is thy favourite diverfion ; I having 
feen thee pafs whole days in that exercife (fo 
great was thy fondnefs for it,) without eating 
or drinking. It is better to purfue the chafer 
than to Aay in the palace by the fire- fide. 
IV. This advice being approved, a royal chafe 
was proclaimed. There thea marched forth, 
on horfebackj foldiers richly habited ; with 
the chief nobles of Perfia, and the flower of 
the army ; the whole making a mod magnifi* 
cent fpectacle. But, above. all (hone the king, 
he being mounted on a tall and moil beautiful 
Nifean horfe $ whofe bridle, and the fcveral 
trappings, 
i 76 3 . 
trappings, were of gold. He was clad in a 
robe of tyrian purple of Babyfonifli work. 
On his head was a yellow Tiara. A golden 
fcymitar was girded on his thigh. He held 
two darts in his hand. By his fide hung his 
bow and quiver* the precious workmanfhip 
ef China. He fat his horfe with a fierce air. 
Love is naturally fond of fplendor in drefe. 
Artaxerxes was defirous of being beheld, in 
the midft of his retinue, by Callirjhoe 5 and, 
as he pafled through the city, he gazed on 
every fide, to fee whether fhe did not furvey 
the pompous proceflion from fome eminence. 
Immediately the mountains echoed with the 
fhouts of hunters ; the barking of dogs j the 
neighing of horfes ; and the cries of rouzed 
wild beafls. Such univerfal tumult miajit 
have baniftied love from the breaft of any 
other 
r 77 ] 
other man ; as this fport was very laborious % 
joy being intermixed with fear, and pleafure 
with danger. But as to the fcing, he did not 
fee a Angle horfe, though fo many horfemea 
ran before, him : nor one wild bead, though 
* 
fuch numbers were chafed: nor could h< 
hear the barking of dogs, though fuch mul- 
titudes were abroad ; nor the cries of the 
people, though fuch crouds were afTembled. 
He faw Callirrhoe only, though (lie was ab- 
♦ . 
fent, and heard no other voice, though (he 
fpake not. Cupid accompanied him in the 
chafe : and as a Deity who is pleafed with 
contention, feeing his adverfary armed againft 
» - 
him, and in battle array ; and a&ing very 
wifely in his dwn conceit ; the amorous god 
turned the monarch's arts uponhimfelf ; and, 
employing the fame remedies, tberebyinflam- 
3 «4 
r 7» 3 
cd him the more: and having got poflef- 
fion of the inward recefles of the king's 
heart, he whifpered it thus: How de- 
lightful would it be to fee Callirrhoe here, in 
afliort veftj her arms bare; with a ruddy 
countenance : out of breath, and 
Likt Q nthia, who delights in woods to range ; 
To climb the mountain ; and to hurl the Jk aft 
On Erymanthus or Toy get us top, 
y GainJl the tremendous hoar 9 or timid deer. 
And thus imaging Callirrhoe to his mind, his 
pafiion increafed to a violent degree*. * 
Saying thefe words, Artaxates replied : 
* Many lines are wanting here, fuppofed to 
be owing to the. inadvertency of the Copif* t 
who, in the hurry of tranferibing, omitted fome 
periods. 
My 
r 79 t 
My Liege ! Thou haft forgot what is paft. 
Callirrhoe has no hufband : and the law has; 
not yet determined to whom ftie (hall be 6c* 
livered : Refleft then that thou loveft a wi- 
dow. Fear not the laws, as thefe relate to 
marriage ; nor be apprehenfive of thy com- 
mitting adultery; fince, in that cafe, there 
mud firft be a hufband who had been injured, 
and then an adulterer who wronged him.— — 
Thefe words were highly pleafing to the mo- 
narch, they foothing his paffion ; when throw- 
ing his arms round the eunuch's neck, he 
kifled him, and laid: It is with jufticc 
that I efteem thee above all others, as thou 
beareft me the warmefl affeftion, and art my 
beft overfeer. Go therefore and bring Cal- 
lirrhoe to me, but in the manner I (hall com- 
mand ; that is, privately, and without com- 
pulfivn ; 
r so j 
polfion ; for thou mud employ perfuaiion aacjt 
artifice. f-Inftantly the king founded a re- 
treat, and departed full of joy, imagining 
that be bad made Callirrhoe his lovely prize. 
Artaxates was not lefs delighted, as thinking 
he was going upon a noble commiflion : and. 
that, for the future, he (hould govern the 
court entirely ; not doubting but both the 
king and Callirrhoe would be very willing to 
promote him, in reward of this fervice. But 
he relied chiefly on Callirrhoe. Artaxates 
being a eunuch, a (lave, and a Barbarian, 
« 
thought this an eafy tafk j he not having any 
idea of the generous fph it of the Greeks j ef- 
pecially of Callirrhoe's natural modefly, and 
the extreme love (he bore her hufband. 
* m 
V. The eunuch, watching a proper op- 
portunity, came to Callirrhoe, when taking 
her 
t 81 3 
her apart : — Woman, (faid he,} I offer thee 
an invaluable treafure. Thon wilt not for- 
get the fignal fervice I now do tl*ee ; I be- 
lieving thee to be of a grateful difpofition.— * 
Callirrhoe was in raptures at the opening of 
this fpecch ; as we naturally expeft what we 
ardently wifh. Thus (he did not doubt but 
that Chsereas would be reftpred to her in- 
ftahtly. This (he longed to hear ; and there- 
fore promifed to recom pence Artaxates, for 
bringing fuch joyful news. Artaxates, after 
much circumlocution, went on as follows.—* 
Indulgent nature, (O woman!) has bellowed 
on thee divine beauty ; but this has not hi- 
therto been of any fignal, any mighty ad- 
vantage. That name, fo much renowned 
throughout the- world, has not yet found a 
hufband or a lover . worthy of it ; oa the 
Vol. II. G con* 
contrary, it fell to the lot of two men, the 
one a pitiful iflander, and the other a vaffai 
of the king. Has any thing great or fplendid 
accrued to thee by their means ? What fruit- 
ful lands, what rich, female ornaments have 
they brought thee ? What cities doft thou 
govern ? What flaves proflrate themfelves at 
thy feet I The Babylonifli matrons keep fer- 
vants richer than thee* Yet art thou nqt to- 
tally neglefted. Even the gods are mindful 
of thee. For this they conducted thee hither, 
upon pretence of the trial, in order that the 
great king might behold thee : and the firft 
joyful news I falute thee with, is, that be 
fees thee with delight. I -frequently call thee 
to his remembrance, and am ever fpeaking 
to *him in thy praife.-^— — Thefe laft words 
^rc not true j it being tltf ctlftom for all 
flaves, 
t *3 1 
Haves, whenever they fpeak to their mailer* 
concerning any one, to commend themfelve* 
at the fame time, imagining that this maf 
turn to their own advantage. Though thefe 
» 
words were as daggers to CaUirrhoe's heart* 
fhe yet pretended not to underftand them, 
but faid: May the gods be ever propi- 
tious to the king* and the king to thee ; fined 
thou art moved to compaffion fo£ an unfortu- 
nate woman ! I only implore Artaxerxes, to 
free me as fooa as poflible from my anxiety, 
by finiftiing the trial ; that I may no longer 
be an incumbrance to any one, and efpeclalfy 
to the queen. 'The eunuch thinking that 
*  *  . 
he had not fufficiently exprefled his meaning; 
and that CalUrrhoc did not underftand him, 
{pake more plainly, as follows:-— In on* 
circumftaace thou, (O woman!) art ex- 
C % Vemely 
f »4 J 
tremely fortunate, which is, that neither 
(laves nor mean perfons are thy lovers ; but 
the great king, who can beftow on thee Mi- 
letus, and all Ionia ; together with Sicily, 
and other more conflderable nations. Sacri- 
fice then to the gods; pronounce thyfelf 
bleft ; do every thing in thy power, to pleafe 
the monarch more and more : and when thou 
{halt be wealthy, lee not Artaxates be for- 
got.— Callirrhoe would, at firfl, have glad- 
ly tome out the feducer's eyes, had this been 
poflible : but knowing mankind ; and being 
able ta govern hertempefj recollefting im- 
mediately the place (he was in ; who (he her- 
self was; and the perfon who fpake, her 
rage foon changed into (corn of this Barba- 
rian. 1 am not, (faid (he) fo weak as to 
fancy myfelf worthy of the great king ; I 
being 
C 85 ] 
v 
being no ways fuperior to the flaves of thd 
Perfian ladies : I therefore intreat thee, mod 
earneftly, never to mention me again to thy 
fovereign ; for though he is not now difpleafed 
With thee, he doubtlefs will afterwards be 
exafperated, when he calls to mind, thy hav- 
ing fubje&ed, to the (lave of Dionyfiu?, the 
matter of the world. I am furprized that 
thpu, being the wifeft of men, fhouldeft be 
a Granger to the king's humanity j he not 
loving an unfortunate woman, but pitying 
her. Let us then break off this difcourfe, 
left fome one ftiould calumniate us to the 
queen. — At thefe words fhe ran away 
fwiftly, leaving the eunuch dumb and fpirit- 
lefs ; for he, having been brought up under 
a fupremely-tyrannical government, had fup- 
G 3 pofed 
[ 86 3 
pofed that nothing was impoffiBle to the king t 
^or even to himfelfc 
; 
VI. Artaxates being now left alone, and 
not thought worthy of an anfwer, went away, 
tortured by a thoufand different paffions. 
Be was angry at Callir rhoe 5 he was vexed 
on his own account ; and he dreaded his fo- 
verelgn's difpleafure; concluding that Ar- 
taxerxes would not, perhaps, believe that he 
had talked with CaHirrhoe on this fubjeft, 
though ineffeftually f but, on the contrary, 
muft certainly fuppofe, that he had betrayed 
his trufl, purely to oblige the queen. .L*ftly* 
he was apprebenfive that Callirrhoe would 
acquaint Statira with their whole convert 
xlon 5 and that ihe, exafperated at this; would 
toe* 
[ 87 ] 
t 
meditate fome grievous vengeance againft him ; 
for his having been, not only the meflenger 
in this amour, but atfo the promoter of the 
king's paffion. la the mean time the eunuch 
revolved, in his own mind, how he might in- 
form the king of all that had pad, without 
injuring himfelf. And now Callirrhoe, being 
alone, refle&ed thus : Alas ! I prefaged 
all that is come to pafs. O Euphrates ! Thou 
art witnefs that I foretold I fhould never crofs 
thy ftream again. Farewell father I Fare- 
well mother ! Farewell my native Syracufe ! 
I never fliall behold ye more. Callirrhoe is 
now really dead at laft. I efcaped indeed 
from the fepulchre j but not even Theron the 
pyrate could take n*e from hence. O infidi- 
ous Beauty ! Thou art the caufe of all my 
G 4 fof- 
C 88 ]. 
fufferings. Through thee I was killed * % 
9 
through thee was fold; through thee was 
married to Dionyfius ; through thee was 
forced away to Babylon ; and through thee 
I appeared at the trial. To how many evils 
haft thou expofed me ?. To robbers ; to the 
ocean ; to the fepulchre ; to flavery ; to the 
trial ; and, far worfe than all thefe, to the 
Icing's love. I will not here fpeak of his 
anger, I dreading, ftill more, rhe queen's 
jealoufy: a paffion which Chaereas himfelf, 
though a Greek, could not conquer. What 
then may not a woman, a barbarous miftrefs, 
perpetrate? Come then (Callirrhoe !) refolve 
on fome heroic aft, worthy the daughter of 
* We may fuppofe that diftra£Hon (as has been 
©bferved) made her (peak in this manner. 
* ■  
Her- 
C 8 9 3 
Hermocrates. Kill thy felf! yet ft ay a little % 
for that was merely a conference, and made 
through the channel of an eunuch. Should, 
violence be ufed with regard to me; then 
will be the time for me to prove my fidelity 
to Chaereas, and that in his prefence. " ■ ■ 
And now Artaxates going to the king,' con- 
cealcd from him all that h^d pad ; alledging 
bufinefs in excufe, and the Ariel eye which 
the queen kept over Callirrhoe j infomuch 
that it was next to impoffible to get admit? 
tance to her. Thou, (faid he) my Liege ! 
didft command me to keep this affair fecret ; 
and that with reafon and juftice* as thou haft 
a/Turned the venerable character of a judge; 
and doft ftudy to gain the affeclion of the 
Perfians, for which the higheft applaufes are 
beftowed % on thee univerfally. The Greeks 
wrangle 
r 90 ] 
wrangle for mere trifles, and are a loqua- 
cious people. Now (houldeft thou make the 
leaft attempt, they would immediately blazon 
it to the world : Callirrhoe out of vanity, 
for being beloved by a king ; Dionyfius, and 
Chaereas r out of jealoufy. Befides, it would 
not be proper to difguft the queen, whofe 
beauty this trial has heightened.— Thus, 
oitf of feeming regard t6 his (bvereign, he 
threw many obftacles in his way; in order to 
divert him, if poffible, from this paflionj 
and to free bimfelf from fb very difficult a 
commiffion. 
VH. The eunuch's perfuafion was effectual 
at that junfture; but /light being come, the 
king found himfelf re-inflamed, when the 
amorous god thus whilpered him :— — How 
be- 
t 9i 1 
bewitching are Callirrhoe's eyes ! How lovely 
herjips !— He then praifed her trefles, her 
mien, her voice. "Kext, with what grace 
ihe entered the court of juftice ! and with 
what dignity (he flood there I how inchanting 
her fpeech ! How eloquent her filence ! Her 
joy How fweet t Her tears how beautiful !— 
Thus did the lung pafs almoft the whole 
night without deep ; except while he faw t 
for a few moments, Cailirrhoe in a dreaou 
And now, waking in the morning, he called 
to him the eunuch, and faid :*- — Go, .and 
be upon the watch the whole day, for thou 
doubtlefs wilt find means to talk privately with 
Cailirrhoe, though but for a few minutes* 
Was I inclined to fatiate my defires openly, 
and to employ force* my Satellites would be 
Kaay for that purpofe,— — Artaxates having 
paid 
t <p ] 
* ...  * » 
paid his adoration, promifed to obey the rpyal 
injun&ion ; no one being permitted to oppofe 
the king's commands. However, knowing _ 
that Callirrhoe would not give him an oppor- 
tunity of fpeaking to her ; but, on the con- 
trary, would always keep near the queen, 
purpofely to prevent his talking with her : to 
remedy this evil, Artaxates turned the fubjeft, 
< 
not to the woman who was watched, but to 
her keeper.—^- If it pleafe thee, my Liege ! 
(faid he) fend for Statira, as though thou 
hadft fome fecret to communicate ; by which 
means her abfence will give me an opportu- 
nity of converging at leifure with Callirrhoe.-— 
Let this be done, (replied the king).*- « 
f 
Art&xates then waiting on the queen, paid 
his adoration, and faid : Princefs \ Thy 
§ 
hufband requires thy preferice;— Statira prof- 
trated 
C .93 J 
trated herfelf, on hearing the king's name; 
and rifing, flew to him. The eunuch, now 
finding Callirrhoe apart from the queen, took 
the former by the hand, as though he had 
been a friend to the Greeks, and of a. humane 
difpofition ; and drew her from among the 
croud of waiting- women. Callirrhde, though 
Jhe underltood his meanings yet follow- 
ed him pale and fpeechlefs. They being 
alone, he addreft her in thefe words : ■ ■■ 
Didft thou obferve how the queen, the in- 
ftant (he heard the name of Artaxerxes, fell 
proftrate, and then ran to him ? Yet thou, 
though a flave, canft not bear thiae owu fa- 
licity ; nor art fatisfied that he, who could 
command thy prefence, is fo gracious; and 
does thee fo fignal an honour, as to invite 
and intreat thee. However, having a refpedfc 
2 for 
1 
[ 94^ ] 
for thee, I would not inform the king of thy 
folly ; but, on the contrary, have promifed 
fomething in thy name. Two paths now lie 
open before thee. Which of them wilt thou 
ftrike into ? I will point out both. If tho.u 
comply with the- king's will, thou wilt re- 
ceive very precious gifts ; and obtain the huf- 
band who is the object of thy wiflies; for 
Artaxerxes will not marry thee, but thou, 
wilt delight him for fpme time. On the con- 
trary, fhcAildeft thou difobey, hear what they 
Undergo who are enemies to the king ; fuch 
only are not permitted to die, when they wifh 
for death. Callirrhoe fmiling : ■ This* 
(faid (he) is not the firft time I have fuffered 
evils. I have been long acquainted with mi- 
fery. What puniftiment could the king in- 
flict, more grievous thai) that which now 
torture* 
{ 9S 1 
' tortures me ? I haw been buried-alive ; aad 
< 
no prifon is fo contrafted as the grave. I 
was delivered into the hands of robbers, and 
now endure the greateft of all evils, being 
deprived of the fight of my Chaereas.' 
Thefe words betrayed her * for the eunuch, 
being fliarp and fubtle, thereby found that 
(he entertained a paffioa for fome one ; and 
thereupon, faid :- Thou finely rnuft be 
the mod foolifti of thy fex, to prefer the 
(lave of Mithridates to the king. — Callirrhoe, 
exafperated to hear Chaereas mentioned thus 
contemptuoufly, cried : Speak, (Oman!) 
toore refpe&fully : Chaereas is of noble birth, 
and chief of that city which withstood the 
arms of the Athenians, who yet overthrew 
thy great king at Marathon and at Salainis,-^- 
Having uttered thefe words, (he burft into a 
* flood 
C 96 ] 
flood of tears ; \vhen Artaxates faid : 
m 
Thou art the caufe of the delay of this trial. 
To obtain favour from thy judge, thou muft 
yield to his defires, and thou thereby wilt 
again poflefs the hufband who is dear to thee. 
Chacrea? may poffibly know nothing of this 
affair ; and, fhould he be informed of it, he 
will not be jealous of one who is fo greatly 
his fuperior; but, on the contrary, muft 
efteem thee ftill more for thy having pleafed 
the king. The eunuch added thefe laft 
words ; not to foothe Callirrhoe, but becaufe 
they were his real fentiments : for all the Bar- 
barians behold their monarchs with awe and 
aftonifhmejnt ; and confider fuch as Deities 
revealing themfelves to mortals. With regard 
to Callirrhoe, (he would not have accepted 
of the nuptials of even Jove himfelf j nor 
P re - 
t s>M 
preferred immortality to the pafTing a fingti 
day with Choreas. Artaxates, finding he 
could riot work upon Caflirfhoe :-^ — Wol- 
ffian ! (faid he) I will give thee leifure to de* 
liberate bn thefe things. In the mean tinl^j, 
think ferioufly, not merely for thine own 
fake, but alfo for that of Chsereas, who cer- 
tainly is in danger of fuffering a moft cruel 
death ; for the king will not bear to fee an 4 * 
other preferred to him&lf in an affair of 
love.- - The eunuch then withdrew; and 
his lad words were as a poniard to Callir* 
xhoe's heart. 
* ■ 
. VIII. .But fortune gave a fuddei turn td 
All thefe conferences, and love negotiations * 
Had changing the fcene, furniihed matter for 
new incidents, Expreffes now brought ad- 
* 
Vol. II. H tic* 
ffee to Artaxerxea, that the Egyptians bav- 
tag raifed a mighty and moil formidable 
array, were m open rebellion j and after 
murthering the governor fet over them by the 
king, had. efefted a monarch from among 
their cotintrymen ; who, having marched 
through Pelufium, was making dreadful ha- 
vock, in Syria and Phoenicia, which they 
over- ran 5 infomuch that the cities in general 
were no more able to tftefift the fury of their 
arms, than an impetuous flood or a raging 
flame. At this news the king was 
greatly alarmed. And the Persians were 
thunder-ftruck ; all the Babylonians wore 
forrowful countenances, and fear dUba&ed 
their minds. Then the interpreters of dreams 
and the foothfayers declared, that the king's 
rifion had foretold what would come to 
pafst 
t n 1 
pafs: for as the gods, by dctfaacding vie- 
tims, (hewed that danger wad : at hand, fc, 
denoted vi&ory at the fame time. A*ufual, 
every thihg was now faid* every thing done, 
which a fudden, and unexpe&ed war zhight 
require; and all AjQa was in confufion. 
The king then fummoned the principal 
Perfian?; and as many governors of different 
nations as were at court, whom he ufed to- 
confult on matters of high importance* The 
council differed widely in opinion, when 
debating on the prefent crifis. But it was 
unanimoufly agreed, that expedition would 
be neeeffary ; and that not a fiftgle day» 
ought to be loft* and this for two reafons-** 
Blrft^ to prevent the enemy frorti increafidg ; 
and fecondjjy ta animate their friend?, bj* 
H 2 (hewing 
r ^ ] 
ihewing them that fuccour was nigh. It Was 
added, that delay would produce the con- 
trary of this, fince their enemies would then 
defpife them as cowards; and their friends 
fubmit, finding themfelves negle&ed. That 
it was extremely fortunate for the king, that 
this advice had been brought him, not in 
Ba&ria nor in Ecbatana, but in Babylon, 
near to Syria; becaufe, had he crofled the 
Euphrates, the rebels would have been im- 
mediately upon him. It was therefore judg- 
ed expedient, to order all the troops near 
at hand to march forth ; and to iffue a pro- 
clamation, commanding all the forces, where- 
foever difperfed, to aflemble on the banks 
of the Euphrates. The Pcrfians can, with 
the greateft cafe, raife an army; Cyrus, 
' their 
* 
Acir firft monarch, having promulgated an 
ordinance, felling, which nations (hould fur- 
jiifh the cavalry, and what number ; which 
people the. infantry, and how many; which 
the -bow-men and their number ; which (hould 
fend chariots armed with fcythes, or tin- 
^rmed ; from what region the elephants were 
to come, and how many : likewife the other 
Articles, each country, refpedKvely, was to 
contribute. Now all thefe contingents could 
be provided, by the various nations, in as 
ihort a tim£ as a lingle map ca$ fit qvfi 
Jumfelfc 
■» 
IX. The fifth day after the arrival of the 
news, the king marched from Babylon, fol- 
Jowed by thofe who were of age to bear 
H 3 arms; 
[ 102 I 
fej-ms; aH foeU being ordered to attend* 
Among them came Dionyfips, who was aa 
Ionian 5 for no fubjeft or dependent was per* 
mitted to ftay behind., Being clad in rich 
and beautiful armour, and his attendants 
forming a confiderab'e band; he tcokpoft 
among the firft and moft iBuftriou9 perfo- 
nages. Dionyfius (eemtd to meditate fbme 
great exploit, he being naturally ambitious t 
and entertaining the hlgheft idea of valonr; 
he thought It one of the nobieft virtues. 
He Kkewife had fome faint hopes, that could 
he make hiynfelf of ufe in this war, lie then 
might efcape the law-fuit; and receive Cal- 
Ifrt hoe from the king, as a recorapence for 
Ms bravery. The queen would not take 
CaUirrhoe with feer, and therefor* did 
not 
t *P3 1 
not once tnention her to the king ; nor Aflt 
him how the foreigner fhould be difpofed of. 
Arraxates was alfo filent on this head j he 
not daring, as his foverdgn was in fo much 
danger* to remind him of an amour. The 
truth was, he would gladly have got rid of 
Callirrhoe, as of a: wljd beaft; and it is my 
opinion, that he was pleafed with the war, 
fince it might cure the king of a paffioa 
which indolence had begun and fomented. 
But Artaxeotes did pot forget Callirrhoe; 
he, even amid the inexpreffible tumult and 
tonfnfion, recalling her beauty to his memory. 
And yet he was not willing to fay what 
fliouid be done with her, left he might betray 
a chiidifh weaknefs ; by having mentioned a 
beautiful woman, in the beginning of fo 
mighty a war. However the king, urged/by 
H 4 ^c 
r io4 j 
violence of his flame, thought of the follawv 
ing artifice, but unknown either to Statira. 
pr to the eunuch ; though the latter knew 
of his paflioiu It is cuftomary for the king, 
?nd the chief men among the Perfians, when 
they go to war, to take with them their 
Wives and children ; their gold, filver, and 
apparel i their eunuchs, concubines, and 
fables j as like wife their precipus furniture, 
3n4 all their injtruments of Juxqry. The 
Jcing then fent for the fuperintendant over 
» 
all tbefe matters j and after much difcourfe 
with him, , and giving orders with refpett to 
every particular article j he at laft mentioqed 
Callirrhoe, when affuming an air of indif? 
ference, as though he had not the lead re* 
gard for her:— -Let that poor, foreign 
Creatine, (feid the monarch) whofe caufe I 
have 
I i©5 3 
have undertaken to hear, follow the other 
women. Thus did Callirrhoe leave Baby- 
lon, and very willingly, as (he hoped that Chas- 
reas would quit it alfo. She calling to mind, 
that the event of war is uncertain ; that vi~ 
ciffitudes are often of advantage to the un- 
happy; and that poffibly a period would be 
put to the trial, by the fpeedy coaclufion of 4 
peace. 
Enp op the Sixth Book* 
THE 
./ 
f ««7 1 
TBI 
LOVES 
O F 
CHOREAS and CALLIRRHOE. 
BOOK VII. 
I. J^HMREAS was not fummoncJ to 
V^i the field, while all the reft marched 
forth, with the ktag at their bead, againft the 
Egyptians } Choreas not being a fubjeft of 
<Artiyerxee j. and the only freeman then ia 
Babylon \ 
>* i 
I 108 J 
Babylon; a circumftance which filled him 
with joy, as he had flattered himfelf that 
Callirrhoe would continue there likewife: 
He thereupon went next day to the palace 
to enquire for his wife ; but finding it (hut, 
and a flrong guard at the gates, he raft all 
over the city in fearch of her 5 and was incef- 
fantly calling out to his friend Polycharmus, 
like one diftrafted :- — Where is Callirrhoe ? 
What is become of her ? She furely cannot 
be gone with the army ! But not finding 
1 
her, he flew tp the houfe of his rival Dio- 
nyfius, whence a perfon came out in a feem- 
ing hurry; who told Chaereas whatever he 
had been taught to fay. For Dionyfius being 
refolved to deprive Chaereas of all hopes of 
ever recovering his w}fe ; and defirous, that 
he fliould depart before the trial was ended, 
had 
had therefore thought of the following itra* 
tag€m. At his fetting oat for the war, he 
left a perfon to inform Chaereas :-< — That 
the king of ,Perfia, being in Want of allies, 
had fent Dioayfius to raife forces againft the 
Egyptians; and, to induce him to ferve 
with fidelity and difpatch, had reftored to 
him Callirrhoe. — Chsereas immediately gave 
credit to what he beard, the unfortunate 
being very eafily impofed upon. And now 
tearing his cloaths and his hair* and fmiting 
his breaft, he thus cried :« O faithlefs 
Babylon ! O abominable receptacle ! and quite 
a defart with regard to me ! Moft admirable 
judge, thus a pander to another man's wife ! 
Nuptials in the mid ft of war 1 I was medi- 
tating and preparing my caufe ; and am fully 
i 
perfuaded that T fbould have pleaded it with 
truth 
troth and eloquence. - But I now am con- 
donned though abfent j and Dlonyfius, who 
has fled from the trial, is vi&or without having ' 
uttered a fingle word. He yet (hall not en- 
joy his conqueft; for Callirrhoe will not bear 
to live, thus fevered from her Chsereas, who 
is flill living, and here prefent. He deceived 
Callirrhoe at firft, by making her believe that 
!> was de*d. Why then do I not murthec 
jnyfclf before the palace; and pour forth 
j»y blood at the gates of iriy judge ? Let 
the Perfians and Medes know the injuftice 
of the king's decision. Polycharmus- find* 
ing that no words, no arguments could 
divert Chscreas from his fad nefolution ; and 
that it would be importable to fave him, fpftke 
thus i ;—— There was a time (py deareft 
friend !) whcnfoft language from me, could- 
. .; give 
t m J 
give thee xonfolation;; and foch has often 
prevented thy. deftooyiqg thyfelf : but I now 
thiftk thou doft determine mod wifely ; and, 
fo far from being an obftade on this occafion^ 
I rather am prepared to die with thee. Let 
us then confider which is the nobleft kind pf 
death ; for that mentioned by thee, though 
it might caft an odium on the king, and dis- 
grace him with. pofterity ; yet would it not 
be a revenge adequate to the evils we have 
fuffered. I therefore am of opinion, that 
the death, to which we mull one day fubmit; 
ought to be employed in taking vengeance on* 
the tyrant. , How glorious will it be, after 
.» 
our having made a mighty (laughter of the 
troops of our foe ; and done him every other 
mifchief, to force him to repent ? Haw much 
will it redound to our glory, when it (ball 
9 *9 
« 
tte related in hiftory, that two Greeks, virKd 
had been wronged by an unjuft fentence of 
the great king; afterwards revenged their 
injuries, and died as became brave men ? * 
Bat how (refumedChaereas,) will it be pof- 
fibleforus, indigent and baniftied men, fing- 
Jy to annoy a prince, matter of fo many and 
fuch powerful nations ; and commander over 
fuch mighty armies, as we ourfelves few ; a 
prince protefted and furrounded by fo taft a. 
number of centinels and body-guards ? and 
though we (hould happen, at lad, to kill one 
of thefe, or burn one of his palaces ; he yet 
would not feel the lofs.-^— Thy arguments, 
(replied Polycharmus) were juft, was not this 
a time of war : But now advice is brought 
that Egypt has taken up arms ; that Phce* 
fticia is conquered, and Syria is oven-unr : and 
that 
t P3 3 
that the king willjbe attacked even before he 
crofles the Euphrates : We therefore are not 
$lone ; but have, in our aid, as many com- 
panions; as great a quantity of arms; as 
numerous forces, and as many (hips, as the 
Egyptian now poflefles, Let us then make 
ufe of his trobps to revenge our wrongs, . 
Polycharmus had not ended, when Chaereas 
qried aloud :- — Away to the army! I will 
take, juftice on my judge in the field. 
II. They then fet ottt with amazing fpeed 
after the king, as if it had been their inten- 
tion to join him; they hoping, upon that 
pretence, to have an opportunity of fafely 
croffing the Euphrates. They got up with 
the army upon the banks of that river ; when 
mixing with thofe who had the care of the 
Vol. II. I birds, 
< 
t »4 ] 
birds*, they went forward; but on their 1 
f 
arrival ia Syria, deferted to the Egyptian. 
They then were feized by the centinels, who 
examined them ftri£Uy; for as they had not 
the appearance of embafladors, they were 
looked upon rather as fpies : and would cer- 
tainly have been cxpofed to imminent danger, 
had not a Greek, who was there by accident, 
under flood their language. They then de- 
fired to be conducted to the king, as having 
fomething to offer which would be of great 
fervice to him. Being introduced, Chsereas 
faid : — We are Greeks, and Patricians of Sy- 
■ 
racufe. My friend here came to Babylon 
purely out of affection to me ; and I to feelc 
* The Perfians, who were a very luxurious peo- 
pie, ufed to carry (among other articles) a vaft num- 
ber of birds, or fowls, for their tables, 
my 
r ny ] 
my wife, daughter to Hermocrates; if thou 
haft ever heard of Hermocrates the Praetor, 
who defeated the Athenians in a naval en- 
gagement. The Egyptian faid, that he 
4 
was not a ftranger to this vi&ory; and in- 
deed every nation had heard of the calamities, 
which the Athenians fuffered, during the Si* 
ciliar>war. Chaereas added:— —The tyrant 
Artaxerxes has exercifed the greateft cruelty. 
ver us : r-Saying which, they related iqvery 
particular. We therefore (continued* Chae- 
jeas) fpontaneoufly devote ourfelves to thee, 
as thy mod faithful friends j we being in- 
spired with courage from two very ffrong 
motives \ a defire of death, and a thirft pf 
vengeance ; for as to my own fuffciings, I 
would have left the world long (race} and t 
*ow live onjy to annoy my fo^. 
I * fit- 
til not inglorious die, nor coward like ; 
But/ome high deed atchieve, which Jh all defcend 
To latifi times 9 and give me deathlefsfame* 
The Egyptian was delighted with thefe word*, 
when flretching forth his hand: Thou 
art come, O young man ! (fkid he) at a happy 
juncture both for thyfelf, and for me. He 
then inftantly gave orders that each fhould 
' be provided with arms and a tent. Not long 
after, he made Choreas his gueft, .and at; 
toft his counfellor ; as he perceived, in him, 
great prudence* fortitude, and fidelity; for 
Ghfereas was naturally of a good difpofitioo, 
and had been liberally educated. But above 
all, hid conteft with the king fired him, and 
rendered him Hill more confpicuous ; as like- 
wife his ardent defire to prove himfelf a man 
who 
I «r 1 
Who was not to be defplfed, nor ill treated 
with impunity; but, on the contrary, de- 
ferred every honour. Accordingly Cbaereas 
loon performed a mighty exploit. The Egyp- 
tians had hitherto fucceeded with little dif~ 
'ficulty on all occafions ; they, after the in* 
curfion, having poflefled themfelves of every 
part of Syria ; and feized on all Phoenicia, 
Tyre excepted. The Tyrians are naturally 
valiant, and ambitions of acquiring glory 4 
in order not to appear unworthy of Hercules 
who is held, by them, in peculiar veneration; 
they having dedicated sheir city almoft to 
him only. The -Tyrians depended likewise 
on the ftrength of the place, for their city 
was built in the midft of the oceap ; and a 
narrow neck of land joining it to the conti- 
nent, it was, by that 'means, almoft anifland. 
I 3 This 
[ nJ ] 
This city lay in the form of a fhlp, which 
coming into the harbour puts out its ladder 
on fhore. Thus the Tyrians could eafily 
repulfe an enemy, from what quarter fpever 
he might come ; They keeping out the land 
army by means of the fea (the harbour being 
fufficient for that purpofe ;) and the walls fe- 
curing them from the attacks of the gallies 
or ftiips ; Tyre being furrounded by vafily 
ftrong fortifications, and inclofed by ports as 
a houfe. 
/  
III. Thus the Tyrians, as was before ob- 
served, were the only people who contemned 
the Egyptians $ though thefe had made a con* 
« 
queft of every other country. This exafpe- 
rating the Egyptian, he fummoned a coun- 
cil of war, to which Chaereas was called, for 
the 
[ "9 1 
the firft time ; when the former fpake thus :—  
Ye fee, my fellow foldiers ! (for I caanot call 
ye fervants,) the great ftraits we are reduced 
to ; we being like a (hip which, after long 
enjoying a profperous courfe, is, on a Hid- 
den, buffetted by contrary winds. The ob- 
ftinacy of Tyre checks our rapid progrefs i 
and we hear that the king is pufhing forward. 
How then are we to aft, as we cannot poflefs 
ourfelves of Tyre* nor advance without tak- 
ing it; fince, (landing as a mid-wall, it (hut3 
us out of all Afia ? I therefore think it ad- 
vifeable, to retire from hence sis fpeedily as 
poflible, before the ferfian army (hall have 
joined the Tyrians j (is we' otherwife (hall 
run the hazard, of being taken in an ertemy's 
country. Now Pelufium is a well fortified 
city, where we need not fear either the Ty- 
I 4 rians, 
t Jib I 
rians, the Medes, or even the whole world : 
as the fands ,are iinpaffible, and the accefs 
to it very narrow. But the fea is open to tis> 
* 
and the Nile is a friend to the Egyptians. — 
* 
The king having ended his fpeech, thofe 
round him flood confounded, filent, and with 
forrowful countenances ; when Choreas only 
dared to exprefs his fentiments thus- . 
O king ! (faid he) for thou art truly a kifcg, 
and not him of Perfia, who of all men is 
the moft wicked ; thou grieveft me to hear 
thee talk of running away in the- midft of 
triumphs. We fhall certainly conquer if the 
gods are propitious -, and be'in pofleffion, not 
only of Tyre, but of Babylon alfo. Many 
obftacles arife in war; yet thefe fhould not 
fuddenly fink our fpirits : on the contrary, 
fortified by hope, we ought to put our hands 
vigo- 
vigoroiifly to the work. Thfeft v&y Tyrian* 
who now deride us, will I drag along ; and 
lay them naked, and In chains, at thy feet. 
If thou doft not credit my words, firft fa- 
fcrifice me, and then depart ; for while- 1 have 
Hfe, never will I (hare in thy flight. If thou, 
art firmly determined to go, leave me, at 
leaft, fome few men, who may abide of their 
own accord. Polycharmus and I are ardent- 
ly defirous of fighting manfully ; and came 
hither under the aufpices of the gods. 
All were aftiamfed not to confent to Chaereas's 
propofal j when the kiog admiring his noble 
fpirit, permitted him to fele&, out of the 
whole army, as many men as he might thiak 
proper. Chaereas did not fet about the choice 
rafhly, but entering the feveral tents, he 
ordered Polycharmus to do the like ; and, 
ia 
iq this manner be vent through the whole 
army, to fee if there were any Greeks. On 
this occafion he found many mercenaries, from 
among whom he drew forth only the Spar- 
tans, the Corinthians, and the Peloponne- 
fians. Here he met alfo with about twenty 
Sicilians. Chaereas having then aflembled 
a body of three hundred men, he fpake 
thus : ^O ye Greeks ! as the king has given, 
me leave to chufe$ out of his whole army, 
the flower of it, I have felefted ye : for I 
myfelf am a Greek, a Syracuflan, and ori- 
. ginally ifrom Doris. Ye therefore muft fur- 
pafs the Barbarians, not only in fplendor of 
birth, but likewife in valour. Let none of 
ye then dread the attempt to which I call ye 
forth; for it will not be found above human 
flrength, nor perplexed with difficulties ; 
4 thefe 
[ "3 ] 
thefc being greater in imagination, than in 
execution. As fmall a number of Greeks 
withftood Xerxes at Thermopylae Now the 
Tyrians are not fire millions. On the con* 
trary, they are few ; very vain $ defpifers of 
their enemies; and Grangers to greatnefsof 
foul, or wifdom in council. Let them then 
know, how vaftly fuperior the Greeks are to 
the Tyrians. However, I am not ambitious 
of being youi 1 general ; but ready to follow 
him, among ye, who will chufe to bead the 
^nterprize j and fuch (hall find me obedient 5 
I feeking not my own glory, but that of my 
country, — Immediately all cried aloud ; 
r 
Be thou our captain ! — Whereupon Chsereas 
faid : Ye have beftowed on me the fu- 
preme command : be then allured, that I 
.will endeavour fo to conduft myfelf^ as not to 
give 
t 124 J 
I 
f 
'give ye caufc to repent of your kindnefs, 
nor of your confidence in chufing me yoor 
leader. Ye now, by the favour of the gods, 
will all acquire more wealth, and greater ho- 
nour, than your fellow- foldiers ; your names 
will be immortal; and all nations will, to la- 
teft pofterity, celebrate the three hundred 
who followed Ghaereas, in like manner as the 
foldiers headed by Miltiades 5 and the three 
' p 
hundred who fought under Leonidas.^— * 
Chaereas had not done (peaking, when all 
dried aloud : Lead on ! And inftantly 
all flew to arms. 
IV. Chaereas having clad them in fplendid 
armour, and furniftied them with weapons of 
every kind, led them to the royal tent. The 
king was all aftonifhment at the fight \ and - 
could 
could not believe them to be the fame men ; 
when promifing them noble rewards : Of 
this, (faid Chaereas) we have not the lead* 
doubt. In the mean time do thou keep the 
reft of the forces under arms ; and draw not 
near Tyre, till we (hall have made ourfelve? 
matters of it, and call out to ye, from the 
wails.*— May the Gods grant (faid the king) 
that this come to pafs. — Chaereas now drew up 
his men clofe together, in order that the; 
might appear much fewer in number ;. when 
Shields prefs'd on Jbields ; while helmet* 9 helmet* 
And men, *witk men, were formidably linked. 
Me then marched them towards Tyre, unfeei* 
at firft by the enemy. Approaching iiilX 
nearer, and being at laft fpied by the centi* 
nets on the walls ; thefe gave notice to the. 
town, that a body of men was advancing, 
but 
. [ 126 ] 
bat rfthoat the leaft fufpicton of their being ' 
foes. Who indeed could furmife, that fuch 
a handful of men would have prefumed to 
advance againft a moft powerful city, which 
the whole Egyptian army dared not to be- 
fiege i Being by this time come near to the 
walls, the Tyrians alked who they were, and 
what they wanted ? - — — Chaereas replied :-*- 
We are Grecian mercenaries, who, have not 
only been refufed our pay by the king o£ 
Egypt> but evcn run the hazard of being 
deftroyed by his machinations : and we appear 
here in order to take vengeance, in con- 
junction with you, of our common foe. — -— 
Thefe words being reported to the people^ 
within the walls, the gates were opened ; 
whep the governor coming forth with only 
a few 
t 127 1 
a few men ; Chsereas firft flew him, and thet 
ran to the reft, when 
His mighty fuiord fpreai horrid flattghter round, 
And heeding foes lay growing on the ground*. 
V 
They now killed one another, like a* when 
Hons fall upon a herd of o*en, whofe keeper 
is not with them, Inftantly the city echoed 
with (hrieks and lamentations; for few could 
be eye-witneffes to the prodigious havook 
then making, and all were in the utmoft 
confufion ; the rabbk poured tumultuoufly 
through the gates, in order to fee what was 
. * Chaereas's chaja&er feems very unami- 
able on this cruel occafion: and furcly ftrata- 
gems, of this kind, are altogether unworthy ^ 
creature who would be {bought jufl and rational. 
doing % 
[ U8 } 
doing ; and to this was principally owing the 
lofs of Tyre : for thofc in the city ftruggled 
s 
t 
\ 
with all their might to get out ; while foch 
as were out of it, being cut with fabres, and 
pierced by fpears, made as violent efforts to 
force in. Meeting thus, and running againft 
one another, they fell an eafy prey to the de- 
ftru&ive fword; and fuch heaps of dead 
bodies lay before the gates, that it wis not 
poflible to fhut them.^ In this inexpreffible 
confuiion, Chsereas only detained his prefence 
of .mind and judgment ; when forcing his 
way through all oppofition, he got within the 
gates. And now himfelf and nine more 
afcended the walls, whence he called to thet 
Egyptians, who immediately rufliing forward, 
the city was taken.  The Egyptians being 
thus mailers of Tyre, were all joy and fefti- 
' vity. 
iky. But Chatreas would neither offer up. 
Sacrifices nor put on a crown; he faying:—* 
To what purpofe (houldl appear with any 
infignia of vi&ory, if thou (O Callirrhoe !) 
doft not. fee them ? Never fiiice our' bridal 
night have I wore it crown 1 ; for fhboldefr 
thou be dead, it would be impious in me to 
rejoice. On the other hand, fhouldeft thou 
be living, how could I mix in feafBngs with* 
out thee, who, poffibly art now furrounded 
with a thoufand evils ? During this in* 
terval, the king of Perfia, having croft the 
Euphrates, marched forward with all poffible 
fpeed, in order to fight the enemy. For hav- 
ing received advice' that Tyre was takenj he 
was afraid for Sidon and all Syria; as he 
found that the enemy would oppofe him with 
equal numbers. Hpnce'he thought it moft 
Vol. II. K , prudent 
V 
Undent t» march Without hit baggage, m 
other hqpecttmeat ; as be fhoald thereby ad- 
tone* mvch fwifter, and haw aotbiog tip 
check him In hit career. > Hereupon fde&iag 
<he fiofecr of hk army, he left, m the place 
whfere he tfecb wa», all fuch me* a* were not 
*£ age to hw arm** as likewifo tbt queen, 
with the tveafufe^ the rich veftmeats and 
reyal equipages, Artafcerfecs refle&ing after* 
inu4$> that toutrtt aadl Qoafofioa reigaed 
ttfrerftlly, Iff toeat!» ef the war $ and that 
fhfc lad {p&ad e*cn to the cities near the 
Euphrates; he therefore thought it Were 
J&feft* ttf lodge, hi Aradui, erery thing be 
aright Jtow leave behfoi JSn>. 
. V. This iflaod is thirty furlongs from the 
eonttoent > and » it Aaode aa aatSeot tempi* 
fered 
fitted to Venus. Here the women titer* 
free and fafe as in their owa hotife*. Cal- 
Krrhoe fpying the God^efs, who flood bppo* 
fite to tier; (he at firft continued filentf 
then weeping* reproached Venu* with 
being the caufe of her tears; and, at 
lad, thus whifpered to herfelf : Behold 
* t 
me now jo Aradu*, a ihiall ifland, in ex* 
change for the wide-extended Sicily 3 aq<| 
Without a fingle relation or friend. - Thii 
fureiy i* enough, O Coddefs ! How mvck 
ldager Wilt thou ferfecute me ? If I hatri 
highly offended thee, thou Draft have chaff* 
tifed me Efficiently. Should v my ill-fated 
beauty have juftly excited envy, conflder that 
it has proved my ruin. I alfo h|ve felt the 
horrors of war, which alone were wanting 
19 complete my fuf&rmgs. Babyion, in comr 
% a parifoa 
r *3* i 
parifon of my prefent evils, has treated rm 
with lenity. There Choreas was dear to me \ 
but he furely is now no more ; for meihinks 
he could not live, after my departure from 
that city. But of whom can I enquire what 
is become of him ? All I here behold are 
ftrangers and Barbarians ; pcrfons who envy 
and hate me ; or, what is ftifl worfe, who 
lovfe me. Do thou then (O Goddefs !} inform 
me, whether Chareas be ftiU living.— -Cal- 
lirrhoe, after faying thefe words, left the 
temple, when (he met on a fudden Rhodo- 
gune, daughter to Zopyrus and wife to Me- 
gabyfus; both men of the higheft rank 
ampng the Berfians ; the fir ft lady of that na- 
tion, who went to meet CalKrrhoe when flie 
entered "Babylon *. The Egyptian hearing 
* Some critics feem juflly of opinion, that acoa- 
terfation pafTcd here between Ca! lirrhoe and Rho- 
dogune, which wa»omitted by the copied. 
that 
i *33 1 
$wtt Artaxerxes was near, an4 had made 
mighty preparations both by Tea and land 9 
fent for Chaereas and fpake thus:— I have 
not yet had an opportunity of rewarding thee, 
, with due honour, for thy firft magnanimous ex- 
ploits. Thou haft put Tyre into my hands. 
With regard to the future, lee us not lofe 
the conquests which now offer thetnfelves 3 and 
thefe I will fhare with thee. Egypt will be 
a Efficient empire for me, and Syria (hall be 
thine. Let us now consider what is to be 
done, for the war rages both by fea and land. 
I leave it to thy option , ekher to hiad the army, 
or the fleet/ However, I imagine that the 
ocean is more naturally thy element, as the Sy- 
racufians defeated the Athenians in a naval 
engagement. Thou now mnft fight againft the 
Perfians, who were defeated by the Athenians, 
K 3 Tfaow 
X m 3 
Thou wilt command the Egyptian gallles* 
which are larger, and more in number, than 
thofe of Sicily. Do thou theft imitate, in 
this expedition, the glorious example fet the* 
by Hermocrates thy father* in-law.— Dangers 
of every kind (faid Cbaereas) will be pleafing 
40 me. For thy fake I undertook to wage 
war with the king of Pcrfia, whom I mor- 
tally hate. Give me only, with the fleet of 
galliesj my three hundred men* ~ — Tak$ 
thofe, (replied the Egyptian) and as many 
more as thou mayeft want.— — This wal 
f ut to execution forthwith, as matters prefled 
exceedingly. And now the Egyptian, head- 
ing the land forces, marched againft the 
enemy; and Chaereas was appointed admiral. 
This firft ftep difheartened infinitely tht 
ffeldiers, as Chicreas* their fttouritc, was 
not 
I «35 1 
pot to command them ; for, led on by hltn, 
jhey never doubted ©£ viftorj. This was 
in fpme meafure fikc plucking out an eye 
from a huge body. On the contrary, thofe 
on board the fleet were infpired with frefji 
hopes and greater courage ; as they were to b$ J 
headed by fo brave, fo excellent a con*- 
tnander. And now all the fea-captalns, the 
pilots, the mariner^ and the foldiers, fo far 
from loitering, were inftaptly rouzed and ia 
action ; each being eager to fet the example, 
and to ihow how ready he was to obey Cha» 
reas, and to give him the moft fignal proofs «f 
▼alour. The battles were fought, on one 
and the fame day, both by fea and lani. 
On this occafion the Egyptian infantry long 
tttftfted the Mcdes and Pcrfcma; buying 
K4 « 
* at laft overpowered by numbers, they wcro 
forced to yield. Artaxerxes purfued them 
with his cavalry ; when equal was the ftrug- 
gle : the king of Egypt endeavouring to get 
into Pelufium, and the Perfian monarch to 
intercept him in his flight. The Egyptian 
would perhaps have efcaped, had not Dio- 
nyfius firft routed all who oppofed him j he 
fighting valiantly near the king, in order to 
be feen by him ; and he performed wonders 
during the whole engagement. As the pur- , 
fuit of the enemy was tedious, and continued 
day and night; Dionyfius-obferving that this ' 
troubled the king, fpake thus :— — Do not 
(my Liege \) perplex thyfelf, for I will pre- 
vent the Egyptian from efcaping, provided 
thou 
I *3? J 
thou wile lend me a body of chofeff cataf~ 
iy, The king applauded his fpirit* and 
gave him five thonfand horfe. Dioriyfius 
then marched, in one day, the number of 
miles ufually rode in two: when falling tin- 
expe&edly on the enemy, in the night, he 
took a great number of them alive'; fletf 
many more ; and routed their whole army. 
The Egyptian being feized alive, laid viofent 
hands on himfelf ; when- Dictayfius" carried 
his head to the king, who, at the fight of it, 
crietf : — — Thou 4 (halt be recorded' in the 
royal annals, as a benefaftor* to' my houfe ; 
and I now beftow* on v thee a gift, which, df 
all things, thou moftdefireft, — —Thy wife 
Gallirrhoe. The war has decided- the' la w- 
fuit: 
t i3« I 
^Att and fhoo wilt now reattf* the matt 
beautiful reward far thy *ato«r.«~ — Dienyw 
Has fell proftme, an* incised himfielf equal 
1* the god*; being firmly ftfrfuaded, that 
be {hocid henceforward continue the hu£ 
band of Gallirrhbe, tad be fiera fftorefep*- 
fated from her, 
» ? 
, Vf. Booh were the traafaftion* oo land : 
but Cbawreas \wu a complete victory at feaj 
bis eoemiea not daring to come out, and 
lace . him with equal nwnber* : They not 
ihnding the attach of the Egyptian gallie^ 
dot once tortring their prows towards thenar 
but part fl#l with aH tbe fiut they cotdd 
croud* audi part, niotb^ etere,. the &v*s 
m 
t *$9 i 
fell into the hands of Chaereas; and the 
ocean was covered with the wrecks of the 
Median veflels. Artaxerxes knew not that 
his fleet was overcome 5 nor did Chareas hear 
that the Egyptian army had been defeated f 
on the contrary, both thought tbemfetaf 
viftors by fea and land. The fame day that 
* 
** * * 
the battle was fought, Chaereas coming off 
Aracjus with his fleet, ordered his Jhips to 
forroudd the ifland j and to keep fo (harp 
* look-out, as might enable them to give 
a good account, to their commander, of aH 
that pail* Accordingly, thofe who had re* 
cehred thefe orders, drove the eunuchs, the 
women-flares, and aft the populace into a 
fjfaciou* ftjuare or market-place; on which 
oc- 
I 140 J 
occaiion the multitude was (o great, that part 
were forced to pa.fs the night under porticos, 
and part in the open air. Thofe of fotne 
rank were led to the town-houfe, whece the 
Archontes, or chief maglftratcs, ufed to af- 
femblc, and tranfaft the bufinefs of the ftate. 
The women fat on the earth round the queen 5 
they having neither lighted up fires, nor re- 
ceived any fuftenance ; being fully perfuaded 
N t 
that the king was taken prifoner ; that the 
,  
Perfians were totally undone ; and that the 
Egyptian had conquered every where. This 
was a night, in Aradus, of the greateft joy 
to fome, and of the deepeft afflittion to 
others: The "Egyptians, on the one hand, 
being* delighted that the war was at an end, 
and themfelves ' freed from Peril an flavery ; 
while, 
f Ifl ] 
while, on the other hand, the Per/tan ^ap* 
tives expe&ed nothing bat chains, outrages, 
fcourges, Daughter; or, as the tnildeft pu- 
nishment, flavery. Statira, laying her head 
on Caliirrhoe's knees, wept. The hitter being 
a Greek/ having had a generous education; 
and been long converfant with adverfity, 
greatly comforted the queen. Now it 
happened, at this juncture, that an Egyptian 
foldier, who flood guard over fucl^ as were 
confined, in the townhonfe, knowing. 
that the queen, was there; he, ftrock with 
the awe which all the Barbarians naturally 
feel, on hearing the royal name pronounced, 
dared not to approach Statira; but {landing 
at the door, which was fiiut, be fpalte thus 
to Callirrhoe:— rO Lady! be not dcje&ed* 
for 
t 14* J 
for the admiral knows not that thou art Ami 
fjp here with the oilier captivfes ; bat wbcfr 
this flull be told him, he will treat thee with 
the atmoft immunity, and take all Imaginable 
care of. thee* He is not only brave, but na- 
turally a lover of thy fex, and wHI make thee 
his wife.—- Callirrhoe, at thefc words, vent- 
ed a deep figh 5 and tearing her hair, burft 
(otQ th* following exclamation :■» ■ ■ I now 
m a flave. indeed 1 O ftrike a poniard to my 
heart, rather than bring me fuch tidings ! I 
-Cannot hear of marriage, and only wifii for 
8eat& Let them murther me, let thent 
lonlhme me aflies, I will not flir from 
hence. This fpot (hall ' be my grave. If 
thy chieftain, (as thou fayeft) Is of a benign 
sad g e n er ous temper, let him grant me one 
4 : boon* 
I »43 | 
v 
twon; I wan, put as end «o«y life here.—* 
The fbldkr renewed hit intreaties, yet Cdl- 
lirrhoe wovld not rife from the earth, but 
lay with her head coveted. Hereupon the 
Egyptian b*gai> to confider how he fhould 
aft ; he hoc dariog to employ force, nor wai 
he matter of eloquence fiiffident to win her* 
lie then retutfted with * deje&ed count** 
nance to Chzreas, whp fpake that :<*-**» 
What can all xhk **ani I am robbed of 
the moil precious pari of my booty ; hat I 
.will take vengeance do thofe wbp hate done 
this,— -The tidier replied :— <— My Lowi I 
**o iniquity has been pra#ifcd on thia *cfi*» 
lion: but the woman whom I found ext$nie4 
in th* market place* refiifet to Jot me bring 
her to thef*. <Qn the contrary, 4ut it £*)1 
Ijiag profiraftei an4 calling out Hoe * IwqpI, 
* 
* Wifha* 
t '44 J 
*ri(hes to die.— — Chsereas fmiltag, cried :—  
thou moft ignorant of mortals ! knoweft 
thou not the arts by which a woman- is won? 
by: foothing* by flattery, by promifcs ; and" 
above all, by making her fancy that (he is be- 
loved. Thou perhaps mayeft have ufed vio- 
lence or opprobrious language::— In no 
manner, (anfivered. the foldier:) On the 
Contrary, I have not only done all that thou 
haft now mentioned, but even twice as much. 
1 have invented a falfity with regard to thee, 
by faying that thou wouldeft marry her, at 
which (he feemed moft offended. — I furely, 
(faid Chsreas) muft be vaflly handfome and 
* 
engaging, fince this captive declares an a- 
'verfion, though (he never faw me. Be this 
as it will, (he feems of a generous fpirit. 
Let no one * therefore prefume * to employ 
.; force; l 
C 145 3 
foi;ce ; but leave her to, aft as flie may think 
proper. It is incumbent on me to revere and 
protect virtue. Perhaps this woman may 
bewail a loft hufband. 
End of the Seventh Book. 
Vol. II. L THE 
[ 147 3 
THE 
LOVES 
O F 
CHOREAS and CALLIRRHOE. 
BOOK VIII. 
I. "Y T has been related, in the preceeding 
bobk, how Chaereas, fufpe&ing that 
I 
Callirrhoe had been decreed to Dionyfius, 
was fired with revenge, and revolted to the 
Egyptians who appointing him admiral, he 
L 2 won „ 
[ 148 ] 
won the empire of the fea : and how Char- 
reas, thus victorious, feized upon Aradus, 
where Artaxerxes had left his confort, his - 
retinue, and Callirrhoe. Fortune was now 
preparing an incident which was fcarce cre- 
dible, and of a forrowful caft ; viz. Chae- 
reas, though poflefled of Callirrhoe, yet 
knew not that (he was in his hands; and 
having taken the wives of other men on 
board, he was failing away with them ; while, 
he left his own in Aradus ; not as Bacchus 
abandoned his wife Ariadne when afleep ; 
but as a prey to his enemies. Hereupon Ve- 
nus, difpleafed at fo unnatural an event, re- 
folved to unravel and clear up the whole. 
For (he how began to be reconciled to Chse- 
reas, ^Vi'th whom fhe before had been offend- 
ed, on account of his violent jealoufy, and 
his 
*■«■ 
[ «49 ] 
Us Ingratitude to her ; after flie had beftow- 
ed, on him, a mod beautiful gift 5 a gift more 
precious than that which Alexander, called 
Paris, bore away. And now Chaereas, having 
fettled all masters with Cupid, and made 
full fatisfafrion to that God, by having been 
long toft, from Weft to Eaft, and expofed to 
numberlefs difafters : Venus took pity on the 
wanderer; arid determined to reftore, at 
Jaft, to each other, a mod exquifitely-beau- 
tiful pair, whom fhe firft joined \ and who 
had undergone a vaft variety of fufferings, 
both by fea and land. — I am of opinion, 
that this laft book will be highly entertaining 
to my readers ; and expiate, as it were, for 
all the mournful incidents in the fprmer ones* 
Robbers, flavery, trials, contefts, fixed re- 
folutions to die ; war, and captivity, will be 
L 3 told 
[ i 5 o J 
told no more : but chafte loves, and lawful 
nuptials, be the fubje&s of the following book. 
I (hall now declare, in what manner Venus 
threw light over this obfcure" affair ; and 
how Chaereas and Callirrhoe, not knowing 
each other, were, by means of that goddefs, 
reciprocally reftored. — It was evening, and 
many (laves were yet to be put on board the 
gallies. Chaereas, who was greatly fatigued, 
now rofe up, to order and prepare the de- 
parture of his fleet. As he was pafling 
through the market place, the Egyptian faid 
to him : —Here (my Lord !) is the woman, 
'who will not go on board, and obftinately 
refolves to ftarve herfelf. But thou wilt 
(perhaps) be able to perfuade her to rife \ 
for why leave behind thee the moft lovely 
part of thy fpoils ? Polycharmus fecond- 
ed 
t »*' 3 
cd this hint, he being vaflly defirous of en«% 
gaging Chaereas, if poffible, in a new amour ; 
to confole him for the lofs of Callirrhoe : 
upon which Polycharmus faid : — Chaereas !-* 
Let us go in. Having paft the threshold, 
and feeing the woman ftretched on the 
ground, with her head covered ; Chaereas im- 
mediately, from her breathing and the form 
of her body, found himfelf greatly agitated, 
and in fufpence ; and would certainly have 
then known again Callirrhoe, had he not 
been firmly perfuaded, that (he was gone 
away with Dionyfius. Hereupon approaching 
very foftly : Woman ! (faid he) whoever 
thou art, be comforted, for no violence (hall 
be offered thee ; and thou fhalt poflefs the 
hufband whom thou coveteft. At.thefe 
words, Callirrhoe, hearing his well-known 
L 4 "  voice, 
[ 152 3 
voice, threw off her veil, and both cried 
aloud: -Choreas ! — Callirrhoe ! — 
when fondly clafping each other, they faint- 
ed, and fell on the ground. Polycharmus, 
at fo wonderful and unexpected an event, 
was at, fir ft ftruck dumb ; but fpake as fol- 
lows, a little after . Rife ! rife ! Ye now 
are mutually reftored. The gods have in- 
dulged the ardent wilhes of both. However, 
confider that ye are not in your native ifle, 
but in an enemy's country : and that it will 
be necefTary ye fliould now fettle every thing 
upon fo folid a footing, as may prevent any 
future feparation — Polycharmus pronounced 
thefe words aloud : but the tranfported pair 
beard them imperfe&ly j as perfons, at the 
« 
bottom of a well, would a voice coming from 
above. *It was with great difficulty they re- 
covered 
> 
[- 153 1 
covered from their extafy ; when fondly gaz- 
ing on each other, they repeated their kifles, 
and again fwooned away. This they did a 
fecond, and a third time, faying only :— Do I 
certainly fold thee ? Art thou, indeed, Cal- 
lirrhoe ? Art thou really Choreas?—— 
Inftantly fame publi(hed, that the admiral 
had recovered his confort. And now, not a 
foldier continued in his tent ; not a mariner 
on board his galley; -nor a porter, orferyant, 
at a door ; but the people flocked from all 
parts, crying aloud :— — Thrice happy fair! 
to have thus found again her exquifitely- 
beautiful hufband. Yet the moment Cal- 
lirrhoe appeared, praifes were no longer be- 
flowed on Chasrcas ; but every eye gazed at 
her, as though fhe only had been prefent. 
Callirrhoe now walked, with an air of ma- 
jefty, 
C 154 ] 
jefty> between Chsereas and Polycharmus. 
Flowers and chaplets were fcattered over 
them ; and ointments, with wine, poured 
forth at their feet. On this occafion were 
united the two moft delightful articles, 
in peace and war, viz. triumphs for viftbry, 
and rejoicings for marriage. It had been 
Chaereas's cuftom, always to lie on board his 
fhip ; and to fpend the greateft part of the 
night, as well as the day, in a variety of oc- 
cupations : but now, leaving all things to 
Polycharmus, he, without waiting for night, 
entered the royal bed-chamber : for in every 
city a palace is appropriated to th6 king. 
Here flood a golden bed, whofe coverlet was 
of Tyrian purple, *of BabyloniGi workman- 
fhip. But O ! what pen could defcribe the 
night in which our blifsful pair related their 
2 refpeflivc 
[ 155 1 
refpe&ive adventures ; intermixing them 
with floods of tears, and numberlefs kifles ! 
* 
Callirrhoe began firft, by telling him how 
(he recovered from her trance in the Maufo- 
leum, and was afterwards taken from thence 
by Theron. She alfo related her voyage, 
and how fhe had been fold. — Hitherto Chae- 
reas had (hed tears while he liftened to her 
ftory ; but when fhe fpake of Miletus,, (he, 
through modefty, was filent : upon which, 
he, excited by his natural jealoufy, grew un- 
eafy ; but the relation (he gave of her fon, 
foothed and confoled him. Hereupon 
Chaereas, before (he had ended, fpake thus : — 
By what accident earned thou to Aradus ? 
Where didft thou leave Dionyfius ? and what 
pift between thee, and the king ! — Inftant- 
ly Callirrhoe declared, with an oath, that (he 
had 
[ 156 ] 
had not once fet eyes on Dionyfius, fmce the 
trial: and that Artaxerxes certainly loved 
her, but that he had never offered fo much 
as to kifs her. 1 then, (continued Chse- 
reas) have been very unjuft, and too preci- 
pitate in my anger ; in bringing fo many evils 
upon the king, fince he never injured thee. 
When tome from thee, I was forced to de» 
fert; yet have I not done any thing, fince 
that time, unworthy of Callirrhoe ; I having 
filled both the land and fea with my trophies. 
—He then told her all his aflions minutely ; 
and feemed not a little delighted, while re- 
lating his his own heroic achievements. * 
After fatiating themfelves with tears, and the 
relation of their refpeftive adventures, 
m 
Swift tbty rr/tund their Hymeneal joys. 
II. It 
r '57 j 
.'II. It was yet night, when an Egyptian, o£ 
-fome rank, arrived in a pinnace j and- land- 
ing, cried haftily, and in fome confufion :— 
Where is Chaereas?— < — Being introduced to 
Polycharmus, the ftranger faid, that he had 
a fecret to communicate to Chasreas only ; 
and that the bufinefs he was come upon, was 
vaftly urgent, and required the, quickeft dif* 
patch.— Polycharmus did not go in to Chse* 
reas for a long time, he being unwilling to 
idifturb him unfeafonably. But the Egyptian 
growing more importunate; Polycharmus* 
opening the bed. chamber door a, little, told 
Chaereas, that a perfon was coipe upon an 
affair of infinite importance. Immediately 
Chaereas, - like an able captain, fatd :— -4 
Bring, in. the man ; for war adopts of* no d«? 
lay. The Egyptian being introduced, in 
' the 
[ *s* ] 
the dead of night, and ftanding by Chaereas's 
bed-fide : Know, (faid he) that the king 
of Perfia has (lain him of Egypt ; and or- 
dered part of his army to march for that 
» 
country, to fettle matters there ; while him- 
felf is advancing, with the remainder of his 
forces, and will be here in a very (hort time. 
Fbr hearing that Aradus was taken, he la- 
ments the lofs of the vaft treafures left by 
him therein ; but is efpecially grieved, on 
account of his confort, Statira. At thefe 
words Chsereas ftarted from his bed, when 
Callirrhoe, holding him, cried : Whither 
doft thou run, without firft deliberating on 
the prefent ftate of affairs ? for (houldeft thou 
fpread abroad this news, thou wilt kindle a 
mighty war againft thy felf. All who l)ear 
this will contemn thee s and we, being again 
made 
L '59 ] 
made captives, (hall fuffer far greater cala- 
mities than before.— Chaereas complied in- 
ftantly with her counfel ; when coming out 
of the bed-chamber, he artfully took the 
Egyptian by the hand : then calling his peo- 
ple round him, he faid : — O my friends ! we 
likewife have overcome the king of Perfia's 
land forces. The man who now Hands be- 
fore ye, has brought this joyful news, toge- 
ther with letters from the Egyptian monarch. 
It is therefore our duty to fail, with all pof- 
fible expedition, to the rendezvous he ap- 
pointed. Be then the baggage got together, 
and let all haften to their refpe&ive gallies. — 
The inftant thefe Words were uttered, the 
trumpet founded for every one to go on 
board. All the booty, with the flaves, had 
been fhipt the day before \ and nothing was 
then 
[ -'<5° ] 
then left in the ifland, except fuch things as 
were too heavy to be tranfported, oraltoge* 
ther ufelefs. They then unfqrled the fails, 
and weighed anchor, when, the harbour echo- 
ed with tfimult and confufion ; and all were 
varioufly employed. Chaereas, now coming 
on board, gave private orders for failing to- 
wards Cyprus; as though it would be ncr- 
ccflary to take poflefiion of that ifland, then 
in a defencelefs condition. The wind being 
favourable, they foon reached Paphos, where 
flood a temple facred to Venus. Chaereas, 
before they landed, fent cryers on fhore, 
to offer to the inhabitants peace and amity ; 
which being accepted, Chaereas ordered .the 
crews of the feveral gallies to land ; when, 
* 
after bellowing-' rich gifts on Venus, and 
getting together a great many vi&ims, he en- 
tertained 
tertained the whole fleet at a fplendid ban- 
quet. Chsereas, confidering afterwards how 
he (hould aft j the priefts and footh-fayers . 
informed him, that the vi&ims were propi- 
tious. Animated by this declaration, he af- 
fembled the captains of the (hips ; his three 
hundred Greeks ; and all the Egyptians whom 
he knew to be in his intereft, when he fpake 
thus: — My fellow-foldiers ! my companions 
in mighty exploits, fo glorious to us all! 
Joined with you, we could either make peace 
TVith honour, or continue the war with fafety. 
Experience has taught us, that we, by means 
of the concord which has fubfifted fo happily 
between us, are become matters of the fea :' 
But things are on fuch a footing, at this junc- 
ture, that it will be incumbent on us to Con* 
fult immediately together, and provide for 
Vol. II. . M our 
t 162 J 
ourfuture fecurity. Know then, that the Egypr- 
* 
tian was flain in battle ; and that the king of 
Perfia has feized upon all the continent ; fo 
that we are now furrouaded with enemies. 
Is then any one among you of opinion, that 
we (hould go to the king, and fpontajieoufly 
deliver up ourfelves into his hands ? — — Im* 
mediately they all, as. with one voice, cried 
aloud : We will fubmit to any thing rather  
than do this. — Whither then {hall we 
dcape, thus encompafled by foes? and it 
will not be poffible for us to fly to the Ikies. — 
At thefe words, all were iilent, when a La* 
cedaemonian, coufin to Brafidas, whom dire 
aeceffity had compelled, in dangerous times, 
to leave his native country, was the fir ft who- 
dared to fpeak: Why (fays he,) do we 
mdcavour to fly from the king, while the 
fea 
4e» is open to us, aud we are poffefled of 
fliips ? Both of thefe will convey us to Sicily, 
and to Syracufe; where we ftand not in fear 
either of the Perfian or the Athenians ?— AJ1 
applauded- thi6 advice, Chaereas excepted, 
Who pretended not to approve of it, by ob- 
serving, that it would be too long a voyage $ 
though, in reality, he fpake thus merely to 
found them $ and to know whether they had 
declared their real featiments. However, 
as they all gjcew exceedingly preffing, and 
were eager, to fet fail inftantly, Choreas 
faid:~0 Greeks 1 ye have taken an ex* 
eellent refolution ; and I return you many 
thanks,, for the testimonies given me of your 
good-will and fidelity; and reft allured, 
that ye (hall not repent of this, if the god9 
favour our defigps. But the Egyptians, of 
M 2 whom 
i 
t 164 ] 
there are vaft numbers, muft not be forced 
contrary to their will ; as moft of them have 
wives and children, from whoip they would 
not willingly be feparated. Let then fome go 
and enquire, among the multitude, the fen- 
timent of each man in particular : in order 
that we may take with us none butvolun- 
r 
teers. — All the commands of Chasreas were 
forthwith put in execution. 
III. Now Callirrhoe, taking Chsereas by 
the hand, and drawing him afide, faid : ■■ 
What are thy intentions ?— — Wilt thou take 
Statira, and the beauteous Jthodogune, with 
thee to Syracufe ? This queftion railed a 
blufli in Chsereas's cheek, when he replied: 
— It is not for my own lake that I fhall con- 
vey thtffe women thither, but in order that 
they 
C * 6 5 1 
they may be thy flaves.- — -Immediately Cal* 
lirrhoe cried aloud:-— The gods forbid, 
that I fhould ever be To mad, as to permit 
the queen of Afia to be my flave ; efpecially 
as ber perfon is, by the laws of hofpitality, 
facred to me! If therefore thou wouldeft 
oblige me, fend her back to the king ; ilnce 
flie treated me, while under her tare, with 
as much kindnefs as if I had been her bro- 
ther's wife. Thou couldeft not form a 
wifti, (anfwered Chacreas) which I would not 
indulge. Thou art miftrefs of Statira; of 
my fpoils; but, above all things, of my 
foul. -Callirrhoe, overjoyed at this reply, 
kiffed her hufband ; and Immediately ordered 
the officers to conduft her to Statira, who, 
with the moft noble Perfian ladies, was fiiut 
vp in a cabin, quite ignorant of all that had 
M 3 paflcdi 
f m j 
pafled ; and not even knowing that Caffirrhoe 
was reftored to her darling Chasreasj the 
queen being fo ftrongly guarded that no one 
could approach, or fee her ; or even give 
her the leaft information of any thing. So 
foon as Callirrhoe entered the (hip, attended 
by the captain, amazement feized the people, 
who ran up and down iri confufion ; when 
one whifpered another, faying : The ad- 
miral's lady is coming.— Statira perceiving 
this, vented a deep figh, and weeping, cried :— 
O fortune ! Thou haft preferved me till this 
day, that I, a queen, might behold my mi- 
fhrefs; who, poflibly, is now come on board, 
merely to' fee what kind of Have fhe has 
got. The other women now broke forth 
into lamentations; on which occasion {he 
learnt how dreadful flavery is to noble, free- 
bora 
f i6 7 J 
born minds. But God changed, on a (Ltd- 
den, the face of things; for Callirrhoe, 
being ft ill on board, flew to Statira, and em- 
bracing her affectionately, faid : Hail O 
Queen ! for a queen thou art, and a queen 
thou (halt ever remain. Thou art not 
falkn into the hands of an enemy, but of 
one who loves thee exceedingly j and has re- 
ceived the ftrongeft marks of thy benevo- 
lence. My Choreas is admiral ; an honour 
to which his anger againft the great king 
raifed him, for his not reftoring me imme- 
diately. But his animoCty being now fabfidecf* 
he is reconciled, and no longer thy foe. Rife 
therefore (excellent Statira !) depart -chear- 
fully, and do thou alfo recover thy confort ; 
for the king liveth, and Chaereas will fend 
thee to Urn. Rife alfo, Rhodogune ! my 
M 4 firft 
fytjt friend among the Perfians, and go to thy 
hufband ; with as many more women as the 
queen (hall defire : and remember Callir- 
rhoc. Statira, at thefe words, was all 
aftonifhment ; not knowing whether fhe ought 
to give credit to, or difbelieve, what fhc 
heard. However, fuch was the re&itude of 
Callirrhoe's heart, that flie never jelled ia 
matters of confequence; and the prefent 
aifis required the utmoft difpatch in all things. 
There was then, among the Egyptians, a 
philofopher, Demetrius by name, who was 
well-known to the king ; a man advanced in 
years ; and excelling all his countrymen, in 
learning and the fludy of virtue. Chsereas 
calling him, fpake thus: 1 intended to 
have taken thee with me; but I now will en- 
trvlt thee with a very important commiffion ; 
I mean, 
f t6 9 ] 
1 mean, thou (hale conduft the royal conlbrt 
to the great king. Hereby thou wilt ingratiate 
thyfelf {till more with the monarch, and re- 
ftore the reft to his favour.— Having (aid 
thefe words, he appointed Demetrius com- 
mander of the (hips or gallies which were to 
return home ; for all would follow Chxreas ; 
they preferring him to their native country, 
and to their children. However, he only 
chofe twenty of the bed and largeft gallies ; 
as he defigned to crofs the Ionian fea. On 
board of thefe he (hipt all .the Greeks who 
were then with him : as likewife fuch Egyp- 
tians, and Phoenicians, as he knew were 
brave and vigorous. Many Cyprians went 
voluntarily aboard on this occafion. Choreas 
fent all the reft to their homes, each with his 
portion of the enemies fpoils ; fo that they 
all 
t 170 ] 
*H returned joyfully to their refpe&ive coun- 
tries, loaded with rewards and honours; 
and no one who aflced Chsereas a favour was 
refafed it* Callirrhoe carried, to Statira, all 
the rich veftments and the iftyal female or- 
naments. But (he would not accept of 
any of them, faying : Callirrhoe ! da 
thou be decked with them, for thy inchant- 
ing frame claims princely attire* It i$ alfo r?~ 
quifite, that thou do hare wherewithal to be- 
(low on thy mother, and to prefent to the 
Deities of thy country. I have left many 
more things of this fort in Babylon. May 
the Gods grant thee a profperous voyage, -and 
land thee in fafety ; and mayeftthou never, 
never more be feparated from thy Chaereas ! 
Thou haft afted with the ftrifteft juftice, to- 
wards me, in all things : and proved that 
thy 
r *7* r 
fhy foul is as excellent as thy form is beauti- 
ful. The king, in giving thee in charge to 
me, depofited an invaluable treafure. 
IV. Who could relate the very numerous* 
and very different tranfa&ions of that day ? 
Some were offering up vows, and others bid* 
* 
ding farewell : Some were elated with joys 
and others plunged in forrow : Many were 
giving commiifions reciprocally; and many 
writing to their families and friends. Cha> 
< 
reas, among the reft, wrote a letter to the 
king, in the following terms:— — Thoii 
waft meditating the trial of my caufe, and 1 
have gained it by the decifion of a moft up- 
right judge f for war is an excellent arbiter 
both of right and wrong * War has given 
* How barbarous, how falfe a maxim is this ? 
r »7* i 
tne not only my own wife Callirrhoe, but 
thine alio. I have not imitated thy dilatory 
conduft, bat inftantly, and without thy de- 
firing it, now reftore to thee Statira inviolate ; 
and a queen, even in captivity. However, 
know that; it is not me, but Callirrhoe, who 
fends, thee this gift ; in return for which, we 
requeft of thee to be reconciled to the Egyp- 
tians ; it being the duty of all men, and ef- 
pccially ot kings, to prevent evil *. Thou 
wilt have foldiers who love their fovereign ; 
they chufing to ftay with thee, rather than 
as friends, to follow me. Thus did Cha- 
reas write. Callirrhoe alfo thought it in- 
cumbent on her to return thanks to Diony- 
iius. That was the only thing (he concealed 
Excellent do&rine! and the reverfe of the 
maxim above hinted at. 
from 
t *73 3 
from Chatreas ; for, knowing his jealous temper, 
(he kept this a fecret ; and wrote to Dionyfius 
in manner following : -Callirrhoc to Dio- 
nyfius, her patron and benefafior, greeting. 
Thou didft deliver me out of the hands of 
robbers, and from flavery.  Be not incenfed 
againft me, I befeech thee, for my heart is 
with thee, on account of our mutual fon, 
whom I earrieftly recommend to thy generous 
care; requeftiog that he be nurtured and 
educated in a manner worthy of us. May 
he never be fubjeft to a ftep-mother ! Thou 
haft not only a fon, but a daughter alfo., Two 
children are fufficient for thee. Marry thy 
fon when come to man's eftate ; and fend him 
to Syracufe, that he may fee his grand-fire.— 
Plangon, I greet thee. I wrote this with 
my own hand. May health attend thee, 
(good 
f «74 ] 
(good Dkmyfius !) and blot Dot Calllrrboe 
from thy remembrance.— -—Having ieakd the 
letter, (he hid it in her bofom, and when the 
departure was near, and all were going on 
board; Callirrhoe, taking Stadia by the 
band, conducted her to the {hip ; where De- 
metrius bad fet up a royal pavillionj with 
fails of Babylonifh purple, interwove with 
gold. Callirrhoe, with the fondeft careffes, 
laid the queen on the bed, and fpake thus :— 
Adieu, O Statira ! preferve me tenderly in 
thy memory, and write to me often at Syra- 
jcufe. Every thing is eafy to the king of fer- 
fia. I will make due acknowledgments, for 
that kindnefs, to my parents, and to the 
gods of Greece. To thee I recommend my 
fon, whom thou didft ufe to fee with plea- 
furc. Look on him as a trail depofited, by 
me, 
me, ift thy. hands. Atthefe words Cat- 
lirrhoe ftied a flood of tears, and the womea 
burft into Waitings. And now Callirrhoc 
leaving the fliip, bowed tp Statira ; and blitfh*- 
tog, delivered her the letter, faying:——* 
Give this to the haplefs Dionyfius, whom 
I earneftly recommend to thee, and to the 
king. Coafole him, I befeech thee ; for 1 
am afraid he will lay violent hands on him- 
felf, when feparated from me.- The wo- 
men would probably have talked much longer 
together ; have broke again into lamentations, 
and kitted each other; had not the pilots 
given notice, that they were going to leave 
the harbour. Callirrhoe, the moment before 
(he went on board, adored Venus, faying :— 
Thanks to thee (O Goddefs !) for the good I 
low enjoy. Thou art reconciled to me at 
laft. 
C *7* 1 
laft. Grant me theo to fee again my native 
Syracufe. A vaft Tea lies between, and tremen- 
dons waters are ready to receive me \ yet (hall 
I not be under the leaft apprehenfions, if 
thou bnt bear me company in the voyage.— 
Not a fingle Egyptian went on board Deme- 
trius's (hip, without firfl: taking leave of Chae- 
reas, and kifling his head and haod ; his 
amiable conduit having won him univerfal 
loves Chaereas permitted this fleet to fail 
out firft ; when praifes, intermixed with kind 
wifhes, echoed through the wide-extended 
ocean. Thus did thefe proceed on their 
voyage. 
V. And now the Perfian monarch, having 
triumphed over his enemies, had fent a per- 
fon into Egypt, to fettle his affairs in that 
9 king- 
kingdom ; whilft himfelf haded to Aradus, 
where his confort had been left. But being 
arrived near Chius and Tyre, s and offering 
facrifices to Hercules for the conquefts at- 
chieved by him ; a courier brought advice, 
that the Egyptian fliips had facked Aradus, 
and left nothing upon that iflaud. To this the 
courier added a mod forrowful piece of news, 
viz. that the queen was no more.— On this 
occafion the Perfian lords, upon pretence of 
weeping for Statira, bewailed the death of 
their refpe&ive relations or friends ; one hav- 
ing loft his wife, another his lifter, a third 
his daughter ; and every one fome kinfman, 
or perfon dear to him. After the Egyptian 
fleet had left Aradus, it was not known to 
which fea it was bound 5 when it happen* 
ed that the Perfians fpied, the day following, 
Vol. II. N fome 
j 
[ I7» J 
fome Egyptian (hips, whofe courfe was doubt- 
ful, bearing down upon them. The Per- 
fians were furprized at the fight, and knew 
not what to make of it ; but were much 
more aftoniflied, when they perceived the 
royal ftandard flying in Demetrius's fhip; 
a thing never feen except when the king is 
on board. This caufed a noife and confufion 
as though an enemy had been near; when 
they went Inftantly to Artaxerxes, and cried 
thus: Perhaps another king of Egypt 
may have rifen up ! Artaxerxes defcended 
haftily from his throne ; and running to the 
fea-fliore, made the fignal for battle. The 
king, as- there were no ftiips at hand, drew 
up fuch forces as were ready armed in the 
harbour. By this time fome had bent the 
bow, while others were going to hurl the 
fpearj 
r 179 i . 
fpear ; tvhich Demetrius obfervlng, he gave 
notice thereof to the queen, who coining 
forth from under the pavillion, and (hewing 
herfelf to the multitude ; they immediately 
threw down their arms, and fell . proftratc 
before her. The king could not contain 
himfelf ; but leaping firft into the (hip, before 
it was come clofe to the (hore, he clafped 
his confort with the utmoft fondnefs ; and 
fliedding tears of joy, cried ':- Deareft 
wife ! what gracious Deity has reftored thee, 
at laft, to my longing arms ? That my queen 
fliould be loft, and afterwards recovered, ap- 
pears equally incredible. By what magic is 
it that I, who left thee on fhore, now find 
thee at fea ? Statira replied : Thou 
receiveft.me, as a gift, from Callirrhoe.— 
Artaxerxes, at this name, felt his former 
N 2 wound 
C 180 ] 
wound bleed afrefti j when dire&ing his eyes 
to the eunuch Artaxates : Conduft me 
(fald he) to Callirrhoe, that I may thank her 
for, this kind aft. — The queen , anfwered ;— 
I will tell thee every thing ; faying which, 
they walked together from the harbour to 
the palace. There Statira, having command- 
ed every one, (the eunuch excepted,) to 
withdraw ; (he related ail that had pad in 
Aradus, and in Cyprus ; and, at lad, de- 
livered Chaereas's letter to the king, who* 
after reading it, found himfelf agitated by 
numberlefs paffions. He was exafperated 
that thofe he held mod dear had been made 
captives: He was forry, that himfelf had 
forced Chaereas to defcrt from his fervice; 
and yet he thought himfelf obliged to Chse- 
reas, for having taken Callirrhoe for ever 
from 
r *8i r« 
from his fight. But, of all the paffions, envy 
tortured him moft, he crying: Thrice 
happy Choreas, and much more fortunate 
than me ! After they had talked over 
every thing, Statira deflred the king to com- 
fort Dionyiius : fhe obferving, that this was 
Callirrhoe's requeft. Hereupon Artaxerxes, 
turning to the eunuch: -Let Dionyfius 
({aid the monarch;} come in. And now 
the Ionian, elated with the moft fanguine 
hopes, inftantly obeyed the royal fummons ; 
he being totally ignorant of the vidorics 
won by Chaereas ; imagining that Callirrho? 
was with the other women i and that he was 
fent for, by the king, in order for her to 
be reftored to him, as a reward for his 
important fcrvices. Dionyiius was no fooner 
introduced, than Artaxerxes related to him 
N 3 every 
[ 1*2 3 
every particular. On this occafion the Ionian 
fliowed uncommon tf ifdom, and fortitude of 
mind : and, like one who fliould ftand un- 
moved, when a thunder-bolt fell at his feet 5 
he heard, with fiirprizing cahnnefs, the follow- 
ing words, more dreadful than thunder, pro- 
nounced, viz. That Choreas was con- 
ducting Callirrhoe back to Syracufe : — Diony- 
fius not thinking it fafe for him to reveal his 
fbrrow, as the queen was found again. — 
Moft willingly, {faid the king) O Dionyfius,! 
would I reftore Callirrhoe to thee, was it 
in my power ; as thou haft given me the moft 
fhining proofs of thy affe&ion and fidelity. 
But as this is impoffible, I now beftow 
on thee the government of all Ionia j and 
thou (halt be enrolled, in the public records, 
as the chief benefa&or to the royal houfe.—* 
Dionyfius 
r »«3 3 
Dionyilus then fell proftrate before his fo- 
vereign; expreffing the deep fenfe of ^ his 
great obligations to him. He then hailed 
away, in order that, when alone, he might 
weep at fall liberty. Statira, as he was de- 
parting, gave him the letter privately. Dio- 
nyfius being returned home, ihut himfelf up ;, 
when well knowing Callirrboe's hand writing, 
he firft luffed the letter ; then opened, and 
preffing it to his bofom, held' it there a long 
time, as though the adored Callirrhoe had 
been prefent; his fa ft -flowing tears not per- 
mitting him to read it. After taking his 
fill of weeping, he began to perufe it, and 
firft kifled Callirrhoe's name 5 when coming 
to thefe words: To Dimyfius^ her patron and 
btnefaftor :— Alas! (faid be) no longer huf- 
band;- Then continuing \~For thou art 
N 4 my 
t 184 ] 
my patron and benefafidr*——Whzt good 
(faid Dionyfias) can I have done thee, to 
merit that title ?— With regard to the letter, 
Dionyfius was beft pleafed with the excufe 
in it; and he read the fame words over and 
over again, as Callirrhoe feemed to have left 
him againft heV will j fo volatile is love, and 
fo eafily do we perfuade ourfelves that we 
are beloved. Then gazing on his fon ; lifting 
him tfp, and fondly clafpihg him feveral 
times: Thou, O my child! (faid he) 
' wilt one day go to thy mother, fince it is 
her injun&ion : while haplefs I (hall fpend 
my fad days in folitude, having brought all 
thefe evils upon myfelf. A foolifh jealoufy, 
and Babylon, proved my ruin.— Having fpoke 
thus, he prepared to go down to Ionia with 
all poffible expedition ; imagining that the 
length 
C »8 5 i 
length, and the diversity of the journey; hi$ 
command over fo many cities ; and the 
houfes which Callirrhoe dwelt in at Miletus, 
would foothe his profound melancholy. 
VI. Such was the fituation of matters in 
Afia ; during which Chaereas had a profpe- 
fous voyage to Sicily; the wind blowing 
always right a-ftern, and himfelf being in 
the open fea with large gallies : notwith- 
ftanding which he was very much afraid^ 
that he poffibly fhould be expofed to the 
"rage of fome malicious Deity. Being come 
within fight of Syracufe, Choreas command- 
ed the captains to adorn their refpedtive gal- 
lies ; and to advance in clofe order, as it was 
a dead calm. The people in the city fpying 
them, fome cried :— r Whence come thefe 
fhips ? 
r 186 ] / 
fhips ? Perhaps from Athens. Be Hertao- 
crates informed of this.- Immediately a 
man hafted to him, and cried : O 
Prartor ! what is to be done ? Shall we (hut 
the ports, or put to fea, and meet yon gal- 
lies : for we know not whether a greater fleet 
is not behind, of which thefe veflels may be 
only the van ? Hermocrates, at thefe 
words, flew from the public fquare to the 
fea-fliorej and fent out a pinnace, which 
being come near to the fleet of gallies, the 
captain of the pinnace haled them, and en* 
quired who they were ? ■ ■ To this one of 
the Egyptians, by Chaereas's command, re- 
plied : We are merchants, from Egypt) 
and bring a cargo which will fill the Syra- 
cufians with joy.— Do not then (faid the 
other) come into the harbour all together ; 
for 
[ i8 7 ] 
for the ftiips I foe are not trading veflHs, but 
long gallies; and feeraingly fitted out for 
war. Let therefore one galley only enter 
the port, while all the reft lie out at fea.— 
This fhall be done, faid the other. — Here» 
upon, firft entered Chaereas's galley ; on the 
deck whereof flood a pavillion, with Baby- 
lonifti curtains round it. The moment it was 
got near the harbour, this was inftantly croud» 
ed ; the common people being naturally cu- 
rious, and very fond of novelty ; and they 
then flocked to the port from a variety of 
motives. At the fight of the pavillion, they 
imagined that merchandize, of precious value, 
was under it. Hereupon fome guefTed-one 
thing, fome another; and all conjectured 
every thing except the right ; for it would 
have been abfurd to fuppofe, that thofe who 
thought 
1 1 
thought Chaereas really dead, could believe 
him to be returning to his native country with 
i 
a fleet of (hips, and in fuch great fplendor. 
The parents of Chaereas did not go out all 
that day. Hermocrates attended as chief 
magiftrate on this occaiion; but clad in 
mourning, and in a private manner. While 
the multitude were thus in doubt and fuf- 
pence, with their eyes fixed on the galley, 
the curtains of the paviliion were fuddenly 
undrawn; when Calllrrhoe was difcovered 
Ui a robe of Tyrian purple, and reclin- 
ing on a golden bed; with Chaereas by 
her fide, in the habit of chief admiral. 
Never did thunder flrike fo forcibly on 
the ear, nor lighting on the eye, as this 
fpeftacle : nor did any man, at his finding 
a treafure, ever break into fuch loud excla- 
mations, as did the populace at this unex- 
pefted 
r i»9 3 
pe&ed fight, which furpaft all the powers of 
defcription. Hermocrates flying to the tent, 
folded his daughter in his arms, and cried :— 
Art thou then living (my child!) or do I 
fee a phantom ? O father ! (replied Callir? 
rhoe) I now really live, fince my eyes behold 
thee. Tears of joy ran down every cheek. 
In the mean time, Polycharmus brought the 
reft of the gallies into the harbour; Chae- 
reas having given him the command of the 
whole fleet, ever fince their departure from 
Cyprus ; it being impoffible for him to at* 
tend to any thing except his Callirrhoe. Im-. 
mediately the port was filled; when the 
fame fpedacle was exhibited, as after a naval 
engagement with the Athenians,; the gallies 
now returning crowded from the war,and com- 
manded by a Syracufian admiral. The voices 
of 
r *9<> ] 
of the multitude, fainting from the fea, were 
blended wkh thofe ♦ which aofwered them 
from fhore : when repeated mutual, kind 
expreffions, praifes, and good wjfhes, echoed 
round and round. Afterwards came Ch3e- 
reas's father, who had fainted through ex- 
cefs of joy. All the youths brought up 
with Chaereas, and who had been his com- 
panions in the Gymnafium, came and crouded 
round him. They being vaftly defirous of 
faluting him; wfiile the women flocked no 
lefs eagerly to Callirrhoe. She now appear- 
ed more beautiful than ever, in the eyes of 
the people : and feemed a new Venus emerg- 
ing from the ocean. Chaereas then approach- 
ing Hermocrates, and his father, faid: * 
Take ! O take the riches of the great king.— 
At his command countlefs heaps of gold and 
i fiber 
[ V 1 
filver were inftantly brought from on board 
the galley. He afterwards produced, to the 
Syracufians, ivory, amber, rich fluffs; and 
every thing precious and fplendid, whether 
with regard to the materials orworkmanfhip; 
together with the bed and table of the great 
king : infomuch that the whole city was now 
filled, not as formerly' in the Sicilian war, 
with the mean goods and efieds of the poor 
Athenians ; but, (a furprizing and unheard 
of circum fiance !) with the fpoils of the Medes, 
in time of peace. 
VII. Inftantly the whole multitude cried : — 
Be an aflembly held :— All longing to fee 
and hear the united pair. And now the 
theatre was crouded, in a (hotter time than 
words could exprefs, with men and women : 
when 
r 19* ] 
When Chsreas entering fingly, all cried with 
the loudeft voice :— Be Callirrhoe called :— 
Hermocrates being greatly beloved by the' 
people, he, to oblige them, led his daughter 
into the theatre. The populace firft direft- 
ing their eyes to heaven, praifed the gods ; 
and thanked them more for this day, than for 
that on which they had triumphed over the 
Athenians. They were afterwards divided 
into two parties ; the men applauding Chae- 
reas, and the women Callirrhoe : then both 
together, which belt pleafed the enraptured 
pair. Afterwards Callirrhoe, being fatigued 
with the voyage, and the violent agitation of 
her fpirits, faluted her country; and was 
conduced home/ ftut the aflembly detained 
Chaereas* they being extremely defirous to 
bear the entire relation of his voyage, and 
* > the 
2 
I «93 1 
the caufe of his abfence. However, he be* 
gaa by the laft incidents } being unwilling to 
fadden the minds of the aflembly, by a de- 
tail of melancholy events. But they perfifted, 
faying: Begin, (as thou art requeued) 
from the firft. Tell us all, and omit not a 
Jingle circumftance. Chaereas found a dif- 
ficulty on this occafion; he being afhamed 
to relate many things which had befallen 
him, contrary to his will. But Hermocrates 
faid :— Blulh not (my fon !) though thou 
lhouldeft inform us of particulars which may 
be derogatory to thyfelf, or excite our for- 
row; fince, as the end \% honourable and 
propitious, a veil will thereby be thrown over 
all the part. Whatever we fupprefs, raifea 
a fufpicionof fomething ftill worfe, from our 
Vol . II f O very 
C 194 ] 
very fileoce. Thou art fpeaking -to thy 
cpuntry, and to thy parents, for both of 
which thou haft an equal affefrion. The 
people are already acquainted with thy firfl 
adventures, as they gave thee in marriage* 
We aU know the fnares prepared for thee 
by thy rivals; which inflaming thee with 
idle jealoufy, thou didft give thy wife an un- 
happy blow : that ihe, being fuppofed dead, 
was interred with all poffiblc magnificence : 
and that thou, being charged with murther, 
didft condemn thy fdf ; thou wiftung to die 
with thy wife : but that the people acquitted 
thee, on finding the deed involuntary. What 
followed has been told us: how the facri- 
legtous Theron, having broke open the Mau* 
(oleum in the flight, aad fining CalHrrhoe 
alive 
Alive therein; put her, with all the' female 
ornaments and the fepulchral treasures, op 
board a pyrate veflel, and fold her in Ionia/ 
la what manner thou , failing from Syracufe 
In fearch of thy wife, didft not pieet with 
her; but coming up afterwards at feawith 
a pyrate veflel, didft find ail the robbers oil 
board her dead wkh thirft, except Theroo, 
whom thou bronghteft alive before an af* 
fembly of the people j when he being put to 
the torture, died at laft on the croft. Next, 
how Syracufe fent out a galley, with an em* 
bafly on board, for Cajjjrrhoe : and in what 
manner Polycharmus accompanied thee fpon-f 
taneoufly in the voyage. Thefe feveral par- 
ticulars we already know. Do thou there- 
fore relate all that has happened to thee, 
O a fine* 
r 
* 
finte thy departure from this city.—— Chac- 
reas then proceeded thus :— After having 
happily croflcd the Ionian fea> we caft an- 
chor on the eftate of a Milefian, Dionyfius 
by name $ a man the mod renowned in all 
Ionia, for riches, for birth, and for glory. 
It was he who bought Callirrhoe of Theron 
for a talent :— *-^Ficre be not afraid, (con- 
tinued Cbaereas) (he not being made a (lave; 
but becoming a miftrefs the inftant (he was 
purchafed ; for as Dionyfius loved her, he 
would not ufe violence; nor could he, on 
the other hand, prevail with himfelf to fend 
back to Sicily, a woman whom he ido- 
lized. Afterwards Callirrhoe, finding that 
(he had conceived by our cohabitation ; and 
being ctefirous of preferring a citizen for 
4 yon. 
t 197 J 
yon, (he thence was reduced to the necef- 
fity of marrying Dionyfius ; and being de- 
livered feven months after of a fon, (he art- 
fully pretended to have come before her 
time ; in order that the child might be fup- 
pofcd the 'offspring of Dionyfius, and re- 
ceive an education fuitable to his high rank. 
. Thus (0 met) of Syracufe) is your wealthy fel- 
low-citizen nurtured in Milptus, under the eye 
6f an UluArious man* He is a Greek, and of 
noble defcent. Let us then not envy the 
child fo rich sin inheritance. — Thefe parti- 
culars I was told afterwards* 
Vllf. To return to my. flory.— -Land- 
ing at Miletus, and happening to fpy a fta- 
3 tue 
tue of Caltirrhoe id a temple, I thence con* 
cciVed fair hopes : but fotne robbers flying 
over fea, came, in the dead of night, and 
fct fire to our galley. They then morthered 
moft of the crew y and after throwing Poly- 
char mus and ipyfelf in chains, fold us in 
Caria.~At thefe words the multitude burft 
into moauings, when Chsereas fpake thus :~ 
Permit me to fupprefs what befel us after- 
wards^ as confining of events far more fad 
than afry-' I have yet related.-— — *But as the 
people clamoured aloud/ and infifted on 
hearing the whole, Cbareas went on as fol- 
lows. The man who purchafed us was 
fervanfc to Mhhridates governor of Carta; 
33d be commanded us, then fettered) to 
plough 
{ 199 ). 
plough the ground. About this time fottte 
of my fellow-flaves having killed their keeper, 
Mkhridates fefatenced us all to die on the 
crofs. As I was leading to execution, and 
going to fuffer, Polychafmus happened to 
utter my name, which wfes well ftntftfn to 
Mithfidates. 'this governor had been Dio- 
iiyfius's gueft m Miletus ; and -was prefeat 
when my funeral obfequies Wefte folemnized ; 
for Callifrhoe, on her being tcfld concerning 
the burning of the galley, and of the robbers,, 
had concluded me to be dead ; and there- 
upon raifed a fplendid Maufoleuiri to my ri£- 
'mory. Inftantly Mithridates ordered ffi£, 
when near expiring, to be taken frota the 
crofs j and afterwards ranked me among his 
bofom friends. He next ufeif Iifruttfroft en* 
O 4 deavours 
{ 200 J 
deavours to get Callirrhoc rcftored to me.; 
and, for that purpofe, obliged me to write 
to her* Now it happened that the letter-, 
through the carelefnefs of the meflepger, fell 
into the hands of Dionyfius, who, pot be- 
lieving me alive; but, on the contrary, 
imagining that Mithridates wanted to feduofc 
fcis wife Callirrhoe, wrote forthwith to the 
king of Perfia j falfely charging Mithridates 
With a defign to drayr her away. Hereupop 
the monarch, being refolved to try the caufe 
himfelf, fummoned all the parties to appear 
^t his court. This brought us to Babylon, 
whither Dionyfips conducing Callirrjioe, 
her beauty, bacame* Ijy that means, rcnowqr 
ed throughout all Afia. On this occafion 
Mithridates made me the companion of his 
journey. 
r aoi } 
journey. Being got to court, we Arenuoufly 
defended our great caufe before the king, 
who foon acquitted Mithridates; and pro- 
pifed to judge whether Dionyfius, or my* 
fclf, ought to poflefs Callirrhoe j who, dur- 
ing that, interval, was committed to the care 
of Statira. Think, (O Syracufians !) think, 
how oftep I fcould have laid violent handf 
on myfelf, thus torne from a wife I adored ; 
had not Polycharmus, my only faithful 
friend among the many who aflumed that 
name, withheld my hand. The king nc- 
gle&ed the trial ; he himftlf being enamour- 
ed with Callirrhoe ; though fre bad not re- 
courfe to perfuafive arts, nor employed vio- 
lence. In the mean time, Egypt breaking 
into open rebellion, a mighty war enfucd, 
Which yet h£$ been 6f the MgheA advantage 
tome: for the queen, having taken Callir- 
rhoe with her, I was deceived by a falfe re- 
port, declaring that flic had beert decreed to 
* 
Dionyfius ; which firing me with revenge* 
I deferted from the king of Perfia to the 
Egyptian. On this occafion, great exploit* 
« *  
Were atchieted by me ; I fefcing upon Tyre 
Which was almoff impregnable. Being theh 
appointed admiral, I overcame the king of 
Perfia in a naval engagement; and took 
Aradus, where ArtaxerXes had lodged Sta- 
tira; with the immenfe riches which you 
have feen. Thus could I have made the 
Egyptian "matter of all Afia, had not that 
'monarchy fighting apart from me, loft his 
life in battle/ I now have gained you the 
i king 
C 20J ] 
king of Perfia's favour, by jby reftoring to 
him his confort ; and by fending back, co 
the chief of the Perfian nobility, either their 
mothers, their Mere, -their wives, or 
their daughters. I have brOflght hither the 
mod valiant among the G/eeks, with ftidi 
Egyptians as would follow me voluntarily! 
and another of your fleets, commanded by 
the grand-fon of HermoCrstt**, will, in duer 
time, come hither from letfa*-— Theft 
words were no fooner  ntteted, than th« 
whole multitude (boated far joy, and tin* 
plored every bleffing on bis head* Choreas, 
after he had prevailed with them to be fi~ 
lent: fpake thns— Let Callirrhee and I 
jrturt, in your prefence, the wanneft thank* 
to our friend Pol ycharams ; he having given 
ttt 
t *>4 ] 
til the fincereft, the ftrongeft marks of his 
affeftion and fidelity ; fo that, if you ap- 
prove of it, we will beftow on him our lifter 
in marriage, with part of the fpoils as her 
dowry.— -The people, with the loudcft 
fronts, approved of this propofal, crying:-— 
We (O Polycharmus !) do return thee thanks, 
thou mod excellent of men, and mod faithful 
of friends ! Thou haft done important Cer- 
vices to thy country,: and art worthy of Her- 
mocrates and of Chacrcas.- — Chaereas, after 
thefe acclamations, fpake as follows: -I 
intreat ye to beftow the freedom of your city 
on thefe three hundred Greeks, my powerful 
army.*— -To this aWb the people, with re- 
peated fliouts, confented, crying:—— They 
are worthy to be otir fellQw- citizens. — — * 
The 
t 205 3 
The votes being taken* they were declared 
duly defied, and enrolled as citizens accord* 
ingly. And now taking their feats, they 
formed part of die affembly. When Chae- 
reas prefented each of them with a talent j 
and Hermocrates gave every Egyptian a piece 
of land to cultivate. While the people con- 
tinued yet in the theatre, Callirrhoe, before 
(he returned home, went to the temple of 
Venus ; when clafping her feet, (he fell pro- 
itrate with her hair difheveled; and killing 
the Goddefs, fpake thus -—Venus ! I thank 
thee for haviqg fet Chsereas Again before mo 
in Syracufe; where, by thy favour, I firft 
when a virgin, beheld him. I do not now 
reproach thee (O Deity!) for my paft woes, 
I having been decreed to fuffer them. I only 
befeech 
