


CHRYSAL 



Library of Early Novelists 

Edited by E, A. BAKER, M.A. 

Sack luiih an Introduction by the Editor or some other 

speeialitt in early fiction. 

Large Crown Zvo, hickram, gilt tops, 6c. neteach. 

1 Life and Opinions of John Buncle, Esquire. 

By Thomas Amory. 

2 Adventures of Don Sylvio de Rosalva. By 

C. M. WiELAND. 

3 The Heptameron. By Margoeeite of Navarre; 

translated by A. Machen. 

4 The Decameron. By Boccaccio; translated by J. M. 

RiGG ; with Essay by J. Addington Symonds. 

5 Novels and Novelettes. By Mrs Aphra Behn. 

6 Gesta Romanorum. Translated, with Introduction 

and Notes, by Rev. C. Swan. 

7 The Fool of Quality. By Henry Brooke. With 

Kingsley's Introduction, and a new Life of the Author 
by E. A. Baker. 

8 Gulliver's Travels (jst edition) and other writings of 

Jonathan Swift. 

9 The Monk. By M.G.Lewis. 

10 Moll Flanders and Roxana. By Daniel Defoe. 

11 Early English Prose Romances. Edited by w.j. 

Thoms. 

12 Arcadia. By Sir Philip Sidney. 

13 Chrysal ; or, The Adventures of a Guinea. 

The Novels, Sp'c, o/"Dekker, Greene, rt«rf Breton, edited 
by Oliphant Smeaton, each in one volume, will shortly be 
added to the series, as well as a number of other hitherto 
■unobtainable books. 



CHRYSAL 

OR THE 

ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 



CHARLES JOHNSTONE 

Edited, with an Introduction, 

BV 

E. A. BAKER, M.A. 




LONDON 

GEORGE ROUTLEDGE & SONS, LTD. 

NEW YORK: E. P. DUTTON & CO. 



INTRODUCTION 

The lot of the satirist is not a happy one, not more felicitous,, 
as a rule, than the fate which he invokes upon his victims- 
George Meredith says of one of his characters, an industrious 
manufacturer of acidulated epigrams, ' He is not happy in 
his business ; Colney suffered as heavily as he struck '. The' 
more he thrives in his trade of pubhc executioner, the surer- 
he is of his wages, hatred from his contemporaries and posthu- 
mous oblivion. Of Charles Johnstone, author of one of the 
most telhng satires in the EngUsh language, Chrysal, or the- 
Adventures of a Guinea, it is stated in one of the few scraps 
of biography that have come down to us (if so much can be- 
said of a faded  in an old Gentleman's Magazine), ' Con- 
viviaUty, and a turn for satirical observations in time left 
him few friends '. Though his book had extraordinary 
success at the time, and went rapidly into many editions,, 
Johnstone, in middle life, found himself a failure both in litera- 
ture and in law, his nominal profession ; and less than twenty- 
years before his death took the drastic step of starting afresh 
in another hemisphere and a different career. In 1782 he went 
to India, and became a journalist at Calcutta. India in those- 
days could hardly have been the most desirable haven for 
old age. But at any rate, Johnstone, having written his last 
satire the year before he set sail, made money on his news- 
paper, and for a few years before his death, for the first time 
in his life, was in affluence. 

It might reasonably be argued that the durability of satire 
must needs be in inverse ratio to its effectiveness, since this 
depends on two ephemeral elements, the force of its personal 
appUcation and the -virulence of its hatred. Comedy endures, 
satire is forgotten. The reason is in the nature of the two 
things. Of both alike the social function is to make man better 
by laughing at his aberrations from common sense. But- 
comedy does this gently and lo-yin^ly. Comedy, in short,, 
laughs with, satire laughs at, humanity. The Comic Spirit, 
according to Mr Meredith, looks into the hearts of men, and 
reveals the causes of their foUy. That is to say, sympathy 



Vi INTRODUCTION 

and love of mankind are necessary to true comic insight. This, 
•of course, must be the foundation of all aft that is to be great 
and permanent. But the short-lived triumph of satire rests 
on the negation of sympathy, the contrary of love. Scorn, 
indignation, hatred — these are the passions that give it 
vitality ; and happily for our race, they are the most tran- 
sitory of human emotions. 

All that we know about the life of Charles Johnstone is 
•comprised in a few scraps of biography embedded in back 
numbers of The Gentleman's Magazine, and in one or two 
-obscure dictionaries of Irish worthies. He was born about 
1719 at Carrigogunnel, in County Limerick, being descended 
■irom the Johnston es of Annandale ; in fact, one writer states 
that he was well known to be the next, though a distant, 
heir to the now dormant mafquisate of Annandale, but did 
not claim it owing to his own lack of means and the circum- 
stance that no property went with the peerage. He was 
educated at Trinity College, Dublin, but does not appear to 
have taken a degree. Being called to the Bar, he was forced 
by his deafness to employ himself in the capacity of chamber 
counsel, which he found far from remunerative, and accord- 
ingly he tried to make a living by literature. His great hit 
was the work which follows, Chrysai ; or, the Adventures of a 
Guinea, begun as a pastime whilst he was on a visit to the 
Earl of Mount-Edgcumbe in Devonshire. In its first form 
it consisted of two volumes, which were sold to Johnson the 
bookseller, and published in 1760, and went into a third 
•edition by the year 1762. The publisher urged him to write 
more, and two further volumes appeared in 1765, completing 
the book as we have it. 

A work professing to reveal political secrets and to give 
the seamy side of the life of the best abused men of the time 
was bound to be a popular success. The pufi preliminary 
•shows on what the author was calculating : ' A dispassionate, 
-distinct account of the most remarkable transactions of the 
present time all over Europe, with curious and interesting 
-anecdotes of the parties principally concerned in these scenes, 
•especially in England ; the whole interspersed with several 
most whimsical and entertaining instances of the whimsical 
•connection between high and low life, and the power of little 
causes to produce great events '. This appeared in a news- 
paper in April 1760, and the first edition of the book a month 
later. A key to the characters is said to have been given to 
Lord Mount-Edgcumbe and to Captain Mears, in whose ship 
Johnstone afterwards sailed to the East.. This key, or more 
probably a garbled version of it, for the inaccuracies are 



INTRODUCTION \n. 

patent, is printed in a very scarce book published in 1814, 
William Davis's Olio of Bibtiographical and Literary Anecdotes 
and Memoranda, which is the sole authority for several of thfr 
more obscure identifications given in the following notes. 

Johnstone wrote several other works that were, presumably,, 
failures, and are now utterly forgotten : The Reverie, or a 
Flight to the Paradise of Fools, a satire, 1762 ; The History of 
Arsaces, Prince of Betlis, 1774 ; The Pilgrim, or a Picture of 
Life, 1775 ; A History of John Juniper, Esq., alias Jack- 
Juniper, a political effusion in which is designated ' a certain 
republican character now living ', 1781. It is told of him 
also that he wrote a tragedy, which a certain manager refused, 
but nevertheless kept a copy, clipped and altered it, and 
produced later with great success. ' His having been employed 
in the concerns of a petty German state ', says the writer 
already quoted in The Gentleman's Magazine (this may account- 
for his caustic observations on the subsidy system), ' preserved 
for him a certain countenance amongst pubhc men in the great 
offices, in spite of the aversion aroused by his satirical habits '. 
He was induced to go to India by hopes of assistance from 
persons who had gained appointments partly through his 
influence in rosier times, and among others he relied on an 
old comrade in the Temple, Lord Macartney, now Governor 
of Madras. 

The Brilliant, in which he sailed with Captain Mears,, 
foundered ofE the island of Joanna, between the coast of 
Africa and Madagascar, and the survivors, among whom were 
the captain and Johnstone, sufiered terrible privations before 
they at length reached their destination. This, however, was 
the end of Johnstone's bad luck. He secured employinent 
as a journahst in Bengal, writing under the signature of 
Oneiropolos, and eventually became the proprietor of a news- 
paper. He amassed a considerable fortune by the profits; 
of his journal and by building speculations, and died atv-"' 
Calcutta about the year 1800. 

According to Fernand Drujon's Livres d. def, there have been 
twenty augmented editions of Chrysal since its first appearance 
in 1760 ; and the "book was even translated into French, under 
the title Chrysal, ou les avantures d'une guinSe, histoire Anglaise,. 
trans. Jos. P. Frinais, Paris, 1768 or 1769. Drujon justly 
complains of the ' grossierete de quelques unes des scenes 
qu'il reprouve ', but adds, ' Comme le roman, 6crit d'un style' 
nerveux, riche de couleurs et d'images, ofErait au lecteur la 
cronique secrete de tous les principaux personages vivants 
et d'un grand nombre de libertins titres, il s'empara sur le 
ch9,mp de I'attention publique '. Johnstone himself declared! 



■viii INTRODUCTION 

that his intention was to draw ' general characters, therefore 
in the application of the key the reader must exercise his 
own judgment in distinguishing the real from the fictitious 
personages '. Such a disclaimer must be taken with a grain 
■of salt. 

It was a time when satire flourished unrestrained, save by 
the fear of physical retaliation ; and personalities were its 
<3hoicest weapon. No age in our history was so prohfic in 
satire, though this portion of our literature is the least re- 
membered. Smollett and Fielding, with a host of writers 
whose names are known to-day only by the student, waged 
a fierce war of scurrilous abuse with little humour in it, from 
day to day and week to week, in newspaper and magazine. 
Foote and Woodward travestied public characters upon the 
-stage ; scores of incompetent poets like Paul Whitehead 
earned money and notoriety by ephemeral lampoons ; and 
poets of genius like Gray and Cowper were wrung to out- 
bursts of fiery sarcasm by the follies and depravity of the 
great. Charles Churchill, as suddenly as Byron, woke one 
morning to find himself famous, and able after years of poverty 
to command almost any price he wished for his furious pas- 
quinades ; Hogarth was but the one true artist among a crowd 
■of indifferent caricaturists, and Junius but the most pungent 
among an army of acrid critics in the press. Satire was the 
literary fashion, and clever personaUties were a marketable 
■commodity. The brilliant success of Chrysal (which ought 
to have made its author's fortune had he been fairly treated 
by his publisher), was due to the lifelikeness of the portraiture 
and the sprinkling in of well-known incidents. At any rate, 
the book ceased to be reprinted only when the last of the 
objects of its ridicule were in their graves. 

The period of history that Chrysal ranges over is the last 
few years of George II and the opening of the succeeding 
reign. The book leaves off just after the first Wilkes agitation, 
when that ' patriot ', finding England too hot to hold him, 
went into exile on the Continent. Although the story wanders 
in a random way, and pays small attention to chronological 
■order, it covers roughly the period of the Seven Years' War, 
that is, the years 1757-63. Both at home and abroad this 
was a period of strilcing incidents and remarkable men. War 
was raging all over the globe. In Europe, Frederick the 
-Great was fighting France, Austria, and Russia. The safety 
-of Hanover being at stake, Britain was dragged into the 
contest, furnishing the King of Prussia and other German 
potentates with a regular subsidy, and supplying a con- 
tingent that fought gloriously at Minden and other battlefields. 



INTRODUCTION ix 

In the East Indies, Olive and Coote were winning victories 
and establishing the British ascendency ; in the West Indies 
our fleet was engaged in a ceaseless struggle with France 
and then with Spain. A series of expeditions against the 
French in Canada culminated in Wolfe's triumph at Quebec ; 
whilst in the Mediterranean and the narrow seas the navy 
and a host of privateers were destroying the enemy's fleete 
and making enormous captures of mercantile shipping. 

At home, when the narrative opens, everything was un- 
settled, though there was no clear contest of political parties. 
In 1754 died Henry Pelham, the all-powerful leader of the 
Whigs, and left to his incompetent brother Newcastle the 
task of governing England. From that time onward for 
many years ministries were more short-lived than ever before, 
and each carried in its own bosom the elements of disinte- 
gration. These disruptive forces were the crude personal 
aims of the men forming them, many of whom are portrayed 
in all their selfishness and turpitude in the s following. 
The contentious attitude of Henry Fox and Pitt upset the initial 
arrangements of the new premier, forcing him to admit the 
ambitious and thoroughly unscrupulous Fox into his Cabinet. 
Newcastle was an unpopular man, and well known to be 
unequal to the strain of conducting the affairs of the nation 
through the perils of a great war, now recognized as imminent. 
The country was not only unprepared for war, but in a state 
of irresolution. Braddock's defeat before Fort Duquesne, 
in July 1755, was a terrible shock to Newcastle, who was 
bewildered with nervousness. The whole country was in 
a state of panic ; and, as related by Chrysal, the suspected 
movements of the French at Brest and Dunkirk threw the 
ministry into humiUating terrors. As a compromise, it was 
decided not to declare war, but that French ships, whether 
merchantmen or vessels of war, should be seized, and con- 
vulsive efiorts made to bring the army and navy up to strength. 
At this point, the government had wind of the threatened 
attack on Minorca. Still vacillating, they let the time go 
by for interrupting it, and then sent out Byng with a fleet 
hastily manned, and orders, so it was alleged, of an indecisive 
nature. The fall of Minorca, and the sacrifice of Byng to 
the popular outcry, are related here. 

Meanwhile, the Newcastle ministry had fallen, after desperate 
attempts had been made by that famous old dispenser of 
patronage to gain the support of WiUiam Pitt, the strongest 
statesman of the day. The Duke of Devonshire and Pitt, 
after considerable negotiation, succeeded in forming a Cabinet ; 
but it could not last in opposition to Newcastle and the powerful 

b 



X INTRODUCTION 

interests he controlled. In five months, Pitt was dismissed, 
and became the most popular man in England. For eleven 
weeks there was no government, although the war was now 
in full swing. Then the famous coalition ministry was formed 
by Newcastle and Pitt, the latter declaring that he had 
' borrowed the majority of the Duke of Newcastle to carry 
on the government of the country '. Under this arrangement 
Fox, though excluded by his old rival Pitt from a seat in the 
Cabinet, obtained the office of Paymaster of the Forces and 
£25,000 a year, with unlimited opportunities for peculation. 
The coalition, in spite of these heterogeneous elements, had 
one of the most glorious careers in the annals of British 
governments. A series of splendid victories brought the 
country out of the depths of panic to the position of mistress 
of the seas, and laid the secure foundations of her empire in 
East and "West. 

In 1760, the accession of George III brought a new force 
to bear on the strength of this ministry and the continuance 
of its policy. The new king had very definite personal in- 
tentions — he meant to govern — and his first object was to 
break down the Whig ascendency, and get the appointment 
of ministers into his own hands. Opposed to the war pohcy 
of Pitt, he dissembled his actual purposes for a while, playing 
ofi Pitt against Newcastle, and Newcastle against Pitt, by 
means of his favourite, the Earl of Bute, whom he proposed 
to make prime minister as soon as events allowed. Early 
in 1762, Bute entered the Cabinet. By the end of the year 
Pitt had resigned, a little too soon for the satisfaction of 
Bute and the ' king's friends ', who found themselves with 
a war on their hands that they had not the abiUty to carry 
on. Very soon, moreover, as Pitt had anticipated, war broke 
out with Spain, involving them in further embarrassments. 
The predominant partner got rid of, it was easy to oust New- 
castle ; and Bute became prime minister in May 1762, with 
a Cabinet comprising George Grenville, Sir Francis Dashwood, 
Halifax and Bedford, with Henry Fox in his favourite post 
as Paymaster. 

Still the war proceeded gloriously, Pitt's measures con- 
tinuing to bear fruit ; but the government had determined 
to bring it to a speedy conclusion. The Peace of Paris was 
forced through the Houses by means of wholesale bribery, 
Fox undertaking to manage the Commons in return for the 
promise of a peerage. The peace was most unpopular ; in 
spite of the sterling benefits to England, it did not give 
her all she had a right to demand. Dashwood's 
financial blunders, an improvident loan, and a ludicrous 



INTRODUCTION xi 

tax on cider, aggravated the popidar clamour against the 
government. 

All this while Bute, the target for the mob and innumerable 
pamphleteers, was being assailed with unparalleled virulence 
by Wilkes in The North Briton, a periodical called forth as 
a counterblast to The Briton, Smollett's hireling journal on 
the government side. On the 19th April 1763, the King's 
Speech in proroguing Parliament described the peace as 
honourable to his crown ; on the 23rd appeared the famous 
No. XLV of The North Briton, denouncing the speech, and 
pouring obloquy on the ministers. The incidents that ensued 
are related by Chrysal with very little disguise or distortion. 
The king took the article as a personal attack upon his in- 
tegrity, and moved heaven and earth to inflict vengeance 
on the writer. A general warrant was issued by the secre- 
taries of state, HaUfaz and Egremont ; forty-nine persons 
implicated in the printing and circulation of The North Briton 
were arrested ; and Wilkes being declared the author was 
imprisoned under the same illegal authority. On May 6th, 
Lord Chief Justice Pratt decided that he was entitled to 
privilege of ParUament, and set him at hberty, the decision 
being followed by a series of actions for damage against the 
secretaries of state and their officials. It is stated that this 
unfortunate transaction cost the government more than a 
hundred thousand pounds. Wilkes, of course, became a 
popular idol ; but in the next Parhament he was attacked 
with a bitterer animosity by the creatures of the government, 
the infamous Essay on Woman (which Wilkes did not write), 
being the instrument selected for his chastisement in the Lords, 
whilst the other House voted No. XLV a false and seditious 
libel, and ordered it to be burned by the hangman. Next 
day Wilkes was entrapped into his duel with the cowardly 
villain Martin, and as soon as his wound permitted he with- 
drew to Paris. Expulsion from the House of Commons 
and outlawry followed. To pursue his later history, the 
election for Middlesex and the agitation that evoked the 
Letters of Junius, would carry us beyond the period dealt 
with in Chrysal. 

Picturing the brawls and factions of the time, we can realise 
the spirit in which the book was put together. Many of the 
incidents of the Wilkes imbrogho and other hotly-contested 
affairs must have been set down by Johnstone almost at the 
moment when they occurred, to be read by excited§ partisans 
a few weeks later. Large parts of the book, indeed, have all 
the sting and force of the keenest and most uncompromising 
journahsm, and more deliberate and thoughtful force withal 



xii INTRODUCTION 

than that exhibited by Junius in the hurry of a controversy 
in the press. The public and the private life of Pox and 
Sandwich, Lord Bute, Bubb Dodington, Wilkes and Churchill, 
and scores of others known or unknown to history, were 
related with hostile candour, and their portraits painted so 
clearly that, in spite of the absence of names, no one could 
mistake their identity. 

One of the latest of the numerous reprints of Chrysal was 
edited by Sir Walter Scott, who compared the work with the 
Asmodeus of Lesage. Chrysal, or the Spirit of Gold, is em- 
bodied in a guinea, which passes through the hands of a 
number of eminent or obscure people, and gives an account 
of its experiences to an adept in the science of alchemy, whose 
unwearied constancy and perseverance have earned at length 
the right to receive the ' grand secret ', the revelation of the 
mysteries of nature. Chrysal is a spirit Uke Asmodeus, with 
the same supernatural powers of insight ; but there the 
resemblance ends, for the gold spirit has none of the tricky 
sprighthness and malicious wit that make the Spanish imp 
so entertaining a character. Johnstone was destitute of 
the good -humour and tolerance of Lesage ; he had a bitter 
and sarcastic nature, and wrote his satire with a gloomy 
seriousness that was indeed the usual tone of the satiric muse 
in his day. Comparing the two satires, which resemble each 
other so exactly in their machinery, Scott rightly distinguishes 
between the Horatian spirit of Asmodeus, which is that of 
comedy, and the scBva indignatio of Chrysal, which is the 
temper of Juvenal. As in Lesage's story, the initial device 
makes any further connection between the episodes un- 
necessary and undesirable. Chrysal passes from hand to 
hand, is now at court and now in a pawnbroker's drawer, one 
day consorts with admirals and ministers, and the next with 
alehouse-keepers and thieves. Its peregrinations and strange 
vicissitudes of fortune are themselves a source of considerable 
entertainment, as were those of the halfpenny and the shilling 
in Richard Bathurst and Addison's stories in The Adventurer 
and The Taller, from which Johnstone, no doubt, got some 
useful ideas. After resting a little while in the purse of General 
Wolfe, on the eve of his departure for Quebec, and witnessing 
his tender parting with Miss Lowther, afterwards Duchess 
of Bolton, the guinea sufiers a series of quick changes, which 
may be related in its own words : — 

My next master was one of the pillars of military glory, who 
had contributed a leg, an arm, and the scalp of his head to raise 
the trophies of the IVench in America. Though he was destitute 
of almost every comfort which nature really stands in need of, his 



INTRODUCTION xjii 

first care, on the acquisition of such a treasure as I was to him, was 
to gratify ths artificial wants of luxury. He went directly to a 
gin-shop, where he chucked me for a quartern of that liquid fire ; 
the taste of which was too pleasing to his palate, and the warmth 
too comfortable to his heart for him to be satisfied with so little. 
Quartern followed quartern till every sense was intoxicated, and 
he feU dead drunk on the floor, when his good-natured host had him 
kindly laid, to sleep off his debauch, on the next dunghill, first taking 
oare to prevent his fellow inhabitants of the streets from robbing 
him of the rest of his treasure, by picking his pocket of it himself. 
The scenes I saw in this service were all of the same kind, but I 
was soon relieved from the pain of them, my master giving me as a 
present to an ofiBcer of the custom that very night. By this faithful 
steward of the public I was next morning given to the factor of 
a gang of smugglers, to be laid out for him in lace in Flanders, 
whither he was just going on the affairs of his profession. With 
this industrious trader I went as far as Harwich, where, while they 
waited for the tide, he lost me at a game of oribbage to a person 
who was going over with him. 

This person was Aroinadab, the rascally agent of the king's 
mistress, the Countess of Yarmouth, and in his company the 
coin becomes immersed in the political broils and warlike 
ferment of Europe at the outbreak of the Seven Years' War. 
Chrysal is an eye-witness of the execution of Byng ; is able 
to give a full, true, and particular account of why Minorca 
was captured from the French ; which officers behaved with 
eowardice, and who did their duty, what ministers were re- 
sponsible for our unpreparedness ; and, in a word, to apportion 
praise and blame with the fearlessness and decision of a 
modern halfpenny paper. 

The guinea plays the part of special correspondent, visiting 
the battlefields of Frederick the Great and Ferdinand of 
Brunswick, victor of Minden ; being opportunely present at 
most of the important sea-fights, and witnessing the military 
movements against the French in Canada. The incompetence, 
treachery, and cowardice of king's officers are everywhere 
the theme ; the charges are corroborated by narratives 
supposed to be by an eye-witness ; and the guilty are por- 
trayed with personal touches that the man in the street 
recognized without a moment's hesitation. Chiysal sees 
everything as Johnstone wants it to be seen. He was a fervent 
admirer of Pitt and the war policy ; and so, when the guinea 
gets into the purse of Frederick of Prussia, it finds him to be, 
not only a heaven-born general, fighting the battles of the 
Lord and of Protestantism, but a high-souled ascetic, who 
sets his people a shining example of jjiety, humility, and 
virtue. The guinea is also an anti-Semite, at a time when 



iv INTRODUCTION 

hatred of tte Jews was inveterate all Europe over ; and it has 
the good fortune to be present at a celebration of the Feast 
of the Passover, when the Jews are represented as ofEering 
up a Christian child as Paschal lamb. 

This sort of thing is merely ridiculous ; but there is one 
ofEence of Johnstone's that cannot be forgiven, his ribald 
attack upon Whitefield. In this, as in many other cases, 
he was voicing a large section of public opinion, as can easily 
be verified by a glance at such contemporary works as Graves's 
Spiritual Quixote and Smollett's Hum'phry Clinker, not to 
mention Foote's scurrilous, but very amusing farce, The Minor. 
Johnstone surpasses even the last-named in the impudence 
and the grossness of his slander, and more still in the directness 
of its personality.. Not content with adopting all the stupid 
innuendoes which the vulgar sinner loves to hurl at the un- 
selfish zealot, he invents, or adopts without any attempt to 
sift, a lying but circumstantial account of Whitefield's birth 
and upbringing, and of his complicity with thieves and worse, 
that must have convinced ignorant readers that the saint was 
a hypocritical rogue. It is hard to suppose that an intelligent 
man like Johnstone swallowed all these monstrous fictions 
himself. His extravagance proves him a jaundiced and un- 
trustworthy witness, a man who when he chose played un- 
scrupulously to the mob. His book is a historical document 
only in the sense that it is a picture of public opinion at the 
time : still, public opinion is an important factor in the making 
of history. A man with the journahstic art of relating as fact 
the things he wants believed, with very little conscience, 
and an intimate and minute acquaintance with the backstairs 
chronicles of the period, Johnstone produced, in spite of his 
excesses, or by reason of them, one of the most damaging in- 
dictments of the public men he hated that was ever used in 
political warfare. While he remains the best or the only 
authority on such matters as the antics of the Medmenham 
bufioons, and a few other dark doings, most of his statements 
require the same discount as the future historian may be 
expected to apply to the views of personal conduct and private 
motive vouchsafed by the more prurient and sensational 
newspapers of the present day. 

Half at least of the satire is directed against systematic 
corruption in high places. Sandwich and Fox, the first Lord 
Holland, are pilloried as examples of peculation on a truly 
colossal scale ; and George the Second's mistress, the Countess 
of Yarmouth, is exhibited as a glaring illustration of how vast 
Bums were made by the sale of offices and titles. Ireland, she 
boasts, has been her privy purse for many years, appointments 



INTRODUCTION xv 

in that blissful country requiring from candidates no qualifica- 
tions whatever beyond the ability to pay her fee. ' An Irish 
title is the constant refuge of those sons of fortune who, not 
being born in the rank of gentlemen, or having forfeited it 
by their villainies, are desirous of changing their names for 
sonorous titles, to hide their disgrace, as it were, under a heap 
of honours '. City employments, however, even though of 
an inferior kind, were the most productive of blackmail. 
' Her Grace ' keeps a Ust of all the posts in the various services 
she controls, with their salaries and perquisites. Here is a bit 
of the dialogue respecting an appUcation for the high office 
of Tapster to the Lord Mayor. 

' Pray, what does he offer for it ' ? asks the Countess. 

' A thousand guineas, please your grace ', replied the woman, 
' which I really think enough for it considering everything ' 

' Do you, indeed ; but I do not. Why, it is rated to me here 
as worth five hundred pounds a year ; and is that worth no more 
than a thousand guineas ? Does the fellow value his own life oaly 
at two years' purchase ' ? 

' Five hundred pounds a year ! How can that be 1 The salary 
is no more than sixty ; there must be some mistake in yom: 
return '. 

' The salary ! The salary signifies nothing, it is the perquisites ! 
The perquisites are the thing ! Do you think any place is valued 
by the salary ? The perquisites of this place are very considerable ! 
Let me see. Why, he buys in all the beer and gin bimaelf, for 
which he can charge what price he pleases ; and then his own 
account is taken for the quantity that ia drank. Ay, indeed ; there 
must be a mistake in my return, to be sure, but not of the kind you 
mean. The place is rated too low ; for, with such opportunities, 
it must be worth twice the sum ; and I shall inquire into that matter 
before I dispose of the place. A thousand guineas for such a place ! 
I wonder at the fellow's conscience to make such an offer ' ! 

Yet the rapacity of a king's mistress was outdone by the 
greediness of king's officers in both services. Chrysal gives 
a lurid, but not, in all probabihty, an exaggerated picture, 
of the proceedings after the capture of the wealthy Spanish 
emporium of Havana in 1762, when the admiral and the general 
of the British forces, Sir George Pocock and the Earl of Albe- 
marle, not content with receiving the lion's share legally due to 
them of the enormous booty (actually £122,697, 10s. 6d. apiece, 
while the common sailors and marines obtained the sum of 
£3, 14s. 9^d. each), insisted on tazing the gains of the petty 
officers and men by keeping the sutler's stores at famine prices. 
Pocock, a lymphatic person, finds the climate fit for nothing 
but sleeping ; the cUnk of gold is the only thing that will 



xvi INTRODUCTION 

wake him. His clerk brings in the accounts, apologizing 
for the firm that had refitted the ship, who had been made 
to pay so exorbitantly for their contracts ' that it was im- 
possible for them to sink the qualities of the stores so low, 
as to be able to give you anything worthy of your acceptance ', 

' Not able to give me anything ! ' said the admiral, who 
had been aroused from his lethargic indifference by the first mention 
of his own affairs. ' They lie, the scoundrela ; and I'll make them 
know it. The sick-lists show that they have sunk them with a 
vengeance, and beyond every degree of reason ; and if they think 
I'll connive at their murdering the men, without having any share 
in the profit, they shall find themselves damnably out in their 
reckoning ; and therefore do you go directly to every purser in the 
fleet, and order them to have a survey privately made of their 
worst stores, to produce when I call for it. I'll make them come 
down, and handsomely too, or they shall repent it '. 

This more than Muscovite system of spoliation, and the 
still more galling methods of selling promotion for cash or 
other equivalent, poor men without influence getting never 
a chance of rising, and growing gray-headed as midshipmen, 
were the common grievance of ouj nautical romancers from 
Smollett to Marryat and Captain Chamier. 

But there were other abuses in the navy. Several ofiicers 
are gibbeted for accepting bribes to let the Spaniards alone, 
or for want of alacrity in bringing them to action, or again 
for an excess of that discretion which is said to be the better 
part of valour. There was Captain Lord Harry Powlett, for 
instance, afterward sixth Duke of Bolton, who being sent 
in chase of a sail, got his carpenter to report the stern-post 
loose, and the ship unfit for action. The nickname, ' Captain 
Sternpost ' clung to this patrician warrior for life. The case 
of Lord George Sackville, who failed to charge at the battle 
of Minden, and so saved the enemy from total destruction, 
is more famous. Chrysal gives the harshest interpretation 
of his conduct ; yet, after all, is not more severe on this mis- 
guided nobleman than was the minister of war, William Pitt, 
who protested strongly against Sackville's return to court 
under the Bute administration. Other defaulters, some of 
whom it is but just to say were acquitted on their court- 
martial, have their cases, so to speak, re-tried by Johnstone 
at the bar of public opinion, and come off pretty badly. Most 
of them are now of Httle interest except to special students, 
but it would be rash to suppose that their chastisement by 
our satirist afforded his readers less satisfaction than that 
of the more celebrated. 



INTRODUCTION xvu 

The prevailing gloom is Ughtened by two or three idealiza- 
tions of goodness, such as the model commander of a king's 
ship, who represents rather what Johnstone thinks such an 
ofiB.cer ought to he than any one of whom there is historical 
record ; and by several really human portraits. One of the 
most attractive is that of the author's friend and fellow satirist, 
Charles Churchill ; and another very engaging one is of a 
typical EngUsh tar. The latter is employed by an unfor- 
tunate Oriental to rescue him and his daughter from the 
clutches of the Inquisition. Having become a Christian, after 
the manner of some miraculously converted paynim in old 
romance, this man had sought asylum in a Christian country, 
but on landing had been instantly arrested by the Holy Office 
for ' errors of opinion '. Being rich, he entrusted the sailor 
with a large sum, to charter a vessel and carry him to England. 
Instead of pocketing the money, as many of his superiors, 
to judge by their habitual conduct, would forthwith have 
done with it, leaving the owner to his fate, the bluff mariner 
carries out his important commission with an honesty that 
is of a piece with his general character. He kicks against the 
need for strict obedience once only, when he is ordered not 
to attack a French man-of-war, twice his size. 

The day after this afiair, when they had all recovered their good 
himiour, my master (the Bailor) addressed his owner thus : ' Now, 
owner, while the sky is clear, and we have nothing else to do, I had 
better give you an account of your money. Here is the log-book, 
which you may overhaul at your leisure, though the sooner the 
better. This is the time, there is no taking a good observation in 
a storm, as may happen by and by ; you will find all as fair aa 
a new cable ; but I must give you one point to direct your reckoning 
by, and that is this, you bade me buy a ship and freight her, and 
so forth, and she and the cargo should be my own, after I had done 
your job this trip. Now, owner, it is very true that a less vessel 
than this might have made the run, but then you seemed so desirous 
to be safe, that I thought it best to take a bargain in this stout ship, 
which I kaew to be as good a sea-boat as ever turned to windward, 
and able to go, hank for hank, with anything that swims the sea, as 
we showed when we ran the Frenchman out of sight yesterday, 
though it went against my heart to do it. But no matter for that 
now ; the ship is yours, and you have a right to be obeyed. How- 
ever, there is the account, and here is the rest of your money, of 
which I did not lay out a shilling that I could avoid, but one guinea 
which I gave Will Cresstree, to repair his rigging, and one I gave 
Black Moll of Wapping ; and I could not well avoid those neither, 
for Will was an old messmate, and I owed Moll for many a good 
turn in her way. But all this signifies nothing to you ; they can 
be stopped in the account. And now, owner, as you may think 
this ship cost too much, and that the cargo is too good, I will not 



xviii INTRODUCTION 

keep you to your bargain ; she is your own, and all that is in her, 
only pay the men. As for me, I am satisfied with having got out 
of that damned Inquisition, and leave the rest to yourself. If you 
think that I have deserved anything, well and good ; if not, I do 
not fear bread while the sea flows round Old England. All that 
grieves me ia, that you would not let us set fire to the Inquisition 
and cut the Inquisitor's throat '. 

Chiysal gives the fullest extant account of the Hell-fire 
Club, or the Monks of Medmenham, the society of fashionable 
reprobates, who in the reign of George II, anticipated many 
of the rites and immoralities of the Parisian, diabolists of recent 
times. In the ruins of a Cistercian abbey, at a secluded 
spot on the banks of the Thames, between Henley and Great 
Marlow, these men enacted an ignoble parody of Rabelais* 
Abbey of Thel^me. The principal harlequin was Sir Francis 
Dashwood, the bufEoon whom Lord Bute made Chancellor 
of the Exchequer, though he was reputed to be unable to do 
a sum of simple addition — after him the members of the order 
called themselves Franciscans. In the old chapter-house, 
this crew of debauched wits performed a burlesque ritual, 
founded partly on monastic ceremonies, and partly on classical 
rites and nondescript superstitions — the wildest orgies that 
could be found in books or invented by their own silly in- 
genuity. Besides Dashwood, the following were among the 
members : Wilkes and ChurchiU ; George Bubb Dodington, 
immortahzed by Browning as the most abject sycophant of 
his time ; Robert Lloyd, a miserable ' poet,' who died in the 
Fleet ; Thomas Potter, whose father, the Archbishop of 
Canterbury, disinherited him for his dissolute life ; Paul 
Whitehead, the ' Tailor-poet ' ; Sir William Stanhope, 
Henry Lovibond Collins, Sir John Dashwood King ; Lord 
March, afterwards the notorious Marquis of Queensbury ; 
Sir Benjamin Bates, the owner of Medmenham ; the Earl 
of Sandwich, and Sir Francis Dufiield. 

To be enrolled among this set of fashionable sinners was a 
distinction much sought after by a certain class of parasite ; 
but there was an order within the order, consisting of twelve 
more abandoned profligates, and to be elected to a seat in 
this sacred number was an honour courted by all. Chrysal 
describes a sitting of the blasphemous conclave, at which Wilkes 
and Dashwood are rival candidates for election. Wilkes 
being rejected contrives to revenge himself on his competitor 
by introducing a baboon, painted and dressed to represent 
the devU, at the moment when Dashwood is engaged in offer- 
ing a sacrifice to his infernal majesty. There is uproar and 
confusion, in the midst of which the animal, scared to death 



INTRODUCTION xix 

jumps on the back of the startled neophyte, who thinks the 
demon he has been invoking has really answered his summons. 

Spare me, gracious devil ' ! said he, ' spare a wretch who never 
was sincerely your servant ! I sinned only from vanity of being 
in the fashion ! Thou knowest I never have been half so wicked 
as I pretended ; never have been able to commit the thousandth 

part of the vices which I have boasted of I am but half 

a sinner. My conscience always flew in my face when I committed 
any crime ! My heart gave the lie to my tongue, when I gloried 
in my vices ; and I trembled at the damnation I affected to brave ! 
Oh, spare me, therefore, at least for this time, till I have served thee 
better. I am as yet but half a sinner '. 

It is not necessary to suppose, with some biographers, that 
this is a verbatim report of the proceedings ; but it is ex- 
tremely likely that Wilkes played some practical joke on his 
aristocratic associates, which rankled in their minds when 
the profligate Sandwich took him hypocritically to task in 
the House of Lords for the alleged publication of that obscene 
parody, The Essay on Woman, really the work of Potter. 
But what must have been the effect of such a caricature of 
Sandwich and his coadjutors at a time when the country 
was in a riot from end to end against a Cabinet largely recruited 
from this gang. It will, perhaps, be a help to the reader to 
give some brief account of the more important actors in the 
story, especially of the members of the Hell-fire Club, who 
not only cut a conspicuous figure in the following s, but 
were prominent in the life of the time. 

The founder of the blasphemous order. Sir Francis Dash- 
wood, was a young debauchee who, like the Earl of Sandwich 
and other libertines, loved to pose as a patron of the arts. 
He had been in Italy, and was a member of the Society of 
DUletanti. A good story is told of an exploit in the Sistine 
Chapel one Good Friday, when a service of atonement was 
being held. Extinguishing the hghts, a priest gives the signal 
for the penitents to bare their shoulders and chastise them- 
selves with a small scourge carried by each. Dashwood was 
not satisfied with the quality of the self-inflicted punishment, 
and came armed with a horse-whip concealed beneath his 
coat. Swinging this right and left, he marched up and down 
the line of penitents, who shrieked that the devil was among 
them. Dashwood got away, but had to flee for his hfe from 
the papal territory. When he entered Bute's Cabinet, his 
speeches on finance were received with roars of laughter ; 
and his first budget, with the ingenious tax on cider, raised 
a storm in the West of England. He plumed himself on the 
title of the worst Chancellor of the Exchequer that ever Uved, 



XX INTRODUCTION 

and retiring on his laurels, was sent to the upper House as 
Lord le Despenser. 

One much abler, but not less depraved of these votaries 
of diabolism was John Montagu, fourth Earl of Sandwich, 
celebrated for his ugly visage and charming manner. Born 
in 1718, and educated at Eton and Cambridge, he performed 
the grand tour, an account of which, purporting to be written 
by him, but more probably from the hand of his tutor, ap- 
peared posthumously, and on the strength of this experience 
he posed as a virtuoso. Returning to England on his coming 
of age, he at once plunged into politics. He became a com- 
missioner of the Admiralty, and succeeded Bedford as First 
Lord, at the same time holding a commission in the army, 
where he rose by regular promotion to the highest rank in 
spite of the fact that his service was purely nominal. He 
appears to have taken a keen interest in naval affairs, and 
to have had the reputation of conducting his work eflS.ciently. 
He was British plenipotentiary at Breda, and at the conclusion 
of the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle. Sandwich was no doubt a 
man of genuine capacity ; but some of the redeeming features 
of his career, such as his responsibility for the reforms in 
the dockyards attributed to him, were probably merely the 
result of his taking credit for the work of subordinates. Owing 
to the jealousy between the Dukes of Newcastle and Bedford, 
Sandwich was dismissed from the Admiralty in 1751. Until 
1763 he held only minor appointments, and then came back 
to this department. 

The later career of Sandwich was more scandalous than 
that part of his history pertaining to the present work. As 
First Lord of the Admiralty, he used the vast powers at his 
disposal simply as a machine for political jobbery. He was 
alleged to have sold appointments, to have embezzled funds 
and sold government stores for his own benefit. The dock- 
yards, at all events, fell into a shocking state under his ad- 
ministration, and the fleet grew rotten with neglect, so that 
many a ship was lost with all hands through the criminal 
mismanagement of those in ofEce. The grosser charges have 
not been proved ; but for the general maladministration 
Sandwich was undoubtedly responsible. Keppel's failure in 
1778 was rightly attributed to Sandwich, whose residence was 
attacked by the mob. A scandalous revelation that ensued 
as to his private conduct, led to his final exit from pubHc 
life in 1782. He died ten years later. 

Churchill attacked him fiercely in The Candidate, written 
when the Earls of Hardwicke and Sandwich were contending 
for the High Stewardship of the University of Cambridge : 



INTRODUCTION xxi 

Prom his youth upward to the present day, 

When vices, more than years, have mark'd him gray ; 

When riotous excess, with wasteful hand, 

Shakes hfe's frail glass, and hastes each ebbing sand. 

Unmindful from what stock he drew his birth, 

Untainted with one deed of real worth, 

Lothario, holding honour at no price, 

Folly to folly added, vice to vice ; 

Wrought sin with greediness, and sought for shame 

With greater zeal than good men seek for fame. 

Lines 307-316. 

The Essay on Woman is said by contemporary writers 
to have been addressed to this unvenerable Maecenas. At 
any rate, the assumed indignation of his indictment of Wilkes 
in the Lords for publishing this poem, which Sandwich read 
with unextinguishable gusto to the peers in spite of con- 
tinuous protest, was characteristic of Ms shameless cynicism. 
Lord Chesterfield is said to have penned the following 
character-sketch of Sandwich : 

The art of robbing vice of its disgust, and throwing around it 
the mantle of convivial pleasure, belongs in a very peculiar manner 
to this nobleman. I understand, that from his youth to the present 
time, he has proceeded in one uniform, unblushing course of de- 
bauchery and dissipation. His conversation is chiefly tinctured 
with unchaste expressions and indecent allusions ; and some have 
assured me that if these were to be omitted by him, much of his 
wit, or, at least, what is called his wit, would be lost. 

The most talented, and if Chrysal is to be taken on trust, 
one of the vilest of the Medmenham friars, was Henry Fox, 
the founder of the Holland family. Born in 1705, son of Sir 
Stephen Fox, an old Cavalier, and younger brother of a re- 
spected gentleman, Stephen Fox, iirst Lord Ilchester, he 
squandered his fortune in gambhng and extravagance soon 
after attaining his majority, and then took refuge on the 
Continent, where, as Chrysal relates, he re-established his 
finances by becoming the favourite of a rich old woman. He 
returned to England in 1735 and entered Parliament, distin- 
guishing himself at once by his brilliant powers of debate. 
He became a faithful adherent of Sir Eobert Walpole, who 
rewarded him with a lucrative appointment, and under 
Pelham he was made a Cabinet minister. He came into 
conflict with Pitt in repelling the latter's attack on the Duke 
of Cumberland, for he remained a staunch servant of both 
Cumberland and his former patron, Walpole. Though he 
entered the Newcastle administration in 1754, Fox was an- 
noyed at having no hand in the distribution of the secret 



xxii INTRODVCTION 

sarvice money, and, reconciled for the time being with Pitt, 
joined him in sarcastic criticism of Sir Thomas Robinson, 
Newcastle's leader of the House of Commons. He was, 
however, induced to desert Pitt by the ofier of a seat in the 
Cabinet, a proceeding that damaged his character irrevocably. 
He resigned just before Newcastle in 1 756. Under the Coalition 
Ministry, he managed to secure the immensely profitable 
office of Paymaster of the Forces, in which he devoted himself 
to the congenial task of piling up a huge fortune. He re- 
tained the same post under Bute, together with a lucrative 
sinecure, and was the main instrument in the scheme of 
wholesale corruption that secured parliamentary approval 
of the peace in 1763. Towards many of his old colleagues 
at this time Fox was savagely hostile. Newcastle, he re- 
commended, should be stripped of his lieutenancies ; and 
he invoked the wrath of the king on his dependents, demand- 
ing that all should be dismissed from their offices. Hated 
by all, Fox obtained the reward he had laboured for in a 
peerage, and a continuance of his appointment as Paymaster, 
which however, he had to surrender in 1765 to Charles Towns- 
hend. In 1769, several years after the incidents related in 
Chrysal, Fox was denounced in a petition from the City of 
London as the ' public defaulter of unaccounted millions '. 
He had followed the traditional course of his predecessors 
in leaving enormous balances outstanding for long periods, 
and pocketing the interest. Proceedings were taken after 
his death against his executor, who had to pay nearly a 
quarter of a miUion from the estate to the Treasury ; but 
it was not finally proved that there was any intention to 
defraud the government of this large sum. Fox simply 
made the fullest use attaching to office in those days to enrich 
his family ; and it is on record that he paid off the debts 
of his two sons for huge amounts, and left every member 
of his household amply provided for, although his means had 
been so slender on his entry into public hie. 

In spite of his pubho vices, Fox had many private virtues. 
His marriage with Lady CaroUne Lennox was a love match, 
and their family life so singularly happy, that it inspired the 
eulogy of so sarcastic a poet as Sir Charles Hanbury WUhams. 
How he devoted himself to his precocious son, Charles James 
Fox, is well known. Hated abroad. Fox was the pet of his 
household. The story of his treatment of Ayhffe is difficult 
to authenticate or disprove. Chrysal's version, that accepted 
by Churchill, is the legend current against a detested minister 
at a time when anything would be believed in his dispraise. 
I John Wilkes, although a popular hero at the date when 



INTRODUCTION xxiii 

the foiu'tli volume of Chrysal waa.publislied, is treated therein 
to a severely critical inquisition into his real character. While 
the author makes Churchill out to be something like a saint 
disguised as a satirist, he does not adopt Churchill's view 
of his friend and ally. In the Duellist and other pieces, 
inspired by the first Wilkes agitation, Churchill painted him 
as a martyred patriot of stainless inorals and purest self- 
abnegation. 

When Wilkes, our countryman, our common friend, 
Arose, his king, hia coimtry to defend ; 
When tools of power he bared to public view, 
And from their holes the sneaking cowards drew ; 
When Rancour found it far beyond her reach 
To soil his honour and his truth impeach ; 

When that Great Charter, which our fathers bought 
With their best blood, was into question brought ; 
When, big with rain, o'er each English head 
Vile Slavery hung suspended by a thread ; 
When Liberty, all trembling and aghast, 
Fear' d for the future, knowing what was past ; 
When every breast was chilled with deep despair. 
Tin Reason pointed out that Pratt was there. 

Epistle to William Hogarth, 383-408. 

Johnstone had no patience with these heroics. He knew that 
WUkes was one of the worst of men in private hfe, and ac- 
cordingly refused to believe that his righteous indignation 
against the government was really disinterested. 

The character and history of Wilkes are too familiar to 
every one to require any detailed account here, and the same 
may be said of the poet Churchill. Two passages may be 
quoted from Churchill to illustrate how completely he was 
in sympathy in his poetical satire with the sentiments ex- 
pressed by Johnstone in prose. The first is a general tirade, 
after" the manner of Juvenal, on ■ the suitability of the times 
ior satire : 

Whilst nobles act, without one touch of shame. 
What men of humble rank would blush to name ; 
Whilst Honour's placed in highest point of view, 
Worshipp'd by those who justice never knew ; 
Whilst bubbles of distiaction waste in play 
The hours of rest, and blunder through the day ; 
With dice and cards opprobrious vigils keep. 
Then turn to ruin empires in their sleep ; 

Whilst Martin flatters only to betray, 
And Webb gives up his dirty soul for pay ; 



xxiv INTRODUCTION 

Whilst titles serve to hush a villain's fears ; 
Whilst peers are agents made, and agents peers ; 
Whilst base betrayers are themselves betray'd, 
And makers ruined by the thing they made ; 

Whilst C , false to God and man, for gold, 

Like the old traitor who a Saviour sold, 

To shame his master, friend, and father, gives ; 

Wliilst Bute remains in power, whilst Holland lives, 

Can Satire want a subject, where Disdain, 

By Virtue fired, may point her sharpest strain ? 

Where, clothed with thunder. Truth may roll along. 

And Candour justify the rage of song ? 

Epistle to William Hogarth, 187-212. 
* 

The next passage is from the Duellist, an attack upon Samuel 
Martin, secretary to the Treasury, who considered himself 
insulted by the free observations of The North Briton, where 
he was described as ' the most treacherous, base, selfish, mean, 
abject, low-lived and dirty fellow that ever wriggled himself 
into a secretaryship '. This man challenged Wilkes while 
the proceedings in Parliament were going on, and having 
practised daily with the pistol for some time beforehand, 
succeeded in wounding his opponent dangerously. Wilkes 
thought he was done for, and begged his enemy to make his 
escape, although it was generally alleged that Martin had 
so arranged matters that, had he been killed, Wilkes would 
hardly have escaped a verdict of murder. The incident is 
alluded to on  484. As soon as he was convalescent, 
Wilkes went to Paris for rest and change. During his absence,, 
his case came up again in Parliament, and in spite of his 
sending a medical certificate of his inability to appear and 
defend himself, he was expelled from the House of Commons. 
The later events of his career — his return to England in 1768, 
and triumphant election for Middlesex, with the riots that 
ensued ; his re-entry into Parliament, election as Lord Mayor, 
and highly respectable after-life — do not at present conceriL 
us. Churchill came down heavily on the secretary Martin : 

But should some villain, in support 

And zeal of a despairing court. 

Placing in craft his confidence. 

And making honour a pretence. 

To do a deed of deepest shame. 

Whilst filthy lucre is his aim ; 

Should such a wretch, with sword or knife 

Contrive to practise 'gainst the life 

Of one who, honoured through the land. 

For Freedom makes a glorious stand. 



INTRODUCTION » 

Whose chief, perhaps his only crime 
Is (if plain Truth in such a time 
May dare her sentiments to tell) 
That he his country loves too well ; 
May he — but words are all too weak 
The feelings of my heart to speak — 
May he — oh, for a noble curse 
Which might his very marrow pierce — 
The general contempt engage. 
And be the Martin of his age. 

The Duellist, bk. i, 229-248. 



Thomas Potter, the vicious son of the 'Doctor Potter who- 
became primate of England, is stated to have been Wilkes's- 
tutor in fashionable dissipation, and to have been the principal 
cause of his ruin ; though a man of Wilkes's strength of 
mind must have wanted only occasion to be as great a 
sinner as any of his contemporaries. Potter, Sandmch, and 
Dashwood were friends of Wilkes at the time when he was 
living with Ms wife, a wealthy woman ten years his senior, whose 
money he ran through, and whom he drove to protect herself 
by a deed of separation. Dashwood enrolled him among the 
Medmenham fraternity, where his high spirits, as already 
related, led him at least on one occasion to make his brethren 
look exceedingly foolish. In the storm aroused by The North 
Briton, No. XLV, the Medmenham scandal came to the light 
of day, Dashwood and Sandwich turned on their plebeian 
comrade, and in addition to the proceedings against him for 
sedition, tried to involve him in the charge of printing and 
publishing the unspeakable Essay on Woman, which had 
been fathered on Warburton. Wilkes had previously offended 
Dashwood by lampooning his cider tax. There is not much 
reason to doubt that the real author of the Essay was Potter. 
The question was very fully dealt with by C. W. Dilke in 
Notes and Queries, second series, vol. 4, 1-2 and 4:1-3. Potter 
figures in Hogarth's election print as the handsome candidate. 
He was reputed to be on too intimate terms with the wife 
of Warburton, and to be the father of her son ; and perhaps 
Warburton's name was attached to the- burlesque notes to 
the Essay because of a quarrel he had had with that prelate. 

One of the Medmenham circle who is not expressly de- 
signated by Chrysal, was Paul Whitehead, the ' Tailor-poet ', 
whose literary career opened in the Fleet prison, and was 
continued in the capacity of paid satirist and pamphleteer 
to the friends of Frederick,. Prince of Wales, when lie was 
in opposition to the government. He was a close /!riend 
of Dashwood, to whom he owed the dignity on which he 



Kvi INTRODUCTION 

prided himself as secretary and steward of the Hell-fire Club. 
Churchill says of him : 

A nation's reckoning, like an alehouse scoie, 
Whilst Paul, the aged, chalks behind the door, 
Compell'd to hire a foe to oast it up, 
Dashwood shall pour, from a communion cup. 
Libations to the goddess without eyes. 
And hob or nob in cyder and ezoise. 

The Candidate, 697-702. 

Dashwood, in his brief career as Bute's Chancellor of the 
Exchequer, gave Whitehead a post worth £800 a year. In 
■gratitude he left his heart to Dashwood, now Lord le Despenser, 
who had the precious relic inurned and buried with pompous 
■ceremonial in the mausoleum at High Wycombe, and crowned 
"with the foUo^wing epitaph : 

From earth to heaven Whitehead's soul is fled ; 
Refulgent glories beam about his head ; 
His Muse, concording ■with resounding strings 
Gives angels words to praise the King of Kings. 

It is true that the poet before his death had burned all his 
■erotic and atheistic verses ; but Churchill's lines would have 
made a more fitting epitaph : 

May I (can worse disgrace on manhood fall T) 
Be bom a Whitehead, and baptized a PauL 

One of the other friars was Robert Lloyd, an old school- 
fellow of Churchill's at Westminster, and subsequently usher 
for several years at the same school, an employment he de- 
tested. Churchill is said to have led him into a course" of 
dissipation, which eventually landed him in a debtor's prison. 
Lloyd had already thrown up school-teaching to -write poetry. 
His Actor is supposed to have given Churchill the idea of the 
Rosciad. For eighteen months he edited The St Jamet'e 
Magazine, and whilst in the Fleet he maintained himself in 
a miserable way as a bookseller's hack. He was only thirty- 
one when he died in gaol, nursed by his sweetheart, Churchill's 
sister. 

The q!uack, mentioned on  371, is the notorious Dr 
John Hill, whose articles, pamphlets, and pseudo-soientifio 
treatises made the same profit out of the popular ignorance 
and credulity of his day, as is made now by innumerable 
journalists from the half-educated majority of those who reai 



INTRODUCTION ixvii 

He failed successively as apothecary, author, actor, aad 
scientist ; and was therefore, according to the best authority, 
suitably qualified to set up as a critic of successful practi- 
tioners in those vocations. He won himself a reputation 
with the pubKshers by a Natural History in three folio volumes, 
■and a supplement to Chambers's Dictionary, which he 
followed up with an absurd hoax on the Royal Society, which 
had rejected him, entitled Lucina sine Concubitu. From 
1746 to 1750, he edited a monthly. The British Magazine. 
Unscrupulous narratives of private scandals ; diurnal efEusions 
in The Daily Advertiser under the title of The Inspector, 
dealing with natural history subjects in an elephantine style, 
cunningly adapted to the ignorance of the average reader ; 
weekly sermons for the Sabbath, and egregious laudations 
•of his own virtues and attainments, pioured forth from the 
year 1751 in a ceaseless torrent. He made £1500 a year by 
means of this exuberant clap-trap, and was decorated with. 
& Swedish order, on the strength of which he called himself 
Sir John. Garriok was persuaded to put a farce of Hill's 
on the stage in 1758, but it was damned at once, eUciting 
Garrick's epigram : 

For physio and farces, his equal there scarce is ; 
His farces are physio, his physic a farce is. 

In the Rosciad, Churchill sketches him as follows : 

With sleek appearance and with ambling pace, 

And type of vacant head with vacant face 

The Proteus Hill puts in his modest plea — 

' Let Favour speak for others, Worth for me,' — 

For who, like him, his various powers could call 

Into so many shapes, and shine in all ? 

Who could so nobly grace the motley list ' 

Actor, inspector, doctor, botanist ? 

Knows any one so well — sure no one knows — 

At once to play, prescribe, compound, compose f 

Who can — but Woodward came, — Hill slipped away. 

Melting like ghosts before the rising day. 

This alludes to his quarrel with Woodward the comedian, 
who, having been insolently attacked, put him on the boards 
in a way he had not courted, in The Mock Doctor, a farce that 
was repeated a good many times at Drury Lane. Another 
victim pulled his nose in public. Hill retaliated by pretend- 
ing to be seriously injured, and charging his enemy with 
attempt to murder, and actually got the man incarcerated. 
The encounter made considerable noise at the time, and was 



xxviii INTRODUCTION 

celebrated in some amusing caricatures, in one of which the 
assailant is represented as addressing Hill in these words : 
' Draw your sword, swaggerer ! if you have the spirit of a. 
mouse ' ! to which Hill replies, ' What ! an illiterate fellow 
who can't spell ! I prefer a drubbing '. Fielding castigated 
the impostor repeatedly in The Covent Garden Journal, but 
failed to extinguish him. When a new periodical he had 
started under the name of The Impertinent came to an un- 
timely end, Hill had actually the efirontery to glory over 
its failure in his Inspector, a piece of cowardly impudence 
that eventually came to light, and inspired one of the objects- 
of his abuse, Christopher Smart, to write a caustic satire,. 
The HUliad. The poem opens with this invocation : 

O thou whatever name delight thine ear. 
Pimp! Poet! Puffer! 'Potheoary ! Player! 
Whose baseless fame by vanity is buoy'd 
Like the huge earth self-centr'd in the void. 

About the date when Ghrysal was written, the palmy days 
of Hill's journalism were over. Encouraged by his patron, 
Ijord Bute, he began a vast botanical work, The Vegetable 
System, in twenty-six folio volumes, with an enormous number 
of plates. It was not a success, and involved him in pecuniary 
losses, which-'he made good, however, by the manufacture of 
quack medicines on a huge scale. At the accession of 
George III he got the appointment of gardener at Kensington, 
with a salary of £2000 a year. He died in 1775. 

An excellent specimen of Johnstone's incisive gifts of 
portraiture is the following rough sketch of the chameleon 
actor Foote, whose amazing powers of mimicry were cele- 
brated by Churchill in The Bosciad : 

The person my master was sent to meet had something so un- 
common in hia appearance as instantly struck my attention. Every 
passion of the human heart was printed in his face so strongly 
that he could at pleasure display it in all its force, while his very 
look and gesture turned some vice or folly into ridicule. 

' You inquire for Number One, sir ! ' said my master, bowing with 
the profoundest respect. 

' I do, sir ', answered the other, returning his bow, assuming his. 
look, and imitating his voice, in a manner that would have extorted 
laughter from despair, ' inquire for Number One '. 

Though my master was no stranger to his talents, which he had 
often seen him display at the expense of others, this personal ap- 
plication of them to himself threw him into such confusion that,. 
in spite of his long-practised assurance, a blush broke feebly through 
his unimpassioned, lifeless face, and he had scarce power to show 



INTRODUCTION xxix 

ium into the room. The ballad-singer (Foote) seeing that he had 
him at command, would not puisue his advantage any farther at 
that time, for fear of frightening him away ; but putting on the 
exact countenance, and mimicking the voice and manner of the 
doctor (Whitefield), ' I am come, my friend and brother in the Lord ', 
said he, ' to inquire into thy spiritual state, to give thee ghostly 
advice, and commune with thee, for a short space, for our mutual 
edification '. 

The surprise and manner of this address had such an efiect upon 
my master that he could not refrain bursting into laughter ; and 
immediately recovered from the confusion into which the ridicule 
of himself had thrown him. 



A good deal is said in Ghrysal about Foote's cruel attack 
upon Whitefield in The Minor, and some of the references 
need a little elucidation. The most uproarious comedy in 
this scurrilous piece is concentrated on the stage version of 
Mother Douglas, a notorious character who lived magnificently 
in Covent Garden, and was reputed to be one of Whitefield's 
proselytes. Foote himself took the part, and made it a 
popular success in London, though a Dublin audience had 
proved too squeamish, and voted Woodward's rendering 
ofiensive to decency and also to their own opinion of the 
Revivalists. The horribly droll manner in which this cari- 
cature of a woman mixes up spiritual and carnal things, is 
comedy of a broad but very entertaining kind, and the satire 
must l^ave been overwhelming with an aiidience bitterly 
prejudiced against the Methodists. Foote as Momus, and Mrs 
Cole {alias Mother Douglas) as Mrs Brimstone, act a grotesque 
scene in Ghrysal, along with their supposed friend and accom- 
plice Squintum, or Whitefield, who is represented in the most 
odious manner as a sanctimonious rascal, who has taken up 
preaching as a money-making speculation, and employs 
people of the stamp of Mrs Brimstone to bring grist to the 
mill by corrupting those who are afterwards to be led into 
the true fold. Cowper speaks out nobly upon the unjust 
•1.etraction of Whitefield's good name, general at this time : 

Leuconomus (beneath well sounding Greek 

I slur a name a poet must not speak). 

Stood pilloried on infamy's high stage. 

And bore the pelting storm of half an age ; 

The very butt of Slander and the blot 

For every dart that Malice ever shot. 

The man that mentioned him, at once dismissed 

AH mercy from his lips, and sneered, and hissed. 

His crimes were such as Sodom never knew. 

And Perjury stood up to swear it true ; 



X3tx • INTBODUCTION 

His aim was mischief, and his zeal pTetenoe, 

His speech rebellion against common sense ; 

A knave when tried on honesty's plain rule, 

And when by that of reason a plain fool ; 

The world's best comfort was, his doom was paased. 

Die when he might he must be damned at last. 

Now, Truth, perform thine office ; waft aside 
The curtain drawn by Prejudice and Pride, 
Reveal (the man is dead) to wondering eyes 
This more than monster in his proper guise. 
He loved the world that hated him ; the tear 
That dropped upon his Bible was sincere ; 
Assailed by scandal and the tongue of strife. 
His only answer was a blameless life. 
And he that forged, and he that threw, the dart. 
Had each a brother's interest in his heart. 
Paul's love of Christ, and steadiness unbribed. 
Were copied close in him, and well transcribed ; 
He followed Paul, his zeal a kindled flame. 
His apostolic charity the same ; 
Like him, crossed cheerfully tempestuous seas, 
Forsaking country, kindred, friends, and ease ; 
Like him he laboured, and like him content 
To bear it, suffered shame where'er he went. 

Blush, Calumny ! and write upon his tomb, 
If honest eulogy can spare thee room, 
Thy deep repentance of thy thousand lies. 
Which, aimed at him, have pierced the offended skies ; 
And say, ' Blot out my sin, confessed, deplored, 
Against thine image, in thy saint, O Lord ' ! 

Johnstone, it must be confessed, is not a humourist. His 
satire is principally of the brutal order ; yet he has many 
attractions for the intellectual reader. He abounds in shrewd 
observations on the common fallacies of conduct. Of at- 
torneys, he says for instance, the very name of whose pro- 
fession had become a reproach, ' such is the perverseness of 
man, that if a child betrays an early propensity to chicane 
and fraud, by setting his playfellows together by the ears, 
and cozening them of their toys, he is immediately marked 
for this profession, and instead of being corrected for such 
a disposition, and having it nipped in the bud, is encouraged 
in it, by having it made the omen and ground of his future 
success in life, till it is confirmed beyond the sense of shame 
and remorse, and becomes the ruling principle of his life ', 
Like a contemporary work, The Fool of Quality, published in 
this series, Chrysal contains numerous anticipations of future 
reforms, many of them yet in the remote distance, showing 
the author to have been a far-sighted thinker. He pleads for 



INTRODUCTION xxxi 

a fairer education for women, who, he says, are prevented, 
from ' rising to that excellence, the want of which is objected 
to them ', mainly by the disadvantages due to a wrong system 
of training and instruction. In politics he pleads for ' One 
man one vote ', absolute freedom of election, and parliaments- 
lasting for only one session, so as to keep perfectly in touch 
with their constituents. He has wise words on duelling, and 
countless other abuses of his own and later times. That he 
was no self-deceiver as to the effective worth of his satire, 
and in spite of his atrabilious disposition, was well aware of 
his own foibles, is witnessed by the observation he puts in 
the mouth of one of his characters. It is 

' A task that will give you the pleasing opportunity of indulging- 
that misanthropy which inspires the muse of a satirist, and is 
mistaken for virtue, because it rails against vice ; for, blazon it out 
as pompously as you will, nothing but ill-nature can make a man 
take delight in exposing the defects of others ; and the more forcibly 
he does it, the more powerful must that principle be with him '. 

With which caveat he may be left to the reader. 

E. A. B. 



PREFACE 

To acquit myself of the suspicion of presuming to aim''at 
particular characters in the following work, should any fancied 
likeness be thought to direct an application, as well as to do 
justice to the real author of it, I think it my duty to make 
known the manner by which it happened to come into my 
hands. 

As I was walking one morning, last summer, along White- 
ohapel, I was obliged to take shelter from a shower of rain 
in a cottage near the turnpike. The family were at breakfast, 
at their tea, and, as the rain continued, I had leisure to reflect 
on the advantages of commerce, which thus, in a manner, joins 
the opposite extremities of the earth, by bringing their pro- 
ducts together ; at the same time, that the variety in the 
■equi of the tea-table, or indeed stool, on which ' there 
was nothing of a piece ' , suggested a just ridicule on the vanity 
■of luxury. 

This last reflection was extended to all the pursuits of man, 
•on the sight of a piece of written paper, that served instead 
•of a plate to hold their butter. ' Who knows ', thought I, 
■' but the writer of this bestowed time and care upon it, and 
promised himself both profit and fame, in reward of his 
labour ' ? 

This thought raised a curiosity to look at the paper, which, 
by this time, was scraped quite clean. I, therefore, after a 
few words of conversation, to introduce my request, desired 
leave to see it, which was readily granted, when I was sur- 
prised to find my conjecture, as I imagined, confirmed, by its 
appearing to be part of some regular work. 

Curiosity had now a stronger motive than idle gratification ! 
I asked where they had got that paper ; and on their telling 
me at the chandler's shop next door, though this discouraged 
me a good deal, I resolved to pursue my inquiry, and went to 
"the shop, as if for some snufE, which, as I expected, was given 
me on a piece of the same paper. 

The rain still giving me a pretence for delaying there, I 
•entered into discourse with the woman, and among other idle 



xxxiv PREFACE 

questions, asked her where she usually got paper to wrap her 
wares in, to which she answered : 

' Sometimes from the puhlic offices, and sometimes from 
the booksellers and printers ; and when she was disappointed 
at those places, she was forced to buy brown paper, which 
was much dearer ; though at present, she made use of some 
old stufi that had lain a great while lumbering her garret,, 
having belonged to a lodger of her mother's, who died many 
years ago '. 

I then changed the discourse, for fear she should perceive- 
my design ; but presently seeing her going to tear more, for 
somebody else that came in, I could not forbear any longer,, 
but offered her brown paper for all the written paper she had, 
as that was most proper for some work I designed, which she 
readily agreed to, and sold me her whole stock for eighteen- 
pence. 

This adventure put an end to my walk, so I took the first 
coach that went by and hurried home to examine my purchase, 
which I found to consist of a number of fragments, upon various 
subjects, whether originally left unfinished, or torn thus in 
the chandler's shop, it was impossible to say ; and, among 
the rest, the following work, wMch seemed to have undergone 
a different, though not much better fate, being blotted in many- 
places, often paragraphs, and sometimes whole s, being 
erased ; and, what was worst, this havoc was made in the 
most curious and entertaining part of the whole, the philosophy 
of the nature and agency of spirits. 

The oddity of this collection made me resolve to try if I 
could learn anything of the author from the woman of the- 
shop, where I had made my purchase ; accordingly I called 
upon her one evening, as if merely by accident, and sending- 
for a pint of wine, to set her tongue a-going, I no sooner hinted 
my desire, than she directly gave me the following account, 
which I shall repeat as nearly as possible, in her own 
words, shortening it only of expletive exclamations and 
repetitions. 

' My father ', said she, ' dying young, and leaving his family 
but poorly; my mother took this shop to help her to bring 
up three children, of whom I, the eldest, was but five years 
old. The times being hard, she was obliged to make every 
honest shift, and therefore took in lodgers, and, among the 
rest, an elderly man, who rented the garret to sleep in, and a 
little turret in the garden, which he fitted up for himself for 
a workshop ; but what business he followed she never knew, 
as he let nobody see him at work ; nor did she trouble herself 
to inquire, as he always paid her punctually ; but she imagined 



PREFACE XXXV- 

lie was a smith of some sort, from the quantities of charcoal 
he burned, and the constant blowing of his bellows. 

' In this place he spent all his time, often not quitting it for 
whole days and nights together, till hunger has forced him to- 
crawl like a starved rat out of his hole, to get a bit of victuals.. 

' At first my mother was uneasy at this, and imagining he 
must be out of his mind, or troubled in conscience, she spoke 
about him to a worthy gentleman, a clergyman, that lived in 
the neighbourhood ; but he coming to see him at a time when 
he had a clean shirt on, and had eat his victuals, and slept 
regularly for some time before, his discourse was so sensible 
and pleasant, that the doctor could not help telling him the- 
cause of his visit as a joke at my mother, to whom he said, 
when he was going away, that, so far from being mad, he 
believed her lodger was the best scholar in the whole parish. 

' My mother's good-nature had like to have lost her her 
lodger, for, as soon as the doctor was gone, he gave her warning,, 
but upon her promising never to be guilty of the like indis- 
cretion again, nor to trouble herself any further about him, 
than just to give him what he should call for, he consented 
to stay. 

' Erom that time he Uved among us as unnoticed as he could 
desire, following his business without disturbance from any 
one, nor appearing to give himself the least trouble about 
that of any other person hving, except it was me, whom he- 
taught to read, and said he would make his heir. Aa unhappy 
heirship, I am sure, for me ; for it hindered my marrying. 
Jack Twist, the rope-maker, who was the toppingest man in 
all Eadolifi Highway, and then ofEered to take me in my 
shift. 

' But there's no help for that now ! Luck is all ; to be sur&- 
we thought he must be some extraordinary man, for he never 
wanted money, and then we used to hear him talk to himself 
sometimes, as if all the world was his own, of building colleges,, 
and churches, and houses, and altering St Paul's, and I do- 
not know what great things ; and one day in particular, I 
remember he said before us all, that before seven years, he 
would hire an army that should drive the pope and the Devil - 
(Lord bless us !) out of Rome ; for to be sxire, he would talk 
before us, as if we could not hear him, as we would also do 
anything before him as freely as if he was a cat or a dog I 
Well, as I was saying, it was no wonder, to be sure, that such 
ignorant poor folks as we should think much of him, especially 
after what the doctor said, and accordingly built great hopes 
upon his promises. 

' He went on thus for near twenty years, no soul ever coming. 



3T3Ti PRE F AGE 

near him, nor he going out above once or twice in a year, and 
then not staying above an hour or two at a time. 

' At length his health began to break very much, which 
made my mother often speak to him, not to work so hard, 
for he had been with us so long, and was so quiet, and paid 
so honestly, that we all loved him as if he was our father. But 
her advice was all to no purpose ; he still went on, bidding 
her not trouble herself, nor be afraid about him. But this did 
not satisfy her ; and one day, when he had been locked up 
-from the morning before, without having any victuals or going 
to bed, she resolved to break through his orders and call him 
-to dinner; 

' When she came to the turret, which he called his laboratory, 
she tapped gently at the door ; but receiving no answer, nor 
hearing any noise within, she was so frightened, that she called 
me to fetch the kitchen poker, with wHch we made a shift to 
force it open, when we found the poor man stretched at his 
length upon the floor, to all appearance dead. 

' This shocked us greatly ; but we did not alarm the neigh- 
bours, as we imagined there were things of value there, that 
might be misplaced, or taken away in the confusion ; we 
-therefore raised him up ourselves, and, after a little while, 
perceiving signs of life, carried him in, and laid him in our own 
bed, and, pouring some drops into his mouth and nose, at 
length brought him to himself, when his first care was to 
inquire for the key of the turret, whether any one else had been 
there, or anything in it stirred. Our answers satisfying him 
he seemed quite easy, and in a little time recovered, to all 
-appearance as well as ever. 

' From this time, he changed his way of life a good deal ; 
and though he was much in the turret, which we observed 
he ever after called his study, and not his laboratory, he never 
sat up whole nights in it, as before, nor bought any more char- 
■Coal, nor even oil for his lamp, but went to bed orderly when 
we did. 

' But this change came too late ; for about six months 
after, we found him one morning dead in his bed, though he 
had been as cheery in the evening before as he had for a 
long time. 

' This was a great surprise and concern to us ! But what 
;avails grief ? We must all die, and he was a very old man. 
As soon as we were certain that he was dead, the first thing 
my mother and I did, was to go to the turret, impatient enough 
to take possession of our heirship, where. Lord help our poor 
heads ! did we find only a few great old books, and those 
papers you got ; the very bellows and tools7 and pots that we 



PREFACE xixvtt 

saw there before, being all gone, and no more sign of a workshop 
to be seen than if it was not the same place we had been in 
six months before. What he could have done with his things- 
we could not imagine, for we never observed him to carry them 
out, so that we concluded he must have burned them. 

' This was a sore disappointment to me, not to mention 
the loss to my mother, to whom he owed a quarter's rent, 
besides an account of near twenty shilhngs in the shop ; and 
seven shillings and twopence halfpenny was all the money in 
his pocket, nor did we ever find one penny more after him, 
though we searched close enough ! 

' Well ! patience is a remedy for all things but death r 
we were forced to submit; though I cannot help grieving 
when I think of it, to this day, especially when I see Peg 
Sprout, the green-woman's daughter from Wapping, that 
Jack Twist married out of despair, when I refused him, ride^ 
by in her chaise, like a lady ; and it is now thirty years ago ! 
No ! let me see, it will be exactly twenty-nine years come- 
next Michaelmas ; I am sure I have reason to remember it 
well, for my poor mother took it so to heart that she never held 
up her head after, till it finished her, in about nine years ; 
though I cannot say but something else might have helped,, 
for she took cruelly to drinking drams, though as she began 
it to comfort her for this misfortune, it was all owing to that ;. 
that poor sister Bet, too ' 

I was obliged to interrupt her here, by asking her what kind 
of a person he was, or she would have gone on to give me the 
history of her whole family. 

My curiosity being thus satisfied as to the author, there was 
but one thing more that I desired to know, and that was, how 
those papers came to have so many blots made in them, which 
by the difference of ink, I could see was done long since the 
first writing ? To which she answered, that, some time after 
the old man's death, her mother let his apartment to one that 
called himself a clergyman, and was a great scholar, and used 
to make almanacks and other books ; that he had looked over 
those papers, and, she beUeved, taken out such as he liked^ 
and done what he pleased with the rest, for they set no regard 
on them ; and particularly she remembered to have heard 
him say, that he would make something of one of them ; but 
she believed he found it would not do, for he soon after left 
their house, and, joining with those Methodists that were just 
then come up, went away with them, preaching about th& 
country. 

I thought it but reasonable to reward the good woman's- 
expense of breath with half-a-crown, and so took my leave,. 



:ixxviii PREFACE 

though with a secret resolution to give her half the profit, if 
there arises any, from the sale of the books ; not thinking that 
such a purchase as I had made from an ignorant woman could 
■give me a just title to the whole heirship, as she called it, that 
had cost her so dear as the loss of her old sweetheart. Jack 
Twist. 

This good woman's account explained to me, in some 
measure, the nature of this work, for the circumstances of the 

-author, who, I could see, had been a schemer who had wasted 
his whole fortune in the search after the philosopher's stone, 
and having his eyes at length opened to his folly, though too 

-late to remedy it, yet was able to divert the grief of his dis- 

. appointment, by writing these papers, in ridicule of such 
notions, and from the sale of which he might also expect some 
relief to his wants. 

But, whatever the motive was, the loss is now irreparable, 

^nd has reduced the work to the appearance of a novel or 
romance, almost the whole philosophical part having been 

-erased ; for, as to the personal application of anything in it 
to the present times, the least attention to this account of 
the author will show the absurdity and injustice of such an 
attempt ; as it was written so long ago, and by a person so 
little acquainted with the world, that all the stories in it must 
necessarily be the mere creatures of imagination. 

For the manner in which they are published I shall only say, 
that it is strictly agreeable to the faith of the text ; not one 

■of the many alterations and interpolations, which were in 
another hand, being given ; but wherever I could not clearly 
make out the very words of the author, I honestly omitted 
the whole, not thinking it allowable or just to palm my own 
words or sentiments upon the world, or the credit of another. 
How scrupulous I have been in this point will appear to any 

•one who shall take the pains of consulting the original manu- 
script, which shall be deposited in the public hbrary of one of 
the universities, as soon as the work is printed. The only 
liberty I have taken being in a few notes in the margin, and 

•supplying a connection, where it was broken by any of the 

-above-mentioned accidents. 

CHRYSIL. 



CONTENTS 





 


Tnteoductios 


T 


Peefaob .... 


. xxxiii 


Book I . . . . 


1 


Book II ... • 


165 


Book III . 


337 


Index . . , . 


519 



CHRYSAL— Vol. I 



CHAPTER I 

THE APPAEITION OF CHKYSAL TO AN ADEPT, IN THE VERY MOMENT 
OF PEOJECTION — HIS ACCOUNT OF HIMSELF, AND THE CAUSE OF 
HIS APPEABINQ TO THE AUTHOR 

On a day, when long and strict abstinence had purified'my body 
from every terrene encumbrance, and intense contemplation womid 
up my mind to an enthusiasm fit for empyreal conversation, as I 
stood with my eyes riveted on the obstetric flame, in strong expecta- 
tion of the birth of the mystic child, the first-born of the morning, 
ready to seize the happy moment when the earth, sufficiently im- 
pregnated with the water, ascendeth white and splendent, that 
I might compound the pure elements, before they fly from the fire, 
and so perfect the great work, my eyes began to dazzle, and the 
power of imagination overwhelmed my soul. I saw a blue effulgence 
break from the hquid gold and play about the genial vase. I waa 
astonished 1 I thought it the substantial form of the son of the 
sun ! I thought the happy moment was come, when the rose of 
the East should bloom in the desert, and mine the favourite hand 
to cultivate its growth ! I indulged the pleasing thought ; I melted 
in the virtuous joy ; and, in obedience to the divine impulse, I 
kneeled to receive the reward of all my labours, the radiant crown 
of wisdom and glory, from the hand of Nature, with every sense and 
faculty suspended, for fear of interrupting the mysterious process. 

As my soul hung in this ecstasy, the flame which wrapped the 
sacred birth in the bed of purification arose with the glory too strong 
for mortal sense and filled the room. My senses sank under the 
pressure, and I was dissolved into a trance, when a voice, celestially 
harmonious, encouraged me to raise my eyes, and I beheld the body 
of the effulgence condense into an incorporeal substance in the 
form of a spirit, while a placid shade softened the fierceness of the 
radiance, and made it tolerable to human sense. 

An holy horror curdled aU my blood ; but the melody of the 
same voice, which had before emboldened me to look up, reassured 
my fainting heart with these words : — 

' Son of pains and votary of science ! thy unwearied perseverance 



2 ADVENTUBES OF A GUINEA 

has prevailed, and I am sent to crown thee with a virgin rose ! I 
am ChrysaU , the spirit of that incorruptible mass now glowing 
in that vase before thee, who, in reward of thy noble constancy 
in ofiering this thy last mite on the shrine of knowledge, am come 
to reveal to thee the mysteries of Nature, and satisfy that raging 
thirst for wisdom which has so long excruciated thy soul, and thus 
emaciated thy body. And that thou mayest the better comprehend 
the greatness of this honour vouchsafed unto thee, I shall trace 
the operations of Nature through her most secret recesses, and 
illustrate the truth of what I say by a detail of the various incidents 
of my being in my present state, to prepare thee for the recep- 
tion and proper use of the grand secret, which I shall afterwards 
communicate. 

' I can see your thoughts ; and will answer every doubt which 
may arise in your mind at the wonders of my relation without the 
interruption of your inquiries, as awful silence is the essence of 
my converse, the least breach of which puts an end to it for ever ! 
Listen, then, in mute attention, nor let a breath disturb the mystic 
tale ' ! 

The works of Nature are infinitely various, and her methods of 
operation inscrutable to the curiosity of that vain intruder. Reason, 
which has of late presumed to pry into her ways, and to doubt, if 
not deny, the reality of all effects which her short-sighted eye cannot 
trace to their causes ; a presumption that has justly shortened the 
hne of human knowledge, and condensed the mist of ignorance which 
overspreads the world. Some noble efforts, though, I see the nature 
of man preparing to make, to recover that eminence of conjecture 
and credulity which alone can merit such a communication of 
extraordinary knowledge as is now indulged to you. Some of the 
most hidden truths which I shaU here unfold has unassisted genius 
discovered already ; and more shall curious penetration make 
learned guesses at, even in this sceptic age 2. 

Know, then, that in the economy of Nature, to ease the trouble 
and keep up the state of its great author, ' a subordination of minis- 
terial spirits execute the system of his government in aU its degrees ; 
one of whom, for the greater order and expedition, is made to actuate 
every divided particle of matter in this immense universe ' ^. In 
this distribution, that portion of gold was assigned to my charge, 
upon its first feehng the influence of the ' ethereal fire of the sun, 
the general minister of the divine commands * '. This happened 
in Peru, where that body, of which I then became the spirit, was 

' This name is evidently derived from Xpuiris, gold, and may probably 
signify golden, from her animating a piece of gold ; for, by the universal 
authority of the occult philosophy, spirits are always denominated from 
their office. 

^See all the modern hypothetical philosophy. 

" Essay on Spirit. 

* Siris. Would not these, and many other passages of the same nature 
which support the systems of those celebrated works almost tempt us to 
think that the writers of them must have had a communication with 
this or some such spirit, to come at knowledge so supernatural ? 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 5. 

torn from its peaceful bed, two hundred fathoms deep in the bowelsi 
of the earth. 

I shall not describe my surprise at my first plunging into those 
realms of darkness ; nor shall I satisfy the curiosity I see rising 
in you, whether that period was the beginning of my existence,^ 
or whether I was, either as a punishment or reward for a past, or a 
preparation for a future life, thrown into this. . These are mysteries, 
not yet discovered, though often most learnedly guessed at. All 
I shall unfold to you are points already known, or such as I see 
ready to be found out by human industry, as it would put an end 
to learning to make a revelation of the objects of its inquiries. Such 
matters, I say, I shall explain to you, and further relate some occur- 
rences, the knowledge of which wiU be equally useful and enter- 
taining, which happened to the several persons with whom I have 
had intercourse in the various stages of my present state. 

And, as you may be at a loss to know how I could arrive at the 
knowledge of such facts, many of which happened long before my 
converse with those persons, I shall inform you that, besides that 
intuitive knowledge common to aU spirits, we of superior orders, 
who animate this universal monarch. Gold, have also a power of 
entering into the hearts of the immediate possessors of our bodies,- 
and there reading aU the secrets of their lives. And this will explain 
to you the cause of that love of gold which is so remarkable in all 
who possess any quantity of that metal. ' For the operation of 
every material is in proportion to the strength of the spirit actuating 
that cause ; aa the strength of the spirit is reciprocally in proportion 
to' the quantity of his material body ' ' : and consequently, when 
the mighty spirit of a large mass of gold takes possession of the 
human heart, it influences all its actions, and overpowers, or 
banishes the weaker impulse of those immaterial, unessential 
notions called virtues. And this intuition and power of transmigra- 
tion I have thus explained to remove every shadow of doubt of 
what I shall relate. 



CHAPTER II 

CHETSAL GIVES AN AOOOTTNT OF THE PEBSON WHO DUG UP HIS BODT 
MT THE MINE — THE PABTIOULAE MANNER OF HIS ACQUIRING THE 
KNOWLEDGE OF HIS LIFE, WITH AN EXPLANATION OF THE NATURE 
OF MEMORY AND CONSCIOUSNESS 

The first object that struck me, when I darted on the power of a 
sunbeam into those infernal regions where my body was just dug 
up, was the person in whose hands it was when I took possession 
of it. 

Dark as the gloom of such a place must be, a melancholy that 
doubled all the horrors of it sat upon his brow. He gazed a moment 

'^ Essay on Spirit 



4 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

on me ^, in silent grief, and then groaned out these words with a 
vehemence that seemed to burst his heart : — 

' Damned, damned, pernicious, damning gold ! how dearly do 
I purchase this momentary possession of thee ! But let me acknow- 
ledge the justice of my fate. I wished only for gold, and now this 
equivocal grant of that wish is the just punishment of the folly and 
the wickedness of it '. 

Grief here choked his utterance. He could say no more, but 
sobbed aloud, while all the dreary caverns echoed to his anguish. 

Curiosity prompted me to learn the cause of his distress : I there- 
fore immediately entered into his heart to read the events of his 
life, which I doubted not but I should find deeply imprinted there : 
but I was surprised to find that room in it which, I could plainly 
Bee, had been possessed by the love of gold, so filled with sense 
of pain, with grief and remorse, that I could scarce gain 
admission. 

Upon this I mounted into the sensorium of his brain, to learn 
from the spirit of consciousness, which you call Self, the cause of 
BO uncommon a change, aa it is contrary to the fundamental rules 
of our order ever to give up a heart of which we once get 
possession. 

I found the spirit very busy, though I thought somewhat oddly 
employed. She was running over a number of niches, or impressions, 
on the fibres of the brain, some of which I observed she renewed with 
such force that she almost effaced others, which she passed over 
untouched, though interspersed among them. The sight of ma 
seemed to suspend her works a moment ; but, as if that pause was 
only to recover strength, she instantly renewed her labour with 
great assiduity. I looked at her my desire to know the meaning 
of what she was doing, and to signify the cause of my visit, to 
which she returned me this answer, in a glance that interrupted 
not her work. 

(I see you wonder that I speak of this spirit, though the sdf of a 
man, as if it was a female ; but in this there is a mystery. Every 
spirit is of both sexes, but as the female is the worthier with us, 
we take our denomination from that. ) 

You are surprised, looked she, to find me so earnestly engaged 
in work which you do not understand ; but in this work consists- 
my very essence. This place where we are is the seat of memory, 
and these traces which you see me mnning over thus are the im- 
pressions made on the brain by a communication of the impressions 
made on the senses by external objects. These first impressions 
are called ideas, which are lodged in this repository of the memory 
in these marks, by running which over I can raise the same ideas 
when I please, which differ from their first appearance only in this, 
that, on their return, they come with the familiarity of a former 
acquaintance ^ . 

How this commvmication is made, I cannot, however, so well 

_ ' Chrysal must here mean the gold which now became her body, as she 
does not say that she appeared in the spirit to any one before the 
author. ^ See all the modern philosophy. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 6 

inform you ; whether it is by the oscillation of the nervous fibres, 
or by the operation of a certain invisible fluid, caEed animal spirits, 
on the nerves ; no more than I can explain to you how my touching 
these marks on this material substance, the braia, can raise ideas 
in the immaterial mind, and with the addition of acquaintance 
besides ; for these are matters not yet settled among the learned. 

AH I know is, that the thing is agreed to be so by some, or other, 
or aU of these means, and that my whole employment and end of 
being is to touch them over, and acknowledge their acquaintance 
thus : without my doing which a man would no longer continue 
the same person, for in this acquaintance, which is called conscious- 
ness, does all personal identity consist ^ 

As for the work I am just now particularly engaged in, you must 
know that this man, whom, as I am his self, I shall henceforth 
for conciseness and perspicuity, call my self, was once possessed 
of, or in power of possessing, every real happiness of life, till an 
insatiable desire of riches hurried him into measures which over- 
turned all that happiness, and La the end plunged him into this 
gulf of misery. 

The traces of that happiness are those which you see me pass 
over without renewing ; by which means he forgets that he was 
ever happy, except sometimes when the trace of any particular 
unhappinesB comes so near that of any instance of happiness as un- 
avoidably to touch it ; which touch, by the renewal of the idea of 
such happiness, only aggravates the sense of the present want of 
it. And thus I make memory either a blessing or a curse, according 
to the nature of the trace which I renew. 

I see you are astonished, how a person who was ever happy could 
possibly fall into such misery as I am now in ; but I shall remove 
that astonishment by the history of my life, in which I shaU accom- 
modate my account of places and things to the circumstances of 
my present state, without regard to the universality of our spiritual 
nature ; and call them by their names among men, without the 
delay or trouble of description. 



CHAPTER m 

THE HISTORY or TRAITIC — HIS FATHBu's ADVICE TO HIM, OONTAUflNG 
SOME GENEBAL OBSERVATIONS ON THE NATURE AND END OF TRADE, 
WITH RULES TO ENSURE A SUCCESS IN IT 

My name is Traffic ; I was the only son of a wealthy merchant in 
London, who bred me to his own business. There was nothing 
remarkable in my youth except that the characteristic passion of 
my heart showed itself, in the very dawn of reason, in my eager- 
ness to engross and hoard up the baubles of my playmates, and 
the far-fetched schemes I laid to overreach them in all our little 
bargains. 

' Locke 



6 ADVENTUBES OF A GUINEA 

My father was at first delighted with this cunning, which his 
foniiess took for the first essay of a great genius ; but when he saw 
me persist in it after I grew up, and attempt to practise the same 
arts in the course of my business, it gave him serious alarms for my 
future conduct ; for he had ever been averse to these artifices, 
which are called the mysteries of commerce, and owed his success 
solely to close application in the plain way of a fair trader. 

But this caution I looked upon with contempt, as timidity and 
want of genius, and, undiscouraged by his constant repulses to all 
Iny bold strokes and deep schemes which I was continually suggesting 
to him, I resolved, when I should be at liberty, to indulge my own 
inclinations, to strike out new ways that should afford me oppor- 
tunities of exerting my abilities in their fuU strength, and showing 
them in their proper lustre. 

The vanity which prompted avarice to form these designs would 
so often break out in boasting, that my father was fully acquainted 
with them ; and a sensible decHne in his health quickening his 
apprehensions for me, his tenderness would omit nothing which 
might show me my error in its proper light, and prevent my falling 
into so destructive ways. 

Calling me therefore into his closet one morning, he addressed 
me in these words — words which dear experience has now printed 
deeply on my heart, though then they had no weight with me : — 

' My son ', said he, ' the day approaches fast when you will be 
in possession of the fruits of my honest industry. I leave you a 
good fortune ; and have the happiness to be able to tell you, in this 
trying moment, that no wilful private wrong or public fraud makes 
me wish it were by one peimy less. As, therefore, it was acquired 
in the fear of God, if not abused, it will wear with His blessing. 
Habit had so wedded me to my business that I could not leave it 
ofi myself ; and I bred you to it, to indulge, as I thought, the bent 
of your genius, and to prevent idleness from tempting youth to foUy, 
But now that dangerous season is past with you ; and the labour 
of my life has taken away all necessity of labour from yours. Be 
wise, then, my son, and enjoy that happiness which Heaven offers 
you without tempting a reverse. You will have riches, more than 
enough for every natural want, for every rational wish ; and it will 
sweeten your enjoyment of them, and draw down the blessings of 
Heaven on your head, to employ the superplus in acts of private 
benevolence and pubhc spirit ; in which best of emplojrments the 
abilities with which you are so liberally blessed will find ample 
room for their exertion, and your pious endeavours be rewarded 
with a success that will be a happiness to your life and an honour 
to your name. 

' As for the profession of a merchant, to which you have been 
bred. Heaven points it out to the inhabitants of this country by 
our situation, nor can any other be more advantageous to it ; but 
stiU, even that advantage may be pursued too far, and the extreme 
of industry may sink into avarice, and so disappoint its own end, 

' For I must tell you, my son, that, though trade adds to the 
wealth, yet too eager a pursuit of it, even with the greatest success 
diminishes the strength of a nation. I am sensible that this is 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 7 

against received opinion ; but truth, when properly displayed, will 
force conviction. 

' The real strength of a nation consists in the prevalence of dis- 
interested spirit which, regardless of self, throws its weight into the 
public fund, as may be proved by many examples of small poor 
states conquering large wealthy ones. Whereas the spirit of com- 
merce centres all in self, discouraging and despising as folly every 
thought which does not tend that way ; and so breaking that una- 
nimity which is the very essence of power, and only can give it 
success ; a reflection this, my son, which observation confirnas too 
strongly at present, and which seems to overcast the prospect of 
this happy nation. 

' My advice to you, therefore, is, to retire from business, though 
not to idleness. You will have a fortune that will make you of 
consequence in the state, and give you sufficient employment in 
the conduct of it, without embarrassing your mind with anxiety 
for more. And, to enable you to follow this advice with the greatest 
ease, I have settled all my affairs, and shall leave you free from 
every entanglement of life. This is the advice, the request, of a 
fond father, who desires compliance from his dear son, and would 
not force unwilling obedience by an act of authority or command. 
But should the love of business have taken such a hold of your 
heart, as habit gave it of mine, and not permit you to comply with 
this request, take, my son, the advice of experience, and hold fast 
the clue it offers to guide you through the labjrrinths of trade, in 
which the vivacity of your genius may otherwise lose its way. Nor 
are the rules I shall hint to you many to be remembered, or difficult 
to be observed. 

' Be just, my son, in all your dealings ; wrong not individuals ; 
nor defraud the pubUc. 

' These are all the rules I recommend ; but in them is comprised 
more than, perhaps, appears at first view. Do not therefore think 
them too obvious to have been necessary to be repeated, nor let 
the mention of them give offence by any seeming implication of 
personal doubt. 

' In the business of a merchant these rules comprehend a great 
extent of meaning, though I shall mention but a few instances of it 
at present. 

' As for the first, every misrepresentation to mislead ignorance 
or abuse credulity, every taking advantage by superior knowledge, 
is a wrong to the party so deceived ; as every artifice to evade the 
intention of the legislature is a fraud against the public, nay, 
against yourself, and every individual who claims the benefits 
provided by the ordinances, so defeated of their support. 

' This indeed is so obvious that it were an aiiront to reason to 
insist on any proof of it. The most eager pursuer of illicit trade 
wiU not vindicate a general indulgence of it ; and if it is not lawful 
for aU, how can it be for him ? or with what colour can he claim 
a profit which he is conscious arises only from deceit, and from the 
benefit of those very laws which he thus defeats. 

' The temptations to this breach of honesty, I own, are many 
and great, and some of them perhaps plausible, particularly in those 



8 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

branches of trade which seem to bear a more than equal share of 
the weight imposed for general advantage. But, in opposition to 
this, it must be considered that it is impossible to provide so exactly 
for a thing of so fluctuating a nature as trade, that the balance 
shall not incline, in some one instance ; and that it must, by the 
same motion which oppresses one be favourable to some other, and 
so preserve the equipoise in the whole ; and this obviates the only 
shadow of an argument that can be brought in defence of this too 
common practice. 

' As for the former, of avoiding private wrong, that is more diffi- 
cult and less defensible, if possible, than even this. For where aU 
the powers of the mind are turned to make advantage, it is very 
hard to refrain from taking it, where we ought not, and bringing the 
great business of Ufe into common practice in its minutest concerns. 

' The man whose soul is on the stretch to take advantage in a 
bargain for thousands on the Exchange, will be apt, perhaps in- 
sensibly, to overlook an error that is not to his disadvantage in a 
tradesman's bill, or to take no notice of a guinea given instead of a 
shilling in change at a tavern, though either is as great dishonesty 
as if he took them in a manner punishable with death by the laws, 
not to mention the innumerable little instances of temptation to 
this kind of wrong which occur in every moment's dealing. That we 
may avoid temptation is one of the petitions of the Divine prayer, 
and never more necessary to be offered up than in this profes- 
sion whose constant practice opens innumerable instances of it 
upon us. 

' In a word, my son, there are so many and strong arguments 
of this nature to be given against all trade, that the general advan- 
tage of the commonwealth alone can in any way support it against 
them. This, therefore, should be written in the deepest characters 
on the heart of every merchant, that he should never let private 
interest tempt him to engage in any trade or scheme that can inter- 
fere with the public interest, or is forbidden by the laws of his 
country. I shall say no more, nor burden your mind with further 
advice. Observe this, and be happy '. 

I was obliged to hear him : but his words at that time made no 
more impression on my mind than the whistUng of the winds, nor 
in the least altered my intentions ; though I felt no scruple in 
promising obedience, the breach of which could never be upbraided 
to me, as I could not think of practising it before his death should 
remove the only person who haid such an authority. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 



CHAPTER IV 

THE HISTOBY OF TBATFIO CONTINUBD — HIS TATHEB's DEATH — HE 
CONTINUES IN TBABE, AND TUBNS SCHBMEE — HIS VABIOTJS SCHEMES 
END IN HIS BTJIN — THE BISE AND PE0GBBS3 OF HIS PASSION FOB 
AMWT.TA — THE BASE ABUSE OF HEB CONFIDENCE, BY WHICH HE 
CHEATED HEB OF THE GBEATBST PABT OF HEB F0BTT7NE, AND 
AFTBBWAED3 FOBMED DISHONOUBABLE DESIGNS AGAINST HEESELF 

The opportunity which I had long panted for arrived too soon, 
my father dying just after I was of age, and leaving me possessed 
of wealth sufficient for me to exercise my talents on, as I was not 
blessed with prudence to take his advice, and put it to its proper 
use in rational enjoyment. 

I was immediately a man of consequence, and that not only in 
my own eyes. I made a figure upon 'Change ; I signed among the 
foremost in the pubUo subscriptions. But all this did not satisfy 
me. I sickened at the thought of having an equal, not only in 
wealth, the darling object of my soul, but also in the' reputation 
of acquiring it by methods of my own striking out, as I looked 
upon the Imown course of business as too slow for my advances, 
and too limited for my genius. 

I therefore immediately became a schemer, and entered into 
every project which my own brain could invent, or artful imposition 
suggest to me ; blindly, wilfully, giving up the serenity of an open 
mind for the vain appearance of mysterious consequence and design, 
and making my fortune a prey to every sharking projector, who 
flattered my vanity with promises of success, in the very attempts 
which had been his own ruin. 

The perplexity in which this infatuation soon involved my affairs, 
far from opening my eyes, only set me upon deeper schemes. Sport- 
ing upon private adventures, taking in unwary confidence, flinging 
the fair trader, by eluding the restrictions of law, were now too 
small a game for me : I was entangled, and must cut the Gordian 
knot by some bold stroke. 

I therefore threw ofE restraint, and entered into measures the 
most injurious to my country, which was then engaged in a just^and 
extensive war. I insured the effects of its enemies, and of conse- 
quence gave them information how to avoid its forces ; I carried 
on their trade with other countries ; I supplied them with pro- 
visions from ours ; and at length went so far as to lend and procure 
them money to support the war against ourselves. 

But all my schemes met their just fate. Though I could give 
their ships information how to avoid our squadrons, yet they fell 
into the hands of unstationed privateers. My subterfuges for 
carrying on their trade were seen through, and a stop put to them 
before I could receive the stipulated profit. The stores I bought 
for them were intercepted by our fleets ; and, to conclude all, the 
enemy, by one stretch of arbitrary power, refused to pay any debts 
and appropriated the funds provided for that purpose to the present 
support of the war. 



10 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

This finisiied my ruin : I had not only lent them all my own 
fortune, but had also borrowed much more to supply them (on 
confidence in their promises), than I was now able to pay. 

In this situation, the advice of my father returned fuU upon me 
and aggravated my distress. But I had no time for reflection ; 
the horrors of a jail stared me full in the face, which I had no way 
to avoid but by flight, the equivocalness of my character having 
made every honest man who was able to assist me afraid of being 
concerned with me. I therefore immediately raised all the 
money I possibly could, and embarked secretly in a ship of my 
own for Jamaica ; Heaven, to make its justice the more signal, 
using my blackest guilt aa a chain to draw me to the vengeance I 
deserved. 

I must stop here and look back, to give you an account of an 
afifair which the precipitancy of my ruin prevented my mentioning 
in its proper order. 

Much as such a complicated scene as I have described must have 
taken up my time and engrossed my thoughts, I had still found 
leisure for guilt of another nature, though ultimately springing 
from the same cause. 

I had told you that my father had acquired his own fortune by 
industry ; but as the greatest industry requires a foundation to 
work upon, his had been assisted by the person to whom he served 
his apprenticeship, who, knowing his abilities, and confiding in his 
honesty, upon the decline of his own health established him in 
partnership with his only son, whom he thought too young to 
conduct so extensive a business. 

My father faithfully executed this great trust, and continued the 
partnership, till his observation of my unfortunate disposition 
determined him to make me quit trade ; when it was dissolved, 
without the least breach in that real friendship which had so long 
subsisted between them. Though I did not obey my father's 
desire, yet my vanity would not admit a thought of recommencing 
the partnership, as it would have been but a curb on my favourite 
schemes, and have implied a want of assistance which, in my own 
opinion, I was far above. On the contrary, I rather declined too 
close a connection with him in business, as I feared he might have 
taken upon him to interpose his advice against anjrthing which his 
narrow, fearful temper might disapprove in my great designs ; but 
as I kept up every other appearance of regard, and even respefet for 
him, this shyness was not observed, nor any coolness occasioned by 
it in the intercourse of intimacy between us. 

But for this conduct I had another motive, besides regard for 
him. He had an only daughter, enriched with every beauty and 
virtue that could mark the favourite work of Heaven : she was 
about four years younger than I, which difference of age had given 
me an opportunity of treating her with such a fondness from her 
veiy infancy as raised a real love in her grateful heart, as her beauties 
did the strongest one it was capable of feeling in mine. Our fathers 
had seen this growing attachment with the greatest pleasure from 
the beginning, and encouraged it between us (our mothers both 
died in our infancy), joining in the general opinion that the union 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 11 

which had always been between their families would be com- 
pleted by the intermarriage of their children : an opinion that was 
then my pride, and seemed a pleasure to the young Amelia's honest 
heart, that was above disguise. 

But my father's death, before she was of an age to imdertake the 
cares of such an awful state, and a long iUness of her father's after, 
during which her filial piety and love would not admit a thought 
of anything that should interfere with her tender regard for him, 
prevented my happiness from being accomplished while there was 
any obstacle that could hinder my evil genius from defeating 
it. 

At length, after languishing five years, her father died, without 
a moment's more immediate warning, having been on the Exchange 
that day as usual. 

In the tumult of this loss I was sent for ; and no wUl being found, 
for he, unhappily, had not imagined his end so near, nor made 
any settlement of his affairs, in the confidence of our attachment 
Amelia gave everything into my hands, and requested me to 
make up all her father's accounts and conclude her dealings with 
the world. 

This happened just as my scheming had begun to embarrass my 
affairs. My heart, therefore, never proof to much temptation, 
yielded to such an opportunity of recovering the losses of my 
folly at her expense, by sinking the greatest part of her fortune 
to my own use ; never considering that I might have the whole in 
a just and honourable way, enhanced with the greatest blessing of 
herself. 

To accomplish this design, and prepare her for what was to 
follow, I pretended to Amelia that I found many difficulties in her 
father's affairs ; and, having secreted as much as I thought proper, 
and could with safety, and destroyed every memorial that might 
detect me, for all which her unbounded confidence gave ample 
opportunity, I at length gave her an account, with the strongest 
expressions of concern, ' to find that what I had long apprehended 
was too true, and that her father's affairs were in a very bad situa- 
tion ; that I had, however, with great difficulty, got together some- 
what above ten thousand pounds ; and was convinced that this 
preplexity in his affaics was the occasion of his long illness, and 
had not left him spirit enough to inquire into them, and make a 

will'. 

This representation had the effect I designed. Amelia's confidence 
in me would not admit a thought of my deceiving her ; as pride, 
too powerful in the purest human heart, prevented her revealing 
her circumstances to anyone else, who might have attempted to 
disprove what I said ; though, indeed, it was scarce natural to 
suspect me of a deceit that, according to the opinion which then 
prevailed concerning Amelia and me, could only affect myseH. 

She therefore, with an appearance of surprise rather than doubt, 
or even concern, acquiesced, and signed a receipt in full, desiring 
me to destroy all her father's books and papers, as they could be 
of no further lose to her. 

This completed my design beyond a possibility of detection. 



12 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

and even raised a new one against the poor pittance I had left her, 
though it was not quite a fourth part of what was really her right, 
for I had now thrown off all thoughts of marriage with one so far 
beneath me in fortune, looking upon it as a reproach of my wisdom 
and knowledge of the world to make any bargain in which I should 
not have the advantage : for what I had so basely defrauded her 
of I considered merely as an acquisition of my superior skiU in 
business, and absolutely my own, without any manner of obligation 
to the person from whom I had obtained it. Not that I had lost 
my desire for the person (the only degree of love my heart waa 
capable of feeling), but the advantage I had it now in my hopes 
of obtaining over her made me look upon her as a sure prey to my 
pleasure. 



CHAPTER V 

CONTINUED — HE CHEATS AMELIA OP THE RESIDUE OF HEB POETUNB, 
AND MARRIES ANOTHER WOMAN — AMELIA SUES HIM AT LAW, IS 
CAST, AND GOBS FOE JAMAICA — ^HE IS RUINED, AND FOLLOWS HBK 

Though my whole life was one continued scene of villainy, yet in all 
there was a gradation, a regular descent from bad to worse ; each 
successful crime opening new opportunities and suggesting schemes 
which never entered into my thoughts before. 

This was exactly my case with regard to Amelia. While she was 
in possession of her whole fortune, the highest wish of my heart 
was to marry her ; but no sooner had an unhappy accident given 
me an opportunity of defrauding her of far the greatest part of it 
than that respectful love immediately sank into loose desire, and 
my success in my former schemes against her set my thoughts at 
work to accomplish the gratification of this passion on my own 
base terms. 

To bring this design to perfection, it was necessary that I should 
get her fortune entirely into my power ; which I accordingly formed 
schemes to accomplish without delay ; for the success of my former 
attempt, so far from satisfying my avarice, or raising any sense of 
compassion in my breast for her wrongs, had made me look upon 
herself and all that belonged to her as my property, which I waa 
as impatient to possess as if it was detained from me by injustice. 

I therefore took occasion one day, when we were alone together, 
to drop some words of concern at my not having immediately by 
me a sum of money to lay out on most advantageous terms, which 
had been that very morning proposed to me. 

She directly took the hint, and said her little fortune was still 
in her hands, in the same bank-notes I had given her ; and if the 
use of it, for any time, could be of advantage to me, she should feel 
a greater pleasure in my taking it than any profit she could make 
of it any other way. 

This was just what I wished ; and though I could scarce refrain 
from laughing at the easiness with which she took the bait, I would 



ADVENTURES OP A GUINEA 1$ 

not accept of her offer but with this restriction — ^that I would con- 
Bider whether the terms proposed to me might not suit her, and 
be more advantageous than the interest I could afford her if I should 
make use of it myself. I said this with an equivocal smile, which 
she understood as I would have her, and immediately, with an 
assenting blush, put the notes into my hand, without requiring a 
receipt or any kind of acknowledgment for them. 

Haying thus gained that which I reckoned the better part of 
Amelia, and sure, as I imagined, of herself when necessity should 
humble her to my designs, as I had her whole means even of sub- 
sistence in my power, I directly resolved to close with an offer some 
tune before made me by a wealthy merchant of a large fortune with 
his daughter ; whom I accordingly married a few days after I had 
got possession of Amelia's money. 

I shall spare myself the pains of any further description of my 
wife than that she was the very reverse of Amelia in soul and body ; 
and my marriage consequently as unhappy as I justly deserved. 

But I comforted myself with hopes of happiuess in the enjoyment 
of Amelia, whom I looked upon as my own, and only deferred mak- 
ing my base proposals to, till her resentment at my marriage should 
cool and I could devise some plan of privacy to elude the vigilance 
of my wife. Not but I dreaded the first emotion of her anger, 
which I expected to break out in loud complaints. But I was 
mistaken in measuring her soul thus by my own. She scorned 
to complain ; nor did I hear a word from her to interrupt the riot 
of my wedding ; a greatness of soul so far above my comprehension 
that I attributed it to fear of giving offence to one in whose power 
she must be sensible she was. 

But at the end of the month I was awoke from those dreams by 
a message from her, delivered by a relation of hers, to desire I 
should pay in her money to him, for which he would give me a 
receipt. As I was not prepared for this, I believe it threw me into 
a confusion too visible ; but I soon recovered presence of mind 
enough to answer that ' I could not but be surprised at such a 
demand, as Amelia must be sensible that I had paid her all the 
money of hers that was in my hands, for which I had her discharge 
in full'. 

The gentleman replied in astonishment : ' Her discharge, sir ? 
That was when you settled her affairs ! but she says that she since 
then gave her whole fortune iuto your hands to lay out for her. 
And, sir, my cousin is known to be neither a fool nor a liar, though 
I believe she has suffered severely for her ill-placed confidence '. 

' Perhaps she says so, sir,' said I, ' but I know nothing of the 
matter, and am not accotmtable for what she says or you think, 
sir ; and I suppose if your cousin is not a fool she has not given 
her money without something to show for it. But you must excuse 
my talking any longer on so idle a subject ; and so, sir, your servant '. 

The mine was now sprung, and I waited with impatience for the 
event. As to her demand, I knew she could never support it, as 
there was no person present when she gave me the notes ; and I 
had negotiated them in a manner beyond all possibility of their 
being traced. 



14 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

While I was hugging myself in this security, the friends of Amelia, 
persuaded her to bring a bill in Chancery against me, in which the 
whole afiair was set forth without any exaggeration. But this I 
made light of, as I had my lawyer ready, under whose directions 
I swore such an answer that set her charge entirely aside. Elate 
with this success, I thought this the time to pursue my victory, 
and wrote her a letter, in which I attributed everything of my con- 
duct of late that might have surprised her to love, and despair of 
obtaining her by any other method : and offered her a settlement 
above the demand she had made on me if she would consent to 
my desires. This I wrote in such general terms that my letter 
could not be brought in evidence against me, and the largeness of 
the offer was only to decoy her into a treaty, there being nothing 
further from my thoughts than ever to make her independent of 
my pleasure. 

This insult only added new fuel to her resentment, and all the 
answer I received was by another bill ; but this met the same fate, 
by the same methods, as the former. 

After this I heard no more of Amelia for some time ; but what 
was my astonishment when I was informed that she had sold off 
her jewels and other little effects, and was gone to a relation of her's 
who lived in Jamaica ! This broke all my designs ; and despair 
of ever obtaining her awoke my love, and aggravated my remorse 
for my ill-usage of her almost to madness. 

From this time the hand of Heaven seemed to be upon me ; 
everything I had any concern in miscarried ; and, to hasten my 
ruin, my house was a perfect sink of riot and debauchery : my 
wife, as she had no charms to excite desire, in a manner publicly 
purchasing the gratification of her lusts at the most extravagant 
expense, and living in a profusion that must destroy even a royal 
fortune. 

Mine, great as it had been, sank under so many dissipations of all 
kinds ; and I had no resource left, as I said before, but in precipitate 
flight, which Heaven made my passion for Amelia direct for Jamaica 
to mark the justice of its vengeance the more plainly. 



CHAPTER VI 

■OONOLTTSION OF THE HISTORY OE TRASmC — HE ABBtVES AT JAMAICA 
WHERE HE LEARNS THAT AMELIA HAD BEEN TAKEN BY THE SPAN^- 
lABDS — HE TURNS BUCCANEER, AND RAVAGES THE SPANISH COASTS, 
WHERE HE PINDS AMELIA — JUST AS HE IS GOING TO SEIZE HEB 
HE IS TAKEN PRISONER BY HER HUSBAND — HE IS CONDEMNED TO 
DIB — HE SUES TO AMELIA JOR MBBOY ; SHE REJECTS HIM WITH 
ABHORRENCE — HIS PUNISHMENT IS CHANGED IBOM DEATH TO THE 
MINES 

I HAD hitherto varnished over my villainies with hypocrisy, and 

:strove to preserve some appearance, at least, of virtue ; but this 

as a restraint no longer possible, nor indeed profitable to me now 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA IS 

when my flight took ofE the veil, and alarmed all mankind against 
me ; so that mine was really a state of war with all the world. 

On my arrival in Jamaica, I had the addition to my grief to find 
that Amelia had been taken in her passage thither by a Spanish 
privateer. 

This drove me to despair. I was wearied of life ; but resolved 
not to die unrevenged on those who had thus, as I thought, robbed 
me of my hopes ; never reflecting on the improbability of her 
hearkening to my suit. 

Burning with this project, I fitted out my ship, and maimed her 
with a crew as desperate as myself ; resolving, though the war was 
at an end, to pursue my revenge upon the Spaniards on the defence- 
less coast of their American dominions, in which my other passions 
were urged to haste by fear of my creditors, the news of my failing 
having come to Jamaica almost as soon as myseU. 

We therefore set out upon our cruise, or rather, piracy, without 
delay, of which I shall not raise your horror with any further par- 
ticulars than that we went directly to the Spanish Main, where we 
not only rifled all the ships we met, but also made descents on the 
coasts and ravaged with a barbarity that was a reproach to human 
nature. 

The tumult and hurry of this life kept my spirits in an agitation 
that gave a kind of respite to my grief ; and the spoil we made of 
our first enterprises was so great as to awake hopes of restoring my 
affairs so as to enable me to return to England with all the credit 
wealth could give ; and could I have known when to stop I was 
soon rich even beyond my most sanguine hopes. But urged by 
avarice and encouraged by success, I still went on headlong to my 
fate, which I met in an attempt upon a town some way up the 
country, the convenience and pleasantness of whose situation had 
made it the residence of the richest families in the whole province, 
as its distance from the coast made .them live in a state of perfect 
security without any fortification or guard. 

To this place we directed our march one evening, and arrived 
at it a little after midnight, with an intention to surprise the in- 
habitants and return to our ship with the spoil before the country 
could rise to intercept us. 

The first part of our design succeeded, and we got possession 
of the town without any resistance, where we committed all 
the outrages and roamed about with the Ucentious carelessness of 
freebooters under no command. 

While every one thus prowled about for prey. Fate goaded me 
to an arbour in a garden whither I followed the cries of women. 
I was just rushing in among them, inflamed with brutal desire, when 
what was my astonishment to see AmeiUa in the most magnificent 
undress throwing heaps of gold and jewels into a vault that opened 
by a trap-door into the arbour ! I stood motionless at the sight 
for some moments in distrust of my senses. But two such objects 
as she and her riches soon awoke me from my trance, and I advanced 
to take possession of both, resolving not to discover myself tiU a 
more proper time ; the strangeness of my dress, that was designed 
to strike horror, and the blood which, from scenes of cruelty and 



16 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

murder just committed, still reeked upon my hands and face, 
making it imposaible that she should know me. 

At the sight of me the women all shrieked, and Amelia, as I 
advanced to lay hold on her, fell into a swoon. This embarrassed 
me greatly, as I had no time to lose, for our sentinels just then 
sounded a retreat. However, I determined to wait a little to see 
if she recovered ; and, stooping to raise her, to give her air, I re- 
ceived such a blow from behind as deprived me of all sense for 
several hours ; when, on my recovering, I found myself chained 
on the ground in a dungeon. 

I was some time before I could believe my senses, or conceive 
where I was ; till the jailor, coming to see if I was alive, gave me 
to understand that my companions had gone off without me, and 
left me in the hands of a nobleman, who had himself knoektii me 
down, as I was going to commit a rape upon his lady whUe she lay 
in a swoon ; and that I had been thrown into this dungeon that 
if I recovered, I might suffer the punishment due to the outrages 
we had committed both here and in several other places of their 
dominions. 

I wanted no further information to show me the horrors of my 
situation. I saw them all, and aggravated an hundredfold by the 
accusation of my own conscience that could now trace the hand 
of Heaven in the justice of my punishment, which had thus over- 
taken me in the presence and on the account of Amelia, I wished 
for death, as my only relief, and determined to seek it. But, alas ! 
my resolution failed me, and I feared to die. In this misery I was 
dragged before a magistrate, who, enumerating the crimes we had 
been guilty of, condemned me to immediate death. 
f ' This sentence, so much milder than my fears, awoke a hope of 
further mercy, to obtain which, my evil genius suggested it to me to 
apply to Amelia, absurdly flattering myself that some sparks of 
her love for me might yet remain alive, or, at least, her goodness 
take delight in showing itself superior to my ill-treatment. Base 
hope, that met its just reward ! 

I therefore waived attempting a defence of other crimes, as I 
was conscious that I could not make any, but asserted my innocence 
as to the particular charge of a base design upon Amelia at the 
time I was taken, adding that ' I had the honour of being nearly 
related to that lady, and that, if I was indulged with a few words 
with her in the presence of all there, I hoped I might be found^to 
merit a mitigation of my sentence '. 

On my mentioning the name of Amelia, I observed one of the 
principal persons in the court, whom I soon understood to be her 
husband, kindle into rage. He did not, however, interrupt me, 
but as soon as I had concluded, he started up and exclaimed with 
the most furious indignation : ' Amelia thy relation ! No more 
than angels are related to devils, by springing from the same 
Creator ! Her virtues are dishonoured by the claim ! But she 
shall appear and disprove the odious calumny '. 

Saying which words, he instantly went for her, while a hollow 
murmur of surprise and detestation made the silence of the court 
the more dreadful, and heightened the horrors of my suspense. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA IT 

But I waited not long. Amelia soon appeared, led in by her 
husband, and being seated by the judge : ' Where ', said she, 
looking round with the serenity of conscious virtue, ' where is the 
person who says he is related to me ' ? 

The sight of her threw me into such a conflict of passions, that 
without reflecting where I was, or how necessary it might be for 
me to raise her compassion by some moving address that might- 
soften the severity of her resentment for my former treatment of 
her, as well as assure her of my innocence of any base designs against 
her person, in the condition she was in when I was taken, I could 
not forbear crying out in English — for I had spoken before in Spanish 
in which I expressed myself but badly : ' Oh, Amelia ! hast thou 
then forgot me ' ? 

At the sound of my voice she started, and looking earnestly at, 
me for a momeiit, fell upon her knees, and lifting her hands and 
eyes to heaven, she said aloud in Spanish : ' God, how signal 
is this justice ! Let me, let all the world acknowledge and adore 
it ! ' And then, rising and turning to her husband, who stood in 
amazement : ' This, my lord ', said she, ' this is the man of whom 
I have informed you. This is that Traffic whose base dishonesty 
obliged me to leave my native country ; and so, by that Providence 
which is able to turn the greatest misfortune into a blessing, was 
made the cause of my present happiness with you. I abjure all: 
kindred with him. I desire he may be examined as to my story, 
and if he can vary in the least from what I have told you, let me 
be condemned to the severest punishment but that of staying longer 
in his sight, or ever seeing his face more '. 

On this she withdrew, without deigning a look at me. But her 
words had a proper efiect upon my heart, and I resolved to do her 
justice. I therefore prevented her husband's command, and in as 
few words as possible related the black affair with the strictest 
truth. When I had concluded, her lord declared that I had not 
only confirmed everything she had told him, but also added many 
circumstances of my own guilt which she had omitted, or perhaps 
not known. 

So complicated guilt seemed to require consideration to find out 
proper punishment, so I was remanded to my dungeon, but without 
the least encouragement to hope. The next day I was again 
brought into the court, where my former sentence was changed 
into that of being broken alive upon the wheel ; and this severity 
was said to be in justice to Amelia. 

When I had stood some moments stupefied with fear, the judge 
addressed me again in these words : ' Thou hast heard, wretched 
man, the sentence due to thy crimes ; but great as they have been, 
mercy extends her hand to thee. The virtues of the illustrious 
Donna Amelia overbalance thy guilt, and have prevailed for a- 
mitigation of thy punishment, in gratitude to that Divine Providence 
which made thee the cause of her coming among us. Thou shalfc 
not die, because we would not kill thy soul before thou hast had 
time to repent of thy crimes ; nor shalt thou suffer torture, that 
thy strength may not be impaired for the labour to which thy 
Jife is doomed : for this is the last day thou shalt ever behold the 

B 



18 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

light of heaven. Thou shalt immediately descend into the mines 
there to work out the residue of thine unhappy days in raising that 
gold for the use of others, the insatiable desire of which was the 
cause of all thy guilt '. 

I would have spoken in the agony of my soul, to desire death, 
but I was stopped by the judge, who sternly said that to hear a 
word from me would be an insult upon justice. On his saying which 
I was hurried away to the mountains over us, and precipitated into 
this gulf, where I have now been near 

Just as he said this, I was obliged to fly away to my body, which 
the unhappy Traffic had thrown from his hand into the vessel in 
which it was to be raised from the mine. 

The length of this story will make you wonder when I tell you 
that the spirit of Traffic showed it to me in a moment, for no longer 
did the gold remain in his possession, and I am always obliged to 
attend my body whenever it changes its master. But to understand 
this you must be informed that we spirits do not distinguish our 
existence by time or a succession of parts as men do ; with us there 
is nothing past or to come, but everything is present in one view 
so far as the natural course of causes and effects is preserved free 
from interruption by superior power. 



CHAPTER VII 

CHRTSAL PITRSITES THE HISTOEY OF HIS ADVENTXTBES — HE BXPLAHTS 
SOME DIPFIOULTIES IN HIS OWN NATURE — HE IS OFFERED AT A 
CONFESSION TO A PRIEST — THE CONFESSION AND OBEBD OF A 
NATIVE PERUVIAN — THE PENANCE ENJOINED HIM BT A JESTITT 

There is no crime, however black in its own nature, that does not 
receive an aggravation from hypocrisy ; but the highest exertion 
of this vice is when it makes a pretext of the best institutions to 
promote the practice of the worst actions. Of this I have seen 
innumerable instances in the adventures of my present state, 
though none so flagrant as what I shall now relate. 

You may imagine I felt pleasure at emerging from that infernal 
abyss into light. There was nothing remarkable in the three or 
four first stages I went through, my temporary owners being only 
the refiners and other tradesmen, who purified me from mixtures 
of mineral dross. 

I see you are desirous to know how I could preserve my identity 
when melted down with large quantities of the same metal. But 
you must know that ' spirits have a power of expanding or con- 
tracting themselves into what dimensions they please ; and that 
their life is not confined to any particular parts, as the heart or 
head, as in man, but is diffused through their whole bodies, so that 
any part being sepnrated from the rest does not die ' ^ ; but that 
portion of spirit which was in it at the time of such separation 

' Miltoc. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 19 

serves as a life for it, and becomes a distinct spirit, to inform that 
distinct body, and so on, ad infinitum '. For as it is agreed upon 
that bodies can be infinitely divided, upon the same principles 
spirit must also ; for it would be most absurd and impious to deny 
of the superior any perfection which we attribute to the inferior. 
The enlarging of my body, therefore, by the addition of more matter, 
or the lessening of it by ever so many divisions, makes no alteration 
in my sameness so long as my consciousness remains ^ : the former 
only increasing by energy, by-,the accession of so much spirit as 
informed the additional matter ^ ; for we spirits embody ourselves 
entirely in commixion, and resolve into one ^ ; as the latter sepa- 
ates us again into distinct beings, to animate our separate bodies. 
The first absolute owner to whom I belonged was a native Peru- 
vian, who had found means to purloin a considerable quantity of 
gold, part of which I was, and who presented me as a peace-offering 
to an ecclesiastic at confession. 

I see you have a curiosity to know my sentiments on religious 
matters ; but I have told you before that I am not allowed to make 
revelations. Sufficient on this head have been already made to 
man, did not his perverseness distort them from their original 
perspicuity and perfection. 

As there was something in the transactions which passed when I 
was offered to this ecclesiastic that may be new to you I shall repeat 
some particulars of them. 

You must have heard of the authority of the clergy in all the 
countries which profess the religion of the Roman pontiff, and 
particularly those under the Spanish monarchy. Of all the several 
Orders which compose this political hierarchy, those who call them- 
selves the companions of their Ood^, have acquired the greatest 
power. 

Though this title may appear profanely great to you, yet they 
seem to support it by the share which they assume in some of His 
most sacred prerogatives. 

To a reverend father of this Order was I presented on the festival 
called Easter. He was seated in a retired chamber of his temple 
in the exercise of one of the functions of the Deity, hearing, and 
punishing, or forgiving sins, according to his sovereign pleasure. It 
is not possible to give you here an idea of the solemnity of this 
ceremony in a country where all religion is evaporated into show. 
Be it sufficient to say, that the antry was such a mockery of 
the Deity, as no other of His creatures but man would dare to 
commit. The man who brought me into this mysterious fane 
advanced with fear and trembling to the apparent deity of the place, 
and kneeling before him, confessed himself guilty of several heinous 
crimes, in the admission of involuntary thoughts and indulgence 
of the appetites of nature, contrary to the rules laid down for him 
by his'spiritual guide. But this will be best explained by instances. 
The first crime which the penitent revealed was having tasted a 

^ Essay on Spirit. ^ Locke. 

^ Essay on Spirit. ^Milton. 

^ The Jesuits call themselves Socii Jesu, the Companions of Jesua. 



20 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

morsel of flesh on a day when it was prohibited. The father with 
a severe frown told him ' that was a great sin, which he must atone 
for by working two days for the Church, without hire, and abstaining 
from flesh at the same time, though it was generally allowed '. 

He next confessed that he had beaten a dog belonging to a priest 
which had broke into his hut and eaten the pottage prepared for 
him, by which means he had been obliged to go to sleep without 
his supper. At this the priest, knitting his brow into tenfold 
austerity, exclaimed : ' This is rebellion — rebellion against your 
God ! Do you not know that the dog of an. ecclesiastic is above 
the greatest, even white, layman, much more a wicked native. 
You must make amends ! you must — or ' 

The tone and gesture with which he spoke these words so terrified 
the trembling wretch that he instantly put his hand into his bosom 
and pulling me out, presented me to make his peace. As soon as I 
appeared, the priest's features softened, the tone of his voice fell, 
and receiving me with a gracious smile : ' You have not said ', says 
he, ' that the master of the dog was a Jesuit ; the crime, therefore, 
though great, may be forgiven. But beware for the future, and 
remember that the world and all in it belongs to us, and that to 
be guilty of the least disobedience, even in thought, is treason, and 
deserves the severest punishment. Proceed, unburden your con- 
science ! I know your thoughts, but would have you speak them 
that I may prove your sincerity. Proceed, I am in haste ' ! 

The penitent then went on : ' O father, be merciful and I will 
confess all ! Returning from my labour one evening late, I found 
my door fastened, and no one answering when I called, I burst it 
in ; when behold, I saw Father Ignatius in the very act of carnality 
with my beloved wife Mootaw ! I was amazed ; and though fear 
prevented my striking him, I could not forbear thinking in my 
heart that he who does those things can be no god — he must be 
only man ; and I cursed him in the bitterness of my soul ; but he 
was drunk with wine and did not hear me '. 

' Wretch ! devil ! heretic ' ! exclaimed the father in a rage ; 
' thou intrude upon the privacy of a Jesuit ! thou say he was but a 
9 an ! thou think he could not know thy very thoughts because he 
had drunk wine ! Audacious slave ! Art not thou and thy wife 
his ? Had he not a right to use his own ? Was it not an honour 
to thee, ungrateful wretch ? and darest thou to think a Jesuit is but 
a man ? But it is enough, the Inquisition shall teach thee faith 
and obedience ; the Inquisition ' 

At that tremendous word, the wretch, half-dead with fear, fell 
at his feet, crying out : ' O father ! God ! O king ! forgive, for- 
give ' ! and pulling out of his bosom the rest of his gold : ' Take 
this, lord, from your poor slave, and forgive. Take this, which 
I got at the peril of my life, and saved to buy the liberty of my 
dear child, whom my master took from me ; take it and forgive ; 
let her still be a slave : let me never see her more ! But oh ! the 
Inquisition ! Oh, forgive ! forgive ' ! 

The priest, mollified at the sight of the gold, replied : ' Thou 
knowest my compassion, but thou abusest it, and thy crimes are 
almost too great for mercy la hope thou wilt amend, and 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 21 

■transgress so no more, I will forgive thee now : but thou must be 
punished. Hast thou no more gold ' ? 

' O, father, no more, no more ! and this I saved to redeem my 
dear child — oh, let me get my child ' ! 

' \Vhat ! insolent ! dost thou presume to capitulate ? Thou shall 
be punished. Instead of getting back thy daughter, thou shall 
bring me thy son, whom I saw yesterday when I bade thee come 
to confession — the boy I blessed, and kissed upon thy knee '- 

' O, father, father, take all the gold, and let my daughter remain, 
but spare my son ; he is too young, oh, father, too young for thee ' ! 

' The Inquisition ' ! 

' Oh, take him, father, take him, take all, but spare me ; I fly, 
to bring my child to thee ! Oh, spare me from the Inquisition ' ! 

' 'Tis well, be comforted ; thy sins shall be forgiven ; perhaps if 
thou behavest well, thy son may also be restored. I fear thou hast 
forgotten thy Christian faith ; let me hear thee repeat thy creed '. 

The man, somewhat reassured to hear that he should escape the 
Inquisition, and comforted with the hope of having his son restored, 
began thus : — 

' I believe that God made the world, and all things in it, for my 
lords the Jesuits ; and that I must worship Him by obejdng them, 
and saying the prayers they direct me to the saints, and the Blessed 
Virgin, the Mother of God ; and above all, to the great saint Ignatius 
Loyola. But if I disobey their commands in anything, or repine 
at their service, or think that I must obey the viceroy before them, 
I shall be burned to death in the Inquisition here, and the great 
devil will burn me for ever after I am dead '. 

' Well, son, remember, and practise thy creed, and thy sins shall 
be forgiven thee. Go, and bring the boy when it is dark '- 



CHAPTER VIII 

THE HOLY FATHEK's TENDEBNESS TO ANOTHBB PENITENT, WHO HAD 
RAVISHED, MtTBDBKED, AND BOBBED HIS OWN BBOTHEE's WITE — 
HE ACCEPTS THE SPOIL AS A BECOMPENSB TO THE CHTJBCH — HE 
HINTS A METHOD OF PEEVBNTING THE DANGER OF HIS BEOTHEB'S 
RESENTMENT, AND DISMISSES HIM WITH GHOSTLY ADVICE 

The severity with which the Jesuit required satisfaction for the 
imaginary faults of the poor Peruvian may, perhaps, lead you to 
think that his zeal would be inexorable to real crimes ; but the 
following account will show you that it was no such thing, and that 
he looked upon nothing as a crime which was not detrimental to 
the power or temporal interest of his Society. 

The next penitent who approached the mercy-seat was a com- 
mander in the army. He advanced with a military intrepidity, and 
kneeling down in form : ' Father ', said he, ' I have a long reckoning 
to make, and some of the articles are rather heavy '. 

' My son ', replied the priest, ' you have had experience of the 
indulgence of the Church, and that no crimes are too black for her 



22 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

mercy, on proper penitence. Proceed, then, and open your ailments 
to your physician, nor fear the ef&cacy of his medicines '. 

' You know then, father ', said the penitent, ' that I have long 
burned with a passion for the wife of my brother, the judge. It 
was the subject of my last confession '. 

' I remember it right well ', replied the father, " and you may 
remember also what ghostly, yet comfortable, advice I gave you, 
to strive against and suppress it if you could '. 

' True, father ; but I told you then that I knew it would be in 
vain for me to strive, as I was resolved to ejijoy her, though at the 
hazard of life '. // 

' But, son, did I not comfort you by saying that if you found it 
in vain to strive, and could not live without her, as life was the 
greatest good in this world, it was just that you should preserve 
yours by obtaining what you were so violently set upon ; but always 
be careful that you conduct matters so as not to give offence by 
your success '. 

' Ah, but, father, that was not in my power : she was deaf to all 
my entreaties ; and that threw me into such despair that, not able 
to wait any longer, I have this very morning had recourse to force '. 

' That was really bad, if it could have been avoided ; but as you 
would not have forced her if she would have complied willingly, 
that alters the case very much in your favour ; and perhaps she 
put you to that trouble only to save the appearance of her own 
virtue ; and if so, you have both acted right, and there is no harm 
done, provided the affair is not disclosed '. 

' Oh, father, that is the thing. I was afraid of that ; and as her 
husband had always been a father to me, and all my future hopes 
depended on him, I so greatly dreaded her telling him that, to 
prevent it, as soon as I had enjoyed her, I cut her throat '. 

' Murder ! — oh, fie ! It is a heinous crime : blood calls for blood. 
Your case is terrible ' ! 

' I feared so, father ; but I depended on your tenderness. And 
I did not think it reasonable that I should have aU the pleasure of 
the crime, and you only the trouble of forgiving ; I stripped her 
of these jewels, which give me leave to offer you '. 

' You are a prudent man, my son ; I thought you would act with 
discretion. I accept the jewels, as a peace-offering to the Holy 
Church for your sins ; and as the value of them — ^indeed, they are 
costly gems — proves the sincerity of your repentance, I shall not 
hesitate to pronounce your sins forgiven. ' 

' For, though adultery is a great'sin •^.-and in this case aggravated 
by rape and incest, yet, as you say, it was not because she was the 
wife of another man, and especially your brother, that you desired 
to enjoy her, but merely as she was a beautiful woman, therefore 
the adultery and incest comes in but by accident. And then, as 
you ravished her only because she would not comply, the sin of 
the rape is certainly hers, as I said before ; for if I force a man 
to commit a crime, I am guilty of that crime, and not he. And 
again, though murder is a most heinous sin, yet as you killed her 
not merely to indulge a murderous intent, but to prevent her 

^ See the casuiBtical divinity of the Jesuits, throughout. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 23 

discoyering your having forced her, and so mining you, the intention 
quite alters the nature of the fact, and makes it but self-preservation, 
which is the first law of nature. And lastly, as you took the jewels, 
not with a design to rob her, but to ofier them to j^e_Church, and 
accordingly have brought them, that conclusion sanctifies the 
whole action, and makes your peace with Heaven. 

' For know, my son, that crimes which respect man only, as in 
your case, rape, adultery, incest, murder, and robbery, though 
bad in themselves, 'tis true, yet are a pleasure to the Church to 
forgive to a faithful and penitent son, who believes all her doctrines 
and pays due obedience to her clergy, the vicegerents of God on 
earth, the receivers of her revenues, and dispensers of her favours 
and vengeance ; to whom all earthly power is subservient, who 
are the kings of kings, and lords of the world. This, my son, is the 
'jioctrine of our Holy Church, as delivered by the most learned 
' fathers of our Order, in the belief of which you will be safe from 
aU the powers of hell. Do what you will, while you pay faith and 
obedience to the Church, she will pardon all your sins '. 

When he had concluded his instructions with this pious exhorta- 
tion, and sealed his absolution with a blessing, the purified saint 
arose and said : ' Holy father, thou hast set my soul at ease with 
regard to hereafter, but still I fear for this world. It unfortunately 
happened that I was seen in the fact by a servant who escaped me, 
or I should have charmed her silence too ; and now I apprehend 
she will inform my brother '- 

' This is unlucky, most unlucky ', replied the priest ; ' I know 
not what to advise : I am utterly at a loss. If you should prevent 
her malice, and accuse her of the fact '- 

' Oh, but father, the rape ? There may be appearances of that 
which would disprove my charge against a woman ' 

' Mistake me not, my son ; I do not advise any such thing. 
Heaven forbid that I should advise to bear false witness against 
an innocent life ! I am utterly at a loss '. 

' Suppose, father, I should stiU strive to prevent my fears by 
taking off my brother, as I caimot find her: this is the only way 
to make me easy. Ha, father, is not that an happy thought ? I 
wish it had occurred sooner, and then I should have given you but 
the one trouble '. 

' Why, truly, son, the dead neither make nor receive discoveries, 
and self-preservation wiU certainly justify anything, as I have said 
before. But I must not advise you : your own genius is ready, 
and can improve a hint ; I must know nothing till the affair is done : 
all I can say is that work imfinished had better never been begun. 
Adieu, my son, my blessing waits on all your undertakings. But 
be sure to hold the indulgent mercy of the Church in grateful 
remembrance '. 

The officer went away, happy in having lightened the burden 
that was upon his conscience, and big with the pious project of 
making the murder of his brother the first-fruits of his regeneration. 
He was the last penitent of that morning, and as soon as he was 
gone, his ghostly director retired to mortify his appetite in the 
refectory of the convent. 



24 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 



CHAPTER IX 

THE father's EAGB ON HEAKINO THAT HIS PENITENT HAD SECBBTBD 
SOME OF THE JEWELS — THE OPFICEE IS PUKSITED BY HIS BROTHBB 
TO THE CONVENT, WHITHER HE FLIES FOB SANCTT7ABY — HIS EE- 
CEFTION FROM THE FATHER, AND THE TERMS OF THEIR RECON- 
CILIATION — THE FATHER SENDS AWAY THE JUDGE IN A FRIGHT — 
THE OFFICER IS RECEIVED INTO THE SOCIETY 

The great value of the jewels which the officer had presented to 
my master took up so much of his thoughts, that as soon as he had 
finished his collation he retired to his cell to meditate on the further 
a,dvantages he might make of this afiair. 

While he was in this pleasing employment another ecclesiastic 
entered to acquaint him with the murder and robbery of the 
judge's wife ; and among other particulars of the story said that 
her crucifix, thought to be the richest in lay possession in all Peru, 
Lad been taken from her. 

' That crucifix ' ! exclaimed my master, starting ; for he knew 
it well, having long paid his devotions to it, and now to be 
cheated thus of it, when he thought it so justly his due, provoked 
him almost to madness ; 'that crucifix taken too ! damned, 
murderous, deceitful villain ! — villain on all sides ! But I will be 
revenged ' ! 

The other priest understood not what he meant, and was just 
going to inquire, when in rushed the captain, all aghast. ' Oh, 
father, father ! ' said he, as soon as he could speak, ' sanctuary ! 
sanctuary ! my brother is at the gate, with all the officers of 
justice ' ! 

At this the father grinned an insulting smile, and beckoning to 
the other priest to withdraw : ' Wretch ' ! said he, ' thou sacrilegious 
wretch ! how couldst thou dare to enter these holy walls, violated 
by thy guilt ? Didst thou not fear the fate of Ananias and Sap- 
phira ? As thou didst deceive me with thy feigned penitence, and 
hast lied to the Lord, in concealing what thou hadst most justly 
devoted to Him, I revoke the absolution I gave thee, and will 
deliver thee to justice, to receive the punishment due to thy crimes ; 
these holy walls aSord no sanctuary to sacrilege ' ! 

The poor criminal stood confounded at reproaches which he dared 
not interrupt, though he could not comprehend the cause or mean- 
ing of them. At length, when the priest had exclaimed himself 
out of breath, the trembling wretch replied : ' Oh, father, what can 
have kindled thy wrath againsti me ? I have committed no crime 
since thy absolution purged my soul. I was only going towards 
my brother's house, when I met him, and the servant with him, 
with all the officers of justice in search of me, on which I fled 
directly to you for sanctuary '. 

' I grant no sanctuary to sacrilege '. 

' What sacrilege, oh, father ' ? 

.'The crucifix, deceitful wretch ! — where is thy sister's crucifix 7 
Hast thou not defrauded the Church of her due ? Didst thou no^ 



ADVENTURES OF 4 GUINEA 25 

say that thou tookest thy sister's jewels only to make a peace 
offering for thy sins ? — and then to secrete thus the most valuable 
part of them. This is defrauding the labourer of his hire ! This 
is defrauding the Church of her right, without making the proper 
compensations ! And what can be greater sacrilege ' ? 

Just at these words, a knocking at the gate awoke the penitent 
from his amaze, and made him apprehend that he had not a minute 
to lose ; he therefore, with the readiest presence of mind, replied : 
' The cruciiix, father ! you astonish me ! Did I not give it you ' ? 
And then putting his hand into his bosom and pulling it out, with 
A look of surprise he reached it to him. ' Forgive, oh, father ', said he, 
' the crime of inadvertency. I meant not to have kept it from you, 
but only overlooked it in my confusion. Accept it — accept all I 
-am master of, and save my life ' ! 

' Son ', replied the father, softening his voice and taking the cruci- 
fix, ' I am glad thou wast not intentionally guilty of so unpardonable 
-an offence. I believe and accept thy excuse. Be comforted, there- 
fore, my son, thy sins are forgiven '. 

' Oh, but, father, the officers of justice ' ! 

' What officers, what justice, dares attempt to show her face 
Tvithin these walls ? Thou art my penitent ; I have absolved thee 
and I will defend thee. Sit down and compose thy spirits, while 
I repel this bold intrusion on the peace and privilege of these holy 
walls '. 

Saying thus, the father went to the gate of the convent, where 
cstood the judge, displaying the guilt of the fugitive to the holy 
fathers, to engage them to refuse him sanctuary and give him up 
to justice. But my master soon stopped him. ' Cease ', said he 
with a low voice, and downcast, meditative look, ' disturb not the 
peace of these holy walls. The man you seek is my penitent. He 
has made satisfaction to the Church, and reconciled himself to 
Heaven. I come this moment from giving him the seal of absolu- 
tion. Disturb not the raptures of his soul, that is now joining with 
the angelic choirs in the hymns of joy raised in heaven for his 
repentance. Depart in peace '. 

' How, father ', exclaimed the judge, 'can a wretch guilty of such 
crimes so soon have made his peace ? He has deceived you, father ; 
he has not told you half his guilt — rape, incest, adultery and 
murder ! Can they be thus forgiven ? So easy pardons but encourage 
vice '. 

' And who art thou, presumptuous man ', replied the father, 
raising his voice, and putting on an air of authority, ' and who art 
thou, that darest thus to call the power of God's Holy Church in 
question ? What faith, or rather, what heresy has taught thee 
this presumption ? Dost thou measure the Divine authority of 
our unerring tribunal by the weak rules of thy blind law ? Are 
not the keys of heaven ours ? and have we not the power to loose 
as well as bind ? But I shall not argue more with thee here. There 
is a tribunal proper for such opinions as thine ; there try if thy 
knowledge of the laws will justify thy heresies ; there thou art not 
judge '. 

The first mention of heresy had struck such a terror into the heart 



26 ADVENTURES OF A OUINEA 

of the poor judge that he was for some moments unable to reply. 
At last, recollecting himself a little : ' I submit, oh, father ", said he. 
' I am no heretic ; I have no opinions but what I learn from the 
Holy Church, whose power I acknowledge in all its divine plenitude '. 

' 'Tis well ', replied the priest, ' 'tis well ; depart in peace, and 
to-morrow I will visit thee, and examine the state of thy conscience '. 

The judge then, making a profound reverence, withdrew without 
a murmur, and the triumphant father returned to his penitent. 
' My son ', said he, ' thine enemies are defeated. Thy rest is secure 
here. But such is their power, and so strong the general abhorrence 
that pursues thy late guilt, that it will not be safe for thee ever to 
leave this sanctuary '. 

' Oh, father, must I be confined for ever here ' ? 

' I said not so, my son : there is a way for thee to go in triumph 
out, above the power of thy present persecutors '. 

' Oh, name it, father ' ! 

' Take our vows. Heaven has blessed thee with a fertile genius, 
and steeled thy soul with fortitude. These talents must not be 
buried ; an account will be required of them. And where can they 
be put to proper use, except in the service of the Donor, in His 
Church ? There they will raise thee to that rank and power which 
thou seest us enjoy. I see thou yieldest. Resist not the motions 
of the Holy Spirit. I receive thee into the fold. I salute thee, 
brother. From this moment of thine election mayest thou date 
thy entrance into the highest honours of this world. The day ap- 
proaches when thy military knowledge and valour may also be 
called into action. Great events are ripening in the womb of 
time ' ! 

' I yield, oh, father ', replied the penitent ; ' I receive thine offer, 
with due submission and respect ; and from this moment dedicate 
my valour, skill, and every power of my soul and body to the 
implicit service of thine holy order '. 

' It is the hand of Heaven that leads thee, no longer son, but 
brother. I will go and acquaint our brethren with thy miraculous 
conversion and election. Thou hast no more to do but to mak& 
thy will, and bequeath all thy wealth to our order '. 

' Bequeath, my father, must I die ' ? 

' But to the world, brother, to live with us '. 

' But I have nothing to bequeath '. 

' Leave that to us. Do you only give all your fortune, in the 
hands of your brother, to our society, in consequence of your 
admission, and let us find that fortune. I go ! The bell rings for 
vespers. I shall send our notary to you ; and when that is done, 
we will restore our exhausted spirits with a slight repast in the 
refectory, where I wiU introduce thee to our brethren '. 

In a word, all things were executed, and the new brother ad- 
mitted in proper time into the order, of which he has since risen 
to be one of the brightest ornaments. And the judge, to avoid the- 
imputation of heresy which his implied doubt of the Church's 
sanctuary had given my master the hint of, was glad to pay half 
his wealth to the society as the fortune of his pious brother. 
Soon as this afiair was thus happily completed, my master, that 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 27 

he might openly show his adoration of me to the world, had me made 
into a crucifix, in which shape I was fastened to his rosary, and 
there publicly received that adoration from the knee, which before 
was paid me only in the heart. A repetition of all the occurrences- 
I saw in the service of this master would be unnecessary, as the- 
two I have related give a general idea of them. 



CHAPTER X 

CHEYSAL CHANGES HIS SERVICE, AND BMBAKKS FOB BUEOPE IN AN 
ENGLISH MAN-Or-WAB — THE CAUSE AND MANNER OF HIS COMING 
THAT WAY — THE OCCURRENCES OF HIS PASSAGE — ON HIS ARRIVAL 
Ur ENGLAND HE IS SENT BY HIS MASTER TO SETTLE SOME MISTAKES 
IN THE VOYAGE 

I WAS heartily sick of such a scene, when the time came for sending 
me into these parts of the world, where scarcity enhances my value, 
and makes my power more extensive. There being a war between 
Spain and England at that time, about the liberty of cutting sticks 
upon a desert shore, it was necessary to secure a safe passage for the 
treasure by establishing a right understanding with the commander' 
of an Engish man-of-war, which was cruising in those seas. It fell 
to my lot to go on this errand in the shape of a doubloon into- 
which I was oast to save the profanation which a crucifix must 
suffer in the hands of heretics. 

There was some little address requisite to conduct this afiair 
with the captain in such a manner as to keep it secret from his 
officers, to gain all of whom would have been too expensive ; besides 
that he would never trust his sarced honour to the fidelity of so- 
many. But this was readily adjusted. The refinements of modem 
politeness having softened the natural ferocity of a state of war, 
and admitting an intercourse of courtesy between parties who- 
profess to seek each other's destruction, the Spanish governor sent 

^ According to Davis's Olio, the commander here referred to was 
Captain Harry Powlett or Paulet, afterwards sixth Duke of Boltoa, who- 
is alluded to later on in a similar episode, where his conduct earns him 
the nickname of ' Captain Sternpost '. This oificer brought charges of 
misconduct against Admiral Griffin for failing to engage the enemy, and 
obtained a verdict against him. Griffin beiug suspended from his rank 
and employment. Griffin retaliated two years later by similar charges 
against Powlett, but was unable to bring substantiating evidence. 
Chrysal, however, compares the two cases in a way that precludes the 
idea that the culprit was one and the same person in both. Davis has: 
probably mixed up two men of the same name ; and, if so, this would be 
another Captain Powlett of the Tilbury, who was reprimanded by a- 
court martial for his dilatoriaess in coming into action on an attempt 
to intercept the Spanish plate fleet, 1748, off Havana. Most of the 
enemy got away, through the mishandling of the British ships, and the- 
Admiral, Sir Charles Knowles, did not escape censure. 



•28 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

-out a boat with his compliments to the English captain with a 
large supply of fresh provisions, fruits, wine, etc. 

This necessarily produced a return of civility from the well-bret? 
-captain ; and in this intercourse were the terms of his connivance 
settled, as the seal of which I was delivered to him among a very 
large number of my fellows ; who, honourably punctual to his 
promise, at the appointed time sailed away from that station in 
quest of some ships of the enemy's which he expected to meet else- 
where, and did not return till the Spanish treasure was beyond 
his reach. 

As this was a compliment of great consequence to the Spaniards, 
the captain had been so handsomely considered for it that his desires 
were satisfied, and he only wished to be safe at home to enjoy the 
wealth he had so happily acquired. Often would he take me out 
-(for the beauty of my new impression had struck his eye and gained 
me the honour of being kept in his purse), often, I say, would he 
take me out of his purse and, gazing on me till his eyes watered : 
^ O thou end of all my toils and dangers ' ! would he say, ' thou 
crown of all my hopes ! now I have obtained thee I am content ! 
Let others seek that phantom, Glory ; I have in thee the more solid 
reward, for which I always sought, nor shall anything tempt me 
to hazard being separated from thee ' : a resolution which he had 
an opportunity of showing in all its strength a few days after, 
when a ship appeared which he thought to be a Spanish man-of-war. 

As ours was a ship of force, and all the officers except the captain 
were very poor ; and as the Spanish ships are always richly laden 
with treasure in those seas, the crew was in the highest spirits at 
this sight, and made everything ready to attack her with the most 
-eager alacrity. But the case was quite different with the captain. 
He was now as rich as he desired, and dreaded the loss of that 
wealth which he had so long laboured for. He therefore retired 
anto his cabin while the lieutenants were clearing ship, and, taking 
me out of his purse with a look of tenderness that brought the 
tears into his eyes : ' And shall I hazard the loss of thee ? ' he cried ; 
* the object, the reward, of a life of toil and danger ? Shall I sacri- 
fice the only good of life to that chimera, honour ? — to that bubble. 
Tighter than air and more variable than the wind, the interest of 
my country ? What is honour without wealth ? What is the 
country to him who has nothing in it ? Let the poor fight for 
money — I have enough ! Let the ambitious fight for glory— I 
-despise the empty name ! Let those who have a property in their 
country fight for it — I have none, nor can have, nor any of its 
blessings, without thee ; and therefore will not venture thy loss 
for any such vain considerations '. 

As soon as he had formed this prudent resolution, he clasped me 
to his heart, kissed me, and returned me into his purse, just as the 
lieutenant came in to tell him they could now make the ship, which 
must be vastly rich, she was so deep in the water. My master made 
no reply ; but, taking a telescope in his hand, he went upon the 
quarter-deck, and viewing her for some time with great apparent 
■earnestness : ' You are all mistaken ', said he, ' in that ship : 
rich, indeed ! and so she may remain for us. That ship is a first-rate 



ADVENTUHES OF A GUINEA 29' 

man-of-war by her size ; and as for her depth in the water, she 
is only brought down by her guns, which are fifty-two pounders 
at least. Put about the ship, and make all sail possible from her. 
I am answerable for His Majesty's ship committed to my care, and 
win not sacrifice her against such odds. Her weight of metal 
would blow us out of the water. Besides, I have a packet on board 
and must not go out of my way : about ship, and away directly, 
I say '. 

The officers stood aghast at this speech, that disappointed all 
their golden hopes. They urged, they beseeched, they remon- 
strated, that it was impossible she could be what he said. They 
insisted that the colour of her sails, and the heaviness of her going 
proved her to be a ship of trade that had been long at sea ; and as 
for her bulk, it only encouraged them to hope she would prove the 
better prize, as all the ships that carry the treasure are very large ; 
that they had observed they wronged her so much, they could go- 
round her if they pleased ; and begged only that they might be 
permitted to take a nearer view of her, which they were confident 
would prove her to be what they said. They alleged the oppor- 
tunity of making aU their fortunes ; the honour, the interest of 
their country. They begged, swore, stormed, and wept ; but all 
in vain. The captain had taken his resolution, and would vouchsafe 
no other answer than a repetition of what he said before, ' That he 
was accountable for His Majesty's ship, and would not hazard her- 
to gratify them : besides, the packet he had on board might be 
of worse consequence than the taking of such a ship (should she 
even be what they said, though he was certain to the contrary) would 
make amends for. And that, as to going nearer to her, the length 
of her guns would enable them to drive every shot through and 
through his ship, at a distance that his could never reach her from; 
though if they should be mad enough to engage her, his small shot 
could never pierce such mountains of timber as her sides were barri- 
caded with '. And so, as his power was absolute, they were obliged 
to submit, and ofi he sheered. 

It is impossible to describe the distraction which this affair threw 
our ship into. The officers acted all the inconsistent outrages of 
madness. The men chewed the quid, damned their eyes and hmbs 
for their bad luck, and went to work as usual ; while several poor- 
sick wretches, whose spirits had been so raised by the hopes of such 
a prize, that they had forgot their complaints, and exerted all their 
strength to assist in the engagement, now sunk under the weight 
of the disappointment, and crawled back, many of them to die in 
their hammocks. 

But the captain had carried his point, and regarded nothing else ; , 
though, indeed, he was somewhat disconcerted a few days after, 
when he learned from another ship that she really was a register" 
ship of immense value, and so weakened by hard weather and sick- 
ness, that she could not have attempted any resistance, but had. 
prepared to strike the moment she saw us. This information 
added such fuel to the rage that inflamed the officers before, that 
all intercourse between them and their captain was entirely broken, 
off, so that I became his sole companion. 



^0 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

This lasted all the while we were at a distance from England; 
but as we drew near home, the captain's stifEness began to bend, 
and he made several advances to a reconciliation and general am- 
nesty, as he could not but feel some apprehensions for his conduct 
from his superiors. But all was in vain. The thought of returning 
in poverty, instead of that wealth which he had disappointed them 
of, kept up their resentments, and they determined to complain, 
if only for the satisfaction of revenge. 

This convinced my master that methods must be taken to obviate 
their attempts, or he might run a greater hazard at home than he 
had intended to avoid abroad. He, therefore, prudently concluded, 
that the same argument which had been so powerful with himself 
would be the most effectual to vindicate what he had done with 
•others, and that it would be better to share the spoil than risk the 
loss of all. 

For this intent, as soon as he arrived in England, he took me from 
bis purse once more, and looking earnestly at me for some moments : 
' We must part ', said he, with a sigh ; ' we must part ! but I hope 
to good purpose. Thou only was the cause of that conduct which 
now gives me fear; exert therefore thy influence equally, where 
I now send thee, and thou wilt excuse my fault, if it is one '. Tears 
at the thought of losing me here choked his utterance ; he gave 
me a last kiss, and sent me directly away, in company with a 
-considerable number more, to mediate his peace. 



CHAPTER XI 

■THE GOOD CONSBQTJBNCBS OF A EIGHT TrNDEBSTAlJDINa BBTWEBW 
CERTAIN PBBSONS — CHEYSAL'S EBPLBCTIGSrS ON HIS BIEST 
SBEINO THE PtTBLIC OFPICES IN LONDON — HIS MASTEE VISITS 
A GENTLEMAN, WHO IN THE VEHEMENCE OF HIS EAGB AGAINST 
CERTAIN ABUSES, HITS HIMSBLP A VIOLENT SLAP ON THE PACB — 
THE NECESSITY OF DECENCY, AND THE METHODS OP SUPPOKTINO 
IT, INSTANCED IN THE HISTORY OF A PRETTY FELLOW 

As the deUoate nature of this transaction required some address, 
Tie entrusted the management of it to his purser, who had con- 
vinced him by many instances of his sagacity in the methods of 
■obtaining an influence over the great. 

As soon as my new master arrived in London, his first care was 
to execute the commission for which we had been given to him ; 
but the person to whom this application was to be made, 
■happening to be out of town for a few days, that he might noi 
lose any time, he proceeded to settle some affairs of his own ; in 
the course of which I had an opportunity of seeing into some 
part of the secrets of his mysterious business. 

Tbe professed motive for hia coming to town, was to settle bis 
.own, and pass his captain's, accounts, between which there was a 
•connection not necessary to be known to any other : for, though 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 31 

my late master did not think it consistent with his dignity to be 
too familiar with his officers, and generally slighted their opinion, 
if only to show his own superiority and keep them at a proper 
distance; with him and his purser the ease is quite otherwise, the 
best imderstanding always subsisting between them, and every 
affair being concerted with the greatest harmony to their mutual 
advantage : an agreement, which, beside the comfort and con- 
venience of it to themselves, had this happy influence over the 
rest of the ship's company, that it kept them, if not easy, at least 
quiet, from aU murmurings and complaints of bad provisions, 
short weights, and such-like imaginary grievances, which the 
restless temper of seamen is too apt to make the cause of much 
trouble to the purser, and disturbance to the captain, when these 
happen not to agree between themselves. But, as the contrary 
was the case here, their common interest animated the assiduity 
of my master, and made him go directly to the several officers and 
contractors with whom his business lay, to prepare everything in 
proper order for public inspection. 

On my first going to these public offices, everything gave me 
pleasure. There was such an appearance of regularity in all the 
proceedings, of ease and affluence in the officers, that I could not 
help saying to myself, ' Happy state, whose meanest servants are 
gentlemen ; whose business is reduced to a system, above danger 
of confusion or abuse'. But a nearer view showed things in 
another Ught. The first person my master went to was the 
gentleman who supplied him with those kinds of clothing for the 
seamen, which are by these merry poor fellows emphatically 
caUed slops. As he was just going to dinner, my master accepted 
of his invitation, and sat down with him. A round or two of 
loyal toasts to the success of the navy, and continuance of the 
war, having washed down their fare, and refreshed their spirits 
after the fatigue of a full meal, they proceeded to business. 

' I come, sir ', said my master, ' to settle the account of the last 
cruise. Here it is. You see most of the articles have pone off 
pretty well; but I must tell you, that you are more obUged to 
some of your friends for that than you are aware of perhaps ; for 
if I had not prevailed on the captain to let the alehouse -keepers 
and gin-women come on board, and keep the slop-sellers off, when 
the men received their pay, on going out, you would have had 
but a blank list of it. But by this management the fellows spent 
all their money in drink, and then necessity drove them to me 
for clothes '. 

' Here is to the captain's good health ', answered the other, • and 
that I may soon see him at the head of the navy. I am very much 
obliged to you and him, and shall consider your friendship 
properly. But is there no way of preventing those pedlars from 
intruding thus upon us ? I am resolved I will try. I believe I can 
make an interest, you understand me, that will procure me an 
order to exclude them ; at least, if I cannot do that, I will insist 
on raising my terms; for every branch of business is now so 
loaded with presents and perquisites, that there is scarce anything 
to be got. A man who goes to a public office to receive money 



32 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

runs the gauntlet through bo many of them, that, if he does nofc 
make up his accounts in a very masterly manner indeed, he will 
have but little to show for his pains, in the end '. 

' Very true ', replied my master, ' I have had experience of 
what you say this very morning. You know it is some years since- 
I have been in town before : I was therefore quite surprised at 
the gay appearance of every clerk in the offices. Our midshipmen 
on the paying off of a ship are nothing to them ; so, thought I to 
myself, this is very well ! Such fine gentlemen as these will never 
stoop to take the little perquisites which their shabby predecessors 
were so eager for ; they cannot want them. Accordingly, as soon 
as I had done my business, I was preparing to make a handsome 
speech, and a leg, and so walk oS; but I was soon undeceived, 
and found, to my no small astonishment, that, if the case wa& 
altered, it was no way for the better for me ; the present fine- 
gentlemen being to the full as rapacious as the former shabby 
fellows ; and with this addition to the evil, that their expectations 
were raised in proportion to their appearance, so that they must 
have a crown, where the others were satisfied -with a shilling '. 

' And how can it be otherwise ', returned the other, ' while the- 
principals set them snoh an example of extravagance, and enforce- 
obedience to it in the manner they do; for though their o-wn 
exorbitant salaries enable them to live with the luxury of aldermen 
at home, and make the appearance of courtiers abroad, how can 
they think that their hackney underlings shall be able to change 
their dress -with the court, and appear with all the precise foppery 
of pretty fellows, if they have not clandestine ways of getting- 
money : and that this is the case, I can give you an instance not 
to be contradicted. 

'Perhaps you may remember a little boy that ran about the= 
house here, when you were in town last. His mother was servant 
to my first wife ; you cannot forget black-eyed Nan ; who was the 
father is nothing to my story, but I took care of the boy. When 
he grew up I thought the best thing I could do for him was to- 
get him iato one of the public offices, for he was too soft for my 
own business, and this I imagined would sharpen him, and fifty 
pounds a year keep him from being an expense to me. Accordingly, 
I got him admitted as an additional clerk, in this busy time : and, 
that his appearance should not shame my recommendation, I 
added a London-made suit to his country wardrobe, which I 
thought good enough for him to wear every day. 

' Well, thus equipped, to the office he went, as good-looking a- 
lad as ever came from a Yorkshire academy, which had, been the 
height of his education. But I soon found that I had been out of 
my reckoning ; for, going with him to introduce him to the head 
clerk, whom I had before spoken properly to in his behalf, I found 
the whole office in deep mourning, which, as it had been ordered 
only for the court, and was to hold but for a fortnight longer, I 
had never thought of dressing him in ; but I soon found that I 
had not a proper opinion of the consequence of the place. For 
the head clerk gave me a friendly hint, "that it was expected 
that all the clerks in His Majesty's offices should show the decent 



ADVENTVREa OF A GUINEA 33 

respect of conforming to the dress of the court on these solemn 
occasions ". 

' I could not help exclaiming, I believe a little too shortly, " What, 
sir, upon a salary of fifty pounds a year" ? 

'"Sir", replied he, "nobody is forced to take that salary; and 
they who do not like the rules of the office are at liberty to leave 
it " ; and then turned oS upon his heel. 

' " I beg your pardon, sir", said I, seeing my error, " it was an 
oversight of mine; but it shall be amended". 

' " The sooner the better, sir ", answered he, " for his lordship will 
be in the office to-morrow, and he must not see anything so 
irregular ; and pray, sir ", turniiig to the lad, " get that fleece on 
your head shorn a Uttle " — ^his hair flowed down in modest ringlets on 
his shoulders — " and strive to appear something like a gerUleman ". 

' I saw it was in vain to say anything, and so took the boy away 
with me ; and had him equipped next day, in all the fashionable 
trappings of woe, with his hair shorn indeed, and tied up in a bag, 
by a French barber, for I would not stand for a trifle when my 
hand was in, and then went with him myself ; being desirous to see 
how he woidd be received in his new appearance ; but alas ! I had 
forgot that indispensable article of a gentleman's dress, a sword, 
which I was therefore obUged to send out for directly. In a fort- 
night's time, the order for the court's going into second mourning 
put me to the same expense over again ; for the rules of decency 
were not to be dispensed with ; and then, in a month after, it was 
as necessary to trim his light grey frock with a silver edging of 
coxcomb, that he might not appear worse than his fellows ; all 
which, with many other as necessary et ceteras, by the end of the 
first quarter, consumed his year's salary. 

' This enraged me to that degree, that I was going to take him 
away directly ; but the boy had by this time got some insight into 
the ways of the place, and prevented me, by saying, that if I 
would try, but for another quarter, he was satisfied that his 
perquisites would more than defray aU such expenses; and so I 
find they do, for though he is now as smart, well-dressed a young 
fellow as any about town he has never since troubled me for a, 
shining ; nay, more than all this, assures me, there are some of his 
fellow clerks who keep footmen and horses, and have routs and 
concerts at their houses, as regularly as the people of the first 
rank ; and all by the perquisites of a place of fifty pounds a year. 

' Now, as all those perquisites are drawbacks upon us, as I 
said before, we cannot carry on the business on the usual terms, if 
we do not bring up our loss in the quality of the goods, for it 
would be absurd to expect that we should lower our living to let 
Buoh fellows run away with the profit of our industry. In short, 
my wife's chariot shall not be put down, nor will I deny myself 
a bottle of claret, to give you or any other friend, to save all the 
seamen in Britain from perishiug with cold: charity begins at 
home; I will insist upon having those pedlars prevented from 
interloping upon our trade ; and so, sir, my service to you ', 



34 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 



CHAPTER XII 

oheysal's master oivbs his feibnd some hints that make him 
lower his note — an uncommon piece of gbner03itt 
returned more politely than could be expected eeom 
the parties — an odd story of an unfashionable steward — 

THE SUCCESS OF CHRYSAL'S MEDITATION IN FAVOUR OF HIS 
LATE MASTER 

My master had heard him out, though not with the greatest 
patience, and now, taking the opportunity of his stopping to 
drink: — 

' All this may be true ', said he, ' and what you propose might 
possibly have been done, and with the effect you desire, some 
time ago: but matters are altered a good deal at present, both 
among the gentlemen of the navy, and here too, as I am 
told ; and indeed, in respect to this affair, those things are 
made so infamously bad, and rated so high, that nobody can 
speak in defence of them; nay, it even goes almost against my 
own conscience to utter them ; for, only think with yourself, what 
a barefaced imposition it is, to make a poor wretch pay seven 
shillings for a coarse rotten jacket, when even a Jew shall seU 
him a soimd one, and of finer stuff, for four and sixpence; and 
everything else at the same rate. In short, this point is so 
overstrained, that it will probably overturn the whole trade in 
the end; for several of the captains are so provoked at it, that 
they take every method they can to prevent the men from 
taking up anything from us; particularly that which I hinted 
before, of keeping off the alehouse-keepers, and such people, and 
encouraging slop-aeUers to come on board, when the men are 
paying, by which means they buy good comfortable clothes, at 
half the price of our rotten trash: indeed, one of them went so 
far as to buy in a parcel of good shoes, at his own expense, and 
make a present of a pair apiece to all his top-men, when they were 
going out on a cruise, as they had spent their money, and could 
not buy for themselves, and our shoes were so bad, that the first 
time they went aloft with them, after they were wet, the ratKngs 
tore them aU to pieces, so that it was a common thing to see a 
man come down barefooted, who had gone up with a new pair 
of shoes on. Though it is but just to comfort you, with an 
account of the return which he met with for his kindness, which 
was no less than a round robin ^ to the Lords of the Admiralty, for 
his refusing to let them go ashore, and spend their money, in the 
same manner, next time they came in '. 

' And such a return may their officiousness always meet with ', 
replied the other, 'for meddling with matters which do not 
concern them : cannot they be content with their own large gains, 

^ The . name that seamen call their complaints against their captain ; 
it is taken from the manner of their signing them, which is in a circle, 
BO that there is no knowing who signs first. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 35 

without interfering to hinder others ? But I see how it is ; the 
spirit of patriotism has got into them too, forsooth, and they must 
be showing their regard to the public! What an evil effect will 
the bad example of one man have ! There was a time when they 
would not have dared to do this. To say the truth, my friend, 
this ia not the first alarm we have received on this head : though 
what to do about it we cannot tell: indeed, I believe we must 
e'en mend our hands; which, as half a loaf is better than 
no bread, hard as it is upon us, ia preferable to losing the 
trade quite; in the meantime, I am obhged to you and your 
captain for your friendship, and hope you will accept of thia 
return '. 

They then proceeded to settle their accounts, as soon as which 
were finished, my master took his leave, and went on with hia 
business, which was exactly of the same nature, and concluded in 
the same way, with every person whom they dealt with. 

As soon as these transactions were ended, his next care was to 
pass his captain's accounts, which he also succeeded in, without 
any difficulty, though for this he was more indebted to the chance 
of a lucky minute than he had apprehended. For they were no 
sooner closed, than an affair happened that gave a tvu:n, entirely 
new, to the whole course of business, in that channel. 

When the accounts of the next captain came to be examined, 
the clerk, glancing his eye cursorily over them, in the usual 
manner, on looking at the amount, 'There must be some mistake 
here ', said hew 

' How so, sir ' ? said the captain, who was present, ' let me look 
at the account, if you please. No, sir, there ia no mistake, I 
believe. Pray, where do you mean ' ? 

'In the casting it up, sir', answered the clerk, 'you see, the 
amount is made to be but eight hundred pounds '. 

' Nor ahould it be more ', rephed the captain, ' I summed up the 
account, myself, and these figures are of my own writing '. 

' How can that possibly be, sir ' ? returned the clerk in a 
surprise, ' but eight himdred pounds for aU the repairs, wear and 
tear, of a man-of-war, on such a station, for four years! I 
suppose then, sir, the ship had a thorough repair going out, and 
wants the like now! To be sure it can be done better and 
cheaper here, than abroad, and therefore you were in the right to 
bring her home to get it '. 

' Not at all, sir ', added the captain, ' that was not the case : 
she had no thorough repair going out, and is come home in better 
order than she went, as this return of the officers of the yard 
shows '. 

' Good God ! sir, how did you manage ' 1 

' To the best of my judgment, sir, I laid out nothing but what 
I thought necessary, and I charged nothing but what I laid out : 
I mean not to arraign the conduct of others: I only speak for 
myself. In these cases I look upon a man as a steward to the 
public! and I should think it as great dishonesty to betray, or 
break that trust, as to wrong a private person '. 
This speech was heard with astonishment, and returned with a 



36 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

cold compliment, as it came too home to many to meet general 
approbation; however, the affair necessarily had an effect not 
very agreeable to some present ; for, the next captain's accounts 
arising to near four times the sum of the last, such an immediate 
precedent made the difference so glaring, that it was impossible to 
avoid putting a stop to them, and so he was mulcted his whole 
four years' pay : though ours, which had been still higher, had gone 
off smoothly, and without the least remark. 

My master having concluded this affair so happily, proceeded 
next on the great cause of his coming to town, in which, with our 
assistance, he laboured so successfully that the captain's mistake 
met only a gentle reprimand. 

I here came into the possession of a new master, and immedi- 
ately after changed my Spanish appearance for the fashion of the 
country, and in the shape of a guinea, entered into the most 
extensive state of sublunary influence, becoming the price of every 
name that is respected under heaven. 



CHAPTER XIII 

OKRTSAL EXPLAINS SOME FUBTHEB PBOPBRTIBS OF HIS NATTJBE — 
HE CaHAUaBS HIS APPEABANCE FOE THE MODE OB THE COITNTBY, 
AND ENTBKS INTO THE SEKVTCB OE A NOBLE LORD — THE SAGACITY 
OF MB POUNDAGE, AND HIS ADDBBS3 IN BUSINESS 

I AM now entering upon a stage where the scenes are so various, 
and so quickly changed, that it will require your strictest attention 
to keep ptice with my relation. But to make this the easier to you, 
and to disencumber your surprise from doubts, at my repeating the 
past lives of persons in whose possession I have been but a few 
moments, I must premise to you, that our knowledge is very 
different frbm that of men. I have told you that we know all 
things intuitively, without the trouble, delay, and errors of 
discourse or reasoning. I must now further inform you, that this 
intuition extends not only to the present face of tlungs, but also 
has a retrospect to the whole series of their existence, from its 
first beginning : the concatenation between cause and effect being 
80 plain to our eyes, that let us but see any one event of the lit© 
of a man, and we immediately know every particular that 
preceded it. 

As to futurity, indeed, it is not yet determined how far 
forward we can look into that ; some allowing us to have the same 
power of foresight as we have of retrospect ; which was the opinion 
that supported the credit of oracles in former days. But that 
notion is now exploded, and men argue that our foresight extends 
only to natural causes and effects ; but in the actions of man, his 
free-will so often breaks that order, that it is impossible for us to 
know this moment how he will act the next, from any observation 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 3? 

of the past; and they think they prove their aigument by this, 
that if spirits could foreknow all a man's actions, it would spare 
them the trouble of tempting him to any particular one. But this 
by the by I for as I shall confine my narrative to matters already 
past, without ever foretelling anything, it is not necessary for me 
to determine a question that opens such a field for the guesses of 
the learned. But to return to my story. 

From the mint, where I put on the shape of a guinea, I waa sent 
to the bank, where the pleasure I had felt at the beauty and 
convenience of my new figure was considerably cooled at my being 
thrown into so large a heap as took away all my particular conse- 
quence, and seemed to threaten a long state of inactivity before it 
might come to my turn to be brought into action. But I soon found 
myself agreeably mistaken, and that the circulation there was too 
quick to admit of such delay ; for I was that very day paid out to 
a noble lord, in his pension from the ministry. 

It was about two in the afternoon, when I was brought to his 
lordship's levee, where the grandeur of his looks, and the magnifi- 
cence of everything about him, made me so pleased with my 
situation, that I thought I could be satisfied to fix my abode with 
him for some time. 

He was just arisen, and seated at the fire, leaning on a writing- 
table covered with green velvet, on which lay some books open, 
and several letters which he had just broke the seals of, and was 
beginning to read, while a female servant, beautiful as Hebe, poured 
out his tea at a sideboard, and a  like Ganymede handed it 
to him. 

In this easy indifference he sat, casting an eye upon a book, or 
reading a paragraph in a letter, between every sip of his breakfast, 
when I was laid upon his table by his steward, with these words, 
* Two hundred, my lord '. 

'Two hundred', replied his lordship, 'the order was for five 
hundred ' ! 

' But, my lord, the butcher, the baker ' ! 

' What are these wretches to me ? Is not my whole estate 
sufficient for them ' ? 

' My lord, there is not a shiUing to be got from your tenants, the 
times are so bad, and the taxes so high ! And an ounce of provisions 
could not be had '. 

' Then you might have aU fasted ! I must have money for this 
evening ; I am engaged in a party, and cannot be off '. 

'My lord, your lordship's tailor desired me to speak to you; he 
is to appear before his commissioners to-morrow, and begs ' 

' What can I do ? I would reheve him if I could, but I have no 
money for myself; I cannot, will not do without five hundred 
more this evening, get it where or how you will '. 

' My lord, I was thinking to apply to Mr Discount, the scrivener, 
but he said, the last time, that he would lend no more on that 
estate, without the immediate power of cutting the timber '. 

' Well, damn him, let him have it, though it will not be fit 
to cut these ten years; and, do you hear, get me a thousand 
to-day '. 



38 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

• A thousand, my lord ! yon said five hundred. I am afraid he 
will think a thousand too much ' ! 

'Then he shall never have it; let me do as I will; do not I 
know that the timber is worth twice as much this moment, if I 
could wait to set it to sale ? I will not be imposed on by the 
rascal ; I'll go myself to my neighbour Worthland directly ; he is 
a man of honour, and will be above taking advantage, though I 
did oppose his election '- 

'As your lordship pleases for that. But then, perhaps, Mr 
Discount will call in all his money, if he saw you put yourself 
into other hands ; beside, I am not certain that he will refuse, and 
therefore I should think it better to try him first ; you may do 
this after. Though I must take the liberty to say, I should be 
sorry to see your lordship stoop to Sir John Worthland, after all 
the expense you have been at to give him trouble. For to be 
sure he would boast of it in the country, it it were only to make 
you look little, and prevent your opposing him again '. 

' Why, there may be something in that, and therefore see what 
is to be done with Discount; but I must have a thousand at any 
rate, five htmdred of which to give to poor Buckram, and bring 
me the other as soon as possible, for I am in haste out '. 

' Then your lordship had better sign this deed first, to save the 
time of coming back again, if he should do it '. 

' Ay, let me see it ; there : and make haste '. And then turn- 
ing to his , ' Reach me that paper, this pen is so good it tempts 
me to write a letter, while I wait for Poundage's return'. Arid 
so, humming a new tune, he went on with his breakfast without 
the least concern. 

You are so great a stranger to the ways of that part of the 
world which deals in money-matters, that you will be surprised 
when I tell you that, while this Mr Poundage brought me from 
the bank, he had called upon Mr Discount, and brought him to 
his lord's to do his business. 

But you must not imagine this was to lend his lordship money. 
Nothing less. It was only to appear as the nominal lender of Ma 
lordship's own money, which Poundage had that very morning 
received from some of his tenants in the country, and which if he 
could not bring it in better, he meant to replace with part of the 
price of the timber, which he was to buy in Discount's name, who 
was a creature of his own. 

So remarkable a transaction gave me a curiosity to take a view 
of Poimdage's life, the main hnes of which I wiU just touch over, 
while you may think him gone for the money, and his lordship 
dressing for his engagement. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 39 



CHAPTER XIV 

THE HISTORY OF MB THOMAS POITNDAOE — HIS LORDSHIP GOES TO 
HIS APPOINTMENT — AN EVBNING's ENTERTAINMENT IN HIGH 
LITE — OHBYSAL CHANGES HIS SERVICE; HIS REFLECTIONS ON 
THE RULING PASSION OF THE TIMES 

Mr Thomas Poundage was the offspring of a gipsy, who had left 
him on the straw he was bom on, in an old barn near his lordship's 
father's, his weakness and deformity making her not think him 
worth the trouble of carrying away. 

The old lord himself happening to be the first who heard his 
cries, as he was riding by, took compassion on the httle helpless 
wretch, and ordered him to be taken care of at his own expense, 
and not sent to the parish. 

Such an uncommon instance of charity was immediately 
attributed to a tenderer motive — a suspicion however injurious to 
his lordship, so advantageous to the foundling, that it doubled the 
care and attendance on him, and made him appear of such conse- 
quence that Mr Thomas Poundage himself, his lordship's steward, 
condescended to stand god-father for him, and gave him his own 
name. As Master Tommy grew up, he showed all the sharpness 
and cmming of his race, which old Poundage representing to his 
lord as a capacity for learning, he was put to the best schools ; and 
being of the same age with his lordship's eldest son, his present 
master, was settled as a humble companion and attendant upon 
him ; in which station, the pliancy of his temper soon gained him 
his master's favour, as his secrecy and discretion did his confidence ; 
no service appearing too difficult or mean for his imdertaking, to 
please his master, especially in the mysteries of intrigue ; nor a 
look ever betraying Ms success. 

These services naturally produced an intimacy that opened to 
him aU his master's secrets, and gave him such consequence 
with him, that upon the death of his father, old Poundage was 
superannuated upon a pension, and the place given to him, in 
which he had behaved himself so judiciously, that, in about ten 
years, he had amaased so large a fortune, as to be able to supply 
his master's wants (with the assistance of his own money some- 
times), without the scandal of exposing them to any other: a 
service that amply recompensed, to his lordship's honour, whatever 
prejudice it may be supposed to do his affairs. 

'Tis true, his supplanting his god-father and benefactor, old 
Poundage, had not met with the approbation of such as were not 
well acquainted with the world, and particularly as the old 
gentleman in his age had accounted for all his kindness to him, by 
owning a relation, which he had before strove to fix upon his 
lord, by many plain insinuations, though he now said he had 
long before revealed to his imgrateful son the secret of his 
birth. 

However, if he had communicated his secret, our son of 
fortune had kept it so well, that he could now deny it with 



40 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

safety ; nor had he profited so little by his father's example, as to 
be moved with a suggestion that evidently appeared, however 
true it might be in itself, to spring at that time from resentment. 
And as he could not expect to reap any great advantage from 
being acknowledged for the spurious son of one who had many 
legitimate children to inherit his fortune, he thought it better to 
confirm the former opinion, by his slights of the claim of Pound- 
age, and since he must be the bastard of one of them, choose the 
lord before his servant. 

But to return to my master. He was dressed by that time 
Poundage came back with the money, when taking the five hundred 
for his own use, he went to his appointment. 

As to the other five hundred, which he had ordered to be paid 
to his tailor, for fear of the wretch's applying to the lord himself 
in his despair, Poundage did send for him, and, in compassion to 
his distresses, advanced him four hundred pounds, of his own 
money, for he had not a shilling of his lordship's in his hands ; 
for which piece of service he desired no other consideration, than 
a receipt for five hundred pounds, though it might be so long 
before he could get it back, that he expected to be a loser by his 
friendship, which Mr Buckram need not, as he could bring it up in 
his next bill. Of this I came to the knowledge some time after, 
in the course of my circulation. 

It was five o'clock, and dinner just serving up, when my lord 
joined his company. At dinner, and during the reign of the 
bottle for a couple of hours after, the conversation turned upon all 
the polite topics of the times, wherein there could be no long 
disputes, as every difference in opinion was immediately deter- 
mined by a bet, the supreme decision of peace, war, rehgion and 
law. But this dissipated piddling soon gave way to the serious 
business of the evening, to which they aU adjourned, with an 
intention and anxiety worthy of the consequence at stake. 

It is impossible to give you any idea of this scene, in which 
every moment produced such sudden transitions from despair to 
exultation, from shouts of joy to the most blasphemous execra- 
tion of their very being, on the vicissitudes in the momentary 
fortunes of the actors, that the very recollection of it is a pain even 
to me. 

However, it made no such impression upon them: but they 
continued at it tiU about six in the morning, when they retired for 
the night. 

In the course of the evening, I often went the circuit of the whole 
company round, and at length was carried home by a new master. 
But, before I say anjrthing of him, I must give you a few slight 
sketches of the characters of some others of the company, and 
particularly of my late lord, in whose whole appearance and 
behaviour there was something so extraordinary. 

There is scarce a stronger instance of the tyranny of avarice 
over the heart of man, than the passion for play, which now 
is so general and prevalent, as to seem in a manner to have 
drowned every other. The tenderest, the strongest, connections of 
friendship and nature, yield to the force of this resistless infatuation. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 41 

The persons who esteem each other most in the world this moment, 
no sooner sitting down to this decision of fate, than they labour 
for each other's ruin, with all the assiduity and eagerness of the 
most inveterate hatred and revenge. 

Nor is this practice confined to those alone whom necessity may 
seem to stimulate to so desperate a resource ; the richest are often 
the most infatuated with this passion, who, possessiog already 
more than they can enjoy, hazard that, and give themselves up 
a prey to anxiety, and often to despair, to indulge a fruitless 
desire for more. 

Of this last class were most of the company, among whom my 
late lord had spent this evening : some few indeed there were whom 
this foUy had reduced to the former, and necessitated to live by 
their experience in the art which had been their ruin. 



CHAPTER XV 

THE COMPAifT EEPBBSENTED IN PEESPBCTIVB — SET A BEOQAB 
ON HOESEBACK, AND HE'li EIDE TO THE DEVIL — A NEW WAY 
OP PABBYDra A DUN, AND PAYING DEBTS OF HONOUB — A COM- 
MISSION-BBOKBR PLrNG — A CONNOISSEUE DECEIVED BY HIS OWN 
JUDGMENT AND EMINENT TASTE FOB VIETU — HISTOEY OF A 
NOBLE BEBECHES-MAKES 

I SEE your curiosity rise at the mention of so strange a scene as 
this must be. It is natural, and therefore shall be indulged. But, 
as all description must fall short of it, I shall represent it to you in 
perspective. Do you therefore resolve sense into imagination, 
a practice not uncommon with the philosophic mind, and to pure 
abstracted attention shall my words become things, and appear as 
visible to your eyes, as if they were purged with euphrasy and 
rue. 

Observe now, at the head of the table, that heavy-looking figure, 
whose saturnine complexion gives a solemnity to his appearance, 
even beyond his declining years. This man wore out the prime of 
his life in indigence and hardships, till chance by one successful 
stroke in his business, gave him such a fortune, as was deemed 
sufficient merit to deserve nobility, and entitle him to one of the 
first employments in the state. 

Sudden elevation makes a weak head giddy ; the plain, good- 
natured, cheerful man, is lost in the solemn proud peer; who is 
harder of access than his sovereign, and seems to value himself on 
having aU the hours he has spent in cringing to the great, repaid 
tenfold in attendance upon him. As to the business of his office, the 
whole system of human politics is in general such a jumble of 
blundering and viUany, that I can seldom bring myself to bestow 
a moment's notice on it, so can say no more of his, than that the 
little attention and less capacity he has for it, may most probably 



42 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

give juat occasion for all the murmurings that are against him. 
But this was not the motive of my pointing him out to you. It 
waa his infatuation to the love of play, which makes him hazard 
that wealth which he so long felt the want of, in hopes of 
acquiring more, though he has already more than he can enjoy. 

This has been an unsuccessful night with him. Observe how 
stupefied he looks at his loss ! Extend the view but a few moments 
further, and see how he sits down in the common hall of the 
tavern, among servants and chairmen, insensible of the impropriety 
of such a, place, and unable to order his servants to carry him 
home : nor is it improbable that the scene he has just quitted may 
remain so strongly on his imagination to-morrow, that he may 
write down the rules of the game he has been playing at, instead of 
the orders of his office, as he has done once before. 

Next to him, you see a short, ruddy, cheerful-looking man. That 
is one of the deplorable instances of the evil of this preposterous 
passion. With every advantage of rank, abilities, and fortune, did 
that person set out in life. But, alas ! soon was the prospect of 
his future happiness and grandeur overcast ! Soon did gaming 
reduce him not only to a necessity of prostituting his abilities to 
the prejudice of his country, but also of descending to every 
iniquitous mystery of the art to support his practice of it ; for so 
bewitched is he to it, that he cannot resist, though he now can 
scarce get any person to play with him, his want of money and his 
skill in the whole art are so well known. 

This has been a successful evening with him, as you may see by 
his extraordinary flow of spirits ; not that his natural vivacity ever 
forsakes him in the worst reverse of fortune. He has won a 
considerable part of the great losings of the person we have just 
been taking notice of ; and though he has many demands upon 
him for every shilling of it, yet, far from thinking of paying one of 
them, he is this moment planning new scenes of pleasure to 
consume it aU, choosing to let his creditors all be bankrupts, or 
even to compound with them as a bankrupt himself, rather than 
deny his appetites their full gratification. 

It is impossible to convey a just notion of such a complicated 
character, by any description ; I shall therefore just mention one 
or two of his actions, from which you may, in some measure, form 
a judgment of the whole. 

Having a pressing occasion, some time ago, for an hundred 
guineas, he appUed to one of those necessary attendants of the 
great, who, at the moderate interest of five hundred per cent., are 
always ready to supply them with money to discharge their debts 
of honour. This friendly gentleman, being well acquainted with 
the character of the borrower, made many scruples to comply 
with his request, tiU at length he suffered Inmself to be prevailed 
upon conditionally, that, if the principal and premium were not 
paid in a week, he should receive a guinea as a further gratuity 
then, and every time after that he should demand his money, tiU 
it was paid. Accordingly, at the end of the week, he made his 
demand, and, as he expected, received his guinea ; from which 
time he took care to call upon him every second or third day, tiU 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 43 

he had received his money more than twice told thus, in single 
goiaeas, for forbearance ; always timing his applications, when he 
saw his debtor in company with persons before whom he would 
not even enter into an expostulation, for fear of having the affair 
known, so that as soon as he saw him approach, without waiting 
to be asked, he used to puU out his purse, and calling him to him, 
gave him a guinea, to go and buy something for him; an errand 
the other sufficiently understood. 

The constant repetition of this could not always escape observa- 
tion, nor was the cause of it unsuspected by most of his acquaint- 
ance ; some of whom happening to hint it to him one evening, 
when wine had taken away all reserve, he, who was above being 
ashamed of anything, honestly owned the whole transaction, and 
joined in the general laugh at his own folly: however, as the 
secret was now out, he resolved to submit to the imposition no 
longer; and the next time his friend waited upon him, instead of 
hurrying him away as before, he publicly entered into a discussion 
of his demand, and as he could not deny his having received 
more than double what he had lent, the debt was adjudged by 
the company to be sufficiently discharged, and he was Uterally 
sent off without his errand. 

This story shows only the levity and inconsiderateness of his 
temper, and the distresses in which they entangled him : but the 
following is of a blacker hue and will prove that he is capable of 
doing anything to extricate himseff from those distresses, and 
provide for the gratification of his passions. 

Not very long ago, a young gentleman, who had a miUtary turn, 
collected the whole of his small fortune, to purchase himself a 
commission in the army. Having lodged his money in the hands 
of his agent, who, for the convenience of making use of it, and to 
enhance the price of his own trouble, was in no haste to dispatch 
the affair, he made an excursion to the coimtry town, in which 
this gentleman's seat was, and where he happened to be at that 
time. 

As the hospitaUty of his temper made his house open to every 
stranger, who had the appearance of a gentleman, the young 
soldier soon became acquainted with him, and in return for the 
friendship for which he mistook the general affability of his 
conversation, and to display his own importance, told him his 
present situation, and the method he had taken to procure success 
to his hopes of a truncheon. His friend expressed the strongest 
approbation of his spirit, and encouraged his hopes, but told him 
that he had chosen the worst way of entering into the army, as the 
sum of money, which he had given the agent to purchase him only 
a pair of colours, applied properly to some of the persons in office, 
and backed by good interest, would not only procure him a 
cometcy of horse, at present, which was of three times that value, 
but would also establish such an interest for him, as should greatly 
accelerate his rise to still higher promotions. 

Struck with such a promising prospect as this speech opened to 
him, the young gentleman answered, that he was sensible of the 
truth of what the other said, but that it was his unhappiness to 



44 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

have had no friend to direct him how to apply his money 
properly, much less to back him afterward. 

' That's very hard ', reolied his friend, ' I wish I had known you 
sooner '. 

This hint was enough; the young gentleman, fired with such 
flattering hopes, flew directly to town, and, finding that his agent 
had not yet concluded the purchase for him, took his money out of 
his hands, and returning to the country, in the confidence of his 
heart, went and presented it to his friend, throwing himself entirely 
upon his patronage and protection. 

It is probable that, when this gentleman began the discourse 
which gave occasion to this action, he meant no more by it than 
to display his own judgment and interest, without any further 
design ; but the sight of five hundred pounds was a temptation he 
could not resist. 

He, therefore, with seeming surprise and reluctance, received the 
money, and took the young gentleman into his care. 

For some time he fed him with hopes of immediate success; 
but, his impatience beginning to grow troublesome, upon his return 
to town for the winter, he gave him to understand ' that he was 
offended at his importunity : that, since he had undertaken to serve 
him, he would do it as soon as he could ; but that he need not 
give himself the trouble of calling upon him any more, as he would 
receive sufficient notice of his success in the public papers '. Saying 
which words, he left him. 

Thunderstruck at this speech, the young gentleman withdrew, 
and, meeting one of his acquaintance, informed him of what had 
happened. This person, who was perfectly acquainted with the 
gentleman's character, saw immediately into the whole affair, and 
explained the imposition to him. This made him mad ; he returned 
directly to demand his money, but was denied admitta,nce, nor 
would his letters even be received by the porter. His case was 
now desperate ; while he had paid attendance upon his patron, he 
had exhausted his means of subsistence to the last mite, so that he 
now was in want of a morsel of bread. In this situation, a moment, 
was not to be lost ; and luckily, Ms despair suggested to him the 
only means that could possibly have procured him redress. He 
drew up a state of his case in a very few words, and, putting on 
the best suit of clothes he had left, went the very next day to 
court, where, in sight of his patron, he bent his knee to his 
sovereign, and presented it to him. Something particular in his 
air and manner struck the monarch's notice : he read the petition ; 
and then reached it to this gentleman, in whose altered countenance 
he soon read the truth of the contents ; turning, therefore, from 
him, with a look of ineffable reproof and contempt, he ordered the 
secretary at war to make out a commission for the young gentle- 
man that very day, and from that hour has never held the other 
in the least degree of esteem or favour ; but he is insensible to 
such disgrace, and while he can gratify his passions, in the manner 
you see at present, cares not what the world thinks or says 
of him. 

Opposite to him, on the other side of the table, observe an 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 45 

tmcommonly large-boned bulky man ; this is one of the instances 
Of the insufficiency and weakness of human laws, which, striving 
to remedy one evil, often make way for a greater. That man is 
now advanced to the foremost rank of the militia Ust, merely by 
seniority ! A grievous abuse of that institution, which, to prevent 
favour from advancing its minions over friendless merit, ordains, 
that no senior officer shall serve under his junior; but now, by 
the natural force of human perversion, this well -designed regulation 
is made a pretext for giving command to such as have no other 
claim to it, than (what should indeed incapacitate them), old age, 
and so keeping back the advance, and damping the ardour of 
youth. 

As there is no man without some particular ambition, his has 
taken a turn, which perhaps you may think the most remote from 
his profession of a soldier. Pictures, painting, is the sole object of 
his admiration, the only knowledge he values himself upon. Tell 
him of a siege, or a battle, an attack or a retreat, conducted with 
the greatest skiU, and he hears yon unmoved, nor will interrupt 
your account with a single question : but name Eembrandt or 
Tlitian, and he immediately gives you a dissertation on their 
excellencies, and the difference of their schools ! Tell him but of a 
sale of pictures, on the day of a review, and, if he is forced to 
feign sickness to excuse his attendance in the field, he will be 
at it. 

Such absurd passions are always the objects of artifice and 
imposition. An ingenious painter of this country, not very long 
since, whose works would have been a credit to the best of foreign 
schools, but were despised at home, bethought himself of a way to 
turn this person's foible to some advantage. He made some 
designs, landscapes, and other drawings, in the manner of some of 
the greatest of the ancient Italian masters, whose names he marked 
upon the backs of them, in the characters of their times, and giving 
them the cast of age, made them up in an Italian chest, and by the 
aasistance of a captain of a ship, had them entered at the custom- 
house, as directly from Italy, and consigned to a stranger, as from 
a friend there, to be disposed of in London. 

The report soon reached this lover of virtu, who was so ravished 
with the thought of gaining such a treasure, that he flew to the 
place, and, being convinced by his judgment of the authenticity 
of them, bought them all together, for a very large sum, but far 
short of their real value, had they been to be disposed of by a person 
acquainted with it. 

Though this success was very pleasing and useful to the painter, 
he did not stop here. This person had some way taken a dislike 
to him, which he indulged by running down his work. This, there- 
fore, was an opportunity for revenge not to be missed. He let 
Mm boast of his acquisiton in all companies, and display his judg- 
ment in proving them to be the genuine productions of those great 
masters, by criticisms which none but a connoisseur could make : 
but then, as soon as the whole afiair was so public, that there wag 
no denying it, what does the incensed artist but produce the counter- 
parts of them all, which he had kept for the occasion, so like as 



46 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

not possibly to be known asunder, and unravelled the whole afiair, 
taking care only to keep himself clear of the law, by saying that 
he had sold those things as of no value, at a very small price, to a 
Jew ! 

This was a severe stroke ! It overturned the only reputation 
which he had even an ambition of, and robbed him of a large sum 
of money besides, to recover which loss, and divert the chagrin 
of the whole deceit, he has recourse to play, which he follows with 
the eagerness you see. But his is not the only absurd passion that 
strikes the notice of an accurate observer of mankind. The person on 
his right hand was bom in the first rank of the state, but by some 
unlucky mistake, the quahfloations which fell to his share belonged to 
one of the lowest classes of mechanics. While others of his rank are 
marshalling armies, and planning conquest, correcting the abuses, 
or studying to rise upon the ruins of the state, his utmost ambition 
is, to cut out a buckskin to advantage, and be reckoned the best 
breeches-maker of his time. Harmless as such an humble turn 
may seem, it involves the noble artist ia many whimsical distresses. 

His passion for breeches-making is so strong that he never sits 
near any person but his hand is immediately and unpremeditatedly 
applied to his thigh, which he has no sooner stroked down two or 
three times, than he thinks he conceives the size and shape of it 
so exactly, that he can completely fit it, without the trouble of 
takir" -ly other measure ; and accordingly never fails to iatroduce 
a die. ,ation on the art, which he concludes with the demonstrative 
proof ^_ his skill, of offering to make a present of a pair of his own 
making. The advantage of such an offer, and the pleasure of 
encouraging so illustrious a mechanic, make his present always 
accepted, so that he has generally the most business of any one 
in the trade, though some accidents have happened, that have 
almost made him afraid to pursue such an indiscriminate method 
of soliciting custom. 

Happening, some time ago, in a very large company, to sit near 
a young gentleman, whose delicate complexion had brought bim, 
though most unjustly, under a suspicion of indulging unnatural 
passions, he applied his hand to the gentleman's thigh, and began 
to feel it all over, to take measure of it, according to his custom. 
The gentleman, who was not ignorant of the imputation he lay 
under, and therefore was more quickly sensible of everything that 
might possibly seem to allude to it, thought this application to 
his thigh was meant either to tempt or insult him, for he had been 
informed that those wretches often make their infamous addresses 
in this manner, and was enraged at it to such a degree, that, for- 
getting all respect to the company present, and to the rank of hia 
supposed lover, he felled the poor breeches-maker to the ground, 
and starting from his chair drew his sword and would have run 
him through the body had not his arm been happily seized by the 
gentleman who sat next him. 

It is not easy to describe the astonishment of the company at 
Buoh an outrage, which they could attribute to nothing but frenzy, 
but the gentleman soon undeceived them. 

' Infamous, unnatural wretch ' ! exclaimed he, as soon as rage 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 47 

permitted him utterance ; ' I'll make you know that I am not an 
object of your brutal passions. I have exposed you here, but your 
infamy shall not be confined to this company, I'll publish it to all 
the world. Unhand me, gentlemen, and let me wash off the disgrace 
of such an attempt with the monster's blood ! I'll gladly pay my 
own life as a forfeit to the defect of the law that has provided no 
punishment for such odious crimes '. 

ft: To the greater part of the company this speech was quite unin- 
telligible, and only confirmed the suspicion of his madness ; but one 
of them, who had observed the gentleman change countenance 
upon the noble mechanic's applying his hand to his thigh, soon 
cleared up the mystery. 

' I believe, sir ', said he, ' you have been too hasty, and mistaken 
an intention, not only harmless in itself, but generous also, for one 
of a very different nature ! Have you any other reason for accus- 
ing his lordship of unnatural designs upon you, beside his laying 
his hand upon your thigh, and feeling it ' ? 

' No, sir ; but that I think enough ; too much for him to offer or 
for me to bear ; nor will I bear it '. 

' I do not pretend, sir, to teE you what you must bear, but this 
I can tell you, that you have entirely, and most injuriously, mis- 
taken his lordship, who meant no more by that action which gave 
you such offence than just to take your measure for a pair of breeches, 
which, if you had not been so hasty in your resentment, he would 
have made you a present of '. 

' Death, sir, do you make a jest of me ' ? 

His lordship, who had heard their discourse, and was by this time 
BO far recovered of his fright aa to be able to speak, interposed here, 
or the affair might probably have taken another turn. 

' No, indeed, sir ', said he, ' he does not jest ! I meant nothing 
more ; and all the company present knows that I never had any 
passion in my life but for breeches-making ; and, if you appre- 
' bended anything else, you were very much mistaken '. 

This speech and the manner in which it was delivered, were not 
to be resisted. They disarmed the gentleman's rage instantly, 
and his only concern was how to make up the matter so as to avoid 
the ridicule of such a mistake. He, therefore, told his lordship 
that he was very sorry for his error, and hoped that he would at- 
tribute the consequences of it to that delicate sensibility which 
every man of honour must have under such an apprehension. This 
was sufficient ; his lordship, instead of harbouring resentment, 
was glad to get so easily rid of the affair ; and to convince the 
gentleman, both of the sincerity of his reconciliation, and that he 
had no other design than what he said in the action that gave 
him the offence, he undertook to make him a pair of buckskin 
breeches, only from the measure he had taken, that should fit him 
better than any he had worn in his life. 



48 ADVENTVBES OF A GUINEA 



CHAPTER XVI 

THE CHAEACTBB OF A VIETUOSO — THE HISTOBT OP A HOENBD COCK ; 
WITH SOME CUBIOirs PHILOSOPHICAL EBMARK3 ON CORNTJTED 
ANIMALS 

Opposite to him sits one of those philosophers who build their 
pretences to scientific fame on making collections of the anomalous 
frolics of nature, without ever attempting to investigate the wisdom 
and power displayed in the regular process of her works. In the 
course of this study, a whimsical adventure lately happened to the 
noble virtuoso before us. A man that bought poultry round the 
country, to supply the markets of this great city, having got intelli- 
gence of his lordship's taste, resolved to turn it to his own advan- 
tage. He, accordingly, procured a most beautiful gamecock, and 
sawing off the spurs of another cook that had very long ones, con- 
trived to fix them firmly with wax on the head of this bird, on each 
side of the comb, with the points turned backwards, and inclining 
from each other, like the horns of a goat, in such a manner that they 
appeared to have grown naturally there. 

As soon as he found that he could bring his scheme to a prob- 
ability of success, he waited on the virtuoso, and giving notice 
that he had something curious to communicate, was immediately 
admitted to an audience in his museum, where he informed him 
that he had received intelligence from a particular friend pf his, 
a Scotch pedlar, that in the farthest part of the Highlands there 
was a most remarkable cook, with two sui^rising horns gtowing 
out of the back of his head, in the possession of an old woman, 
who was famous for the second sight ; that upon his admiring the 
creature, the woman had offered to sell it to him for a pound of 
tobacco and a bottle of brandy, but he was afraid to meddle with 
it, as the country said it was her familiar, though he had iieen it 
himself scrape the dunghill, and tread the hens like any other cock ; 
and that upon hearing the news, he was come to inform his lordship 
of it, and to offer his service to go aU the way himself for the bird, 
and bring him up, if he would promise to reimburse him the ex- 
penses of his journey, and give him some little consideration for his 
trouble ; and to convince his lordship that he had no design to 
impose upon him, he would go at his own hazard and desire nothing 
if he did not succeed. 

The first mention of such a curiosity threw the virtuoso into the 
highest rapture ; he embraced the fellow, conjured him not to lose 
a minute, nor drop the least syllable of the affair to any person 
living till he had brought him the cock : and to secure his fidelity 
pulled out his purse, and gave him ten guineas, with the promise 
of fifty more, the moment he should receive him. The man pro- 
mised him everything he required and went away, hugging himself 
in the suoces of his scheme. Accordingly he left that part of the 
country directly, and, taking care to keep beyond the reach of 
his lordship's inquiry, followed his business as usual, for the time 
that he might be thought to have spent in his expedition. In th© 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 49 

meanwhile, the virtuoso could not conceal the pride of his heart on 
the prospect of so great an acquisition ; but in all his letters to his 
philosophical correspondents gave mysterious hints of something 
immensely fine, rare, and unnatural, and assumed the importance 
due to the possession of such a treasure. 

At length the moment arrived that he was to complete his happi- 
ness. About ten o'clock at night the man alighted at his lordsUp's 
gate, and sending in his name, was immediately shown into the 
museum, where his lordship flew to meet him, in the utmost im- 
patience. 

As soon as the man entered, all over spattered with dirt, and 
putting on every appearance of fatigue, ' Well, my good friend ', 
said the virtuoso, with the greatest eagerness, ' what success ? 
Where is the dear creature ? Shall I be so happy as to see him in 
my possession ' ? 

' My lord ', answered the man, ' I must beg your pardon for a 
moment ; I am not able to speak ; I am quite worn out ', and then 
dropping upon a chair, as if he was just ready to faint. BKs lord- 
ship immediately rung for some cordial for him, which he took from 
the servant himself at the door (for he would not admit any one 
living) and gave him with his own hand. When he was a little 
recovered, ' I beg your lordship's pardon ', continued he, ' but I 
could not hold out a moment longer ; what with travelling all day 
and watching all night, I am quite worn out '. 
' But where is the bird ' ? 

' And then such ofEers as I have refused ! WeU, to be sure, I 
trusted to your lordship's generosity, for I shall never have such 
another opportimity of making my fortune ; for behold the thing 
had taken wind, and there was my lord's duke and Sir Thomas's 
men, and twenty more, riding for Ufe, to try who should get him, 
but I had got the start of them, and was coming back with the pretty 
creature in my bosom ; but I let them all go on their fools' errand, 
and did not say anjrthing to them, for how did I know but they 
might kill me to get him away from me ' ? Having finished hit 
speech, which the other did not choose to interrupt, though he 
listened to it with the utmost impatience, the feUow opened his 
horseman's coat and with the greatest caution, produced the wonder- 
ful creature, the head and neck of which had been carefully thrust 
into a box made on purpose for fear the coat should rub off the 
horns. 

His lordship's rapture at the sight is not to be described. Ee 
instantly pulled out his purse, and paying down the promised 
price, took possession of him, and bid the man go and refresh him- 
self for that night with the best in the house, and in the morning 
he would consider how he might make him a return more equal 
to his service by procuring him some handsome place at court. 
But the fellow had other designs in his head than ever to see his 
face more. However, he kept that to himself, and retiring with 
many professions of gratitude, left his house directly and took hia 
leave of that country for ever. 

In the meantime, his lordship had notice that supper was served 
up ; but though he had company the first of rank in his house. 



60 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

he was so wrapt up in the contemplation of his new acquisition 
that he sent word he was taken suddenly ill and could not possibly 
attend them ; he then dispatched several servants express to his 
learned friends to-desire their attendance next day to see the most 
astonishing and beautiful composition nature had ever made in 
the animal world, and devoted the rest of the night to the drawing 
up of a proper description of this surprising homed cock, with a 
physical inquiry into the substance of his horns and a philosophical 
attempt to account for such an extraordinary production. When 
this work of uncommon learning was finished he indulged himself 
with taking another view of his darling bird, and then put him in 
a beautiful cage from which he dislodged two Chinese pheasants, 
and placed him in his museum next to his favourite homed 
owl. 

It was six in the morning before he retired to rest ; when his head 
was so full of his new acquisition that he lay dreaming of cows 
with wings and cooks with horns, and such-like wonderful works 
of nature, tiU the arrival of his learned friends at noon. As soon 
as their arrival was announced, he rose directly, and without wait- 
ing to visit his cock, to whom he had given a sufficiency of pro- 
visions before he left him, went to meet them. After several 
impatient inquiries into the cause of so sudden and peremptory 
a summons, the virtuoso, in all the mysterious importance which 
so inestimable an acquisition gave him, produced his own learned 
labours of that morning, and when they had sufficiently studied 
and examined them, introduced them to a sight of the unparalleled 
subject. 

' There, gentlemen ', said he, in conscious exultation, ' there 
my friends, behold the most uncommon, unnatural, and inestimable 
curiosity that ever enriched the collection of a philosopher. There 
behold an indisputable proof of their error, who assert that nature 
has placed an immovable boundary between the quadruped and 
winged creations. There, behold a sufficient encouragement to 
urge your indefatigable search for monsters, and to mix the whole 
animal creation in coition, for the production of mermaids, griffins, 
centaurs, harpies, and homed cooks, and all that beautiful con- 
fusion which 3?ield such inexpressible delight to an inquisitive, 
philosophic mind '. 

While he was making this harangue, the company approached 
the gilded cage that contained this inestimable prodigy, and stoop- 
ing down to contemplate him, were surprised to find one of his horns 
faUen off, and the other moved considerably from the situation 
in which it had been described to them ; for doleful to relate, the 
cock, which was of the right game breed, had, unfortunately, taken 
ofienoe at the visage of the owl his neighbour, and in his struggles 
to come at him through the bars of the cage, had rubbed off one 
and displaced the other of his horns. When this deplorable mis- 
fortune was mentioned to the owner, it is impossible to describe 
his astonishment and confusion. He stooped hastily to be satisfied 
of the truth of it, and beholding the irreparable ruin of his pride, 
gave one dismal groan, and fell at his length on the floor in a swoon. 

While his servants, who were summoned upon the occasion, were 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 51 

fetching him to himself, one of the philosophers opened the cage, 
and, taking out the bird, they all entered into a discussion of so 
strange a phenomenon. After many learned and ingenious solutions, 
one of them declared that it had always been his opinion, in which 
the present case abundantly confirmed him, that all cornuted 
animals cast their horns every year like the stag, and that the present 
case was no more than that ; of which he was perfectly convinced 
as he could plainly feel with his finger the growing horn, which had 
thus thrust off the old one ; ' So that, my lord ', said he, addressing 
himseK to the owner, who by this time was recovered, and attend- 
ing to their remarks, ' instead of being vexed at such an event, 
you have reason to rejoice, as it explains a very difficult point, and 
you will now have an opportunity of tracing the growth of this 
beautiful prodigy '- 

The sage solution administered some consolation to the virtuoso, 
who immediately took the bird in his own hands, and feeling the 
lump of wax, which had fastened on the fictitious horn, was con- 
vinced of the truth of his friend's accurate observation, which he 
himself further confirmed by taking notice that as no blood followed 
the avulsion, it was evident the horn was of itself ready to fall ofi 
without the assistance of the cock's struggling (for they had caught 
him at that work) as the dislocation of the other horn showed that 
that was not in the same state of ripeness, and, therefore, it had 
resisted that force. Consciousness of the sagacity of this remark, 
in some degree, restored his spirits, and he was going to proceed 
when one of the company, who had taken up and examined the 
fallen horn, and had not given any opinion on the matter, interrupted 
him dryly, and said that the hjrpothesis was certainly very in- 
genious, but he believed the affair might be solved a readier way; 
for upon examination of the supposed horn, he found it was only a 
cock's spur, which had been fastened upon the creature's head with 
wax, as appeared evidently by the remains of the wax upon the end 
of the spur in his hand ; and, if they would let him pull ofi the 
other, he would undertake that the imposture would be too plain 
to admit of any doubt. 

The mention of this threw them aU into confusion, as they had 
all given their opinions, positively, of the honour of which it de- 
prived them, and cut short many more which they were ready to 
offer ; they, therefore stood looking at each other tiU he stretched 
out his hand to pull off the other horn, when they all interposed, 
particularly the owner, and insisted that they must be better satis- 
fied of what he had advanced before they could permit so rash an 
experiment. But the bird himself cut short the dispute, for some 
ofthe company happening to have snuff in their fingers, it got into 
the cock's eyes, and made him shake his head with such violence 
that off flew the horn in the owner's face. The person who had 
made the discovery immediately took it up and showed such plain 
proof of the trick that it could no longer be denied. 

It is impossible to describe the shame and vexation in every 
philosophic face present, at this lamentable event. The abused 
purchaser, in particular, was almost mad ; however, after mature 
■deliberation, it was agreed upon, for the credit of philosophy, to 



52 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

bear the deceit in silence rather than expose themselves to the 
ridicule of the unlearned, by seeking satisfaction from the cheat. 
As for the cook, he was immediately sacrificed to jEsculapius, to 
avert the consequences which such a disappointment might have 
upon the health and understanding of the company, and to remove 
such an evidence of their disgrace. But all their caution was in 
vain ; the person who first detected the deceit could not deny hia 
vanity the pleasure of making his sagacity known ; and the fellow 
finding his trick passed over thus with impunity, could not avoid 
. boasting of it, and to this day diverts his customers with the history 
of the homed cock. 



CHAPTER XVII 

MOEB MOETIFIOATION TO HTTMAN VANITY — A BBASON FOE StTBMIT- 
TnfrO TO BE PILLAOED BY 3HABFEB3 — WHAT's OOT OVER THE DEVIL's 
BACK IS SPENT UNDER HIS BELLY — FILIAL PIETY BEMABKABLY 
EBWAEDED 

I SEE you are shocked at the inconsistency, vices, and folly of man- 
kind ; but this is owing to your recluse fife, and want of acquaint- 
ance with the world. To an accurate observer, things appear in 
their proper colours, and, if the picture should be unpleasiug, the 
fault is ia the subject, not in the painter, who honestly represents 
nature as he finds her. As to those of whom I have given you these 
short sketches, they are wealthy, and wealth is an excuse for all 
things, the nobility of their birth not yielding a greater sanction 
to their persons than their money does to their vices and foUies. 
And where these tend to the dissipation of that wealth, they only 
enhance their welcome in every place of poHte resort ; indeed, the 
society in which you seem at present assembled, subsists entirely 
by these, as by the institution of it ; no person can be admitted 
who has not wealth to dissipate, as no person will desire to be ad- 
mitted who has not a vicious avarice for the wealth of others, and 
folly enough to hazard his own for the acquisition of it. 

But, though folly is, in the strictness of truth, thus essential 
to this association, there are many of the members, who, in the 
general meaning of the word, are entirely above the imputation 
of it ; yet so prevalent is the infatuation of gaming, that they wiU 
bear the grossest impertinences, and mix with the outcasts of 
humanity for its gratification, as if the dice, like death, levelled all 
distinctions. 

Observe that person ^, who seems to be absorbed in thought in 
the midst of the hurricane around him. Reason takes the advan- 
tage of his being for a moment disengaged, and forces him to behold, 
in a proper fight, a scene so contrary to the economy of human fife 
as that in which he was involved ; but wait tiU the dice-box comes 
round to him, and you will see all his philosophy vanish, and his 

^ Lord Chesterfield was notorious for his reckless gambling. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 53 

passion for gaining hurry him as destructive lengths as the most 
thoughtless of them all. 

Every ability, every virtue that could adorn and exalt the human 
mind, conspired to throw the brightest lustre around his youth, 
and mark him as a blessing to society. Nor did he disappoint, the 
general hope, but filled with dignity and honour the high employ- 
ments to which his merits raised him, tiU this pernicious passion 
insensibly imbent his mind, and turned his thoughts from every 
nobler pursuit. The f aJhng off was most unhappy ; his time, every 
moment of which is precious to the public, is wasted in idle dissi- 
pation, or devoted to pleasures destructive to his fortune, which 
thus falls a prey to sharpers, while the industrious, honest tradesman 
caUa in vain for payment at his door. 

Yet, even in this improvidence, the natural virtue of his heart 
sometimes appears, in a manner that softens the severity of censure. 
Some years ago, when he filled one of the most important places 
of the state ', in a neighbouring nation, he had notice given him 
that a set of sharpers, disguised with the most delicate and specious 
art, had entered into a combination against him, but instead of 
profiting by the friendly caution, and avoiding them, he seemed to 
throw himself on purpose into the snares laid for him till they pillaged 
him of sums of money sufficient to distress the greatest fortune. 

As it was known that he had been forewarned of their schemes, 
his conduct was astonishing to all ; but he vindicated it by saying 
that the wretches had put themselves to a considerable expense, 
and travelled a great way to accomplish their design ; if he had 
disappointed which, they must either have starved or robbed, perhaps 
from those who might not be able to bear the loss, and then have 
been hanged ; so that he looked upon it as a charity, in a double 
sense, to submit to be cheated by them, and in the same manner 
does he still vindicate his gaming with persons so notorious for their 
viUanies that it is almost infamous to speak to them. 

At his left hand you see a person with a heap of gold before him, 
which he dissipates with such eagerness that he seems desirous to 
be poor. His father heaped up that wealth with an avidity that 
was a disgrace to human nature. The groans of the distressed, 
the tears of the orphan and the widow, which he hoarded with his 
riches, now eat them like a canker ; and the gold that he wrung from 
the hard hands of the poor melts in the possession of his spendthrift 
heir, like snow before the sun. Nor was the sordidneas of his heart, 
in abstaining from the most necessary use of his riches, inferior to 
his iniquity in acquiring them. He denied himself the very neces- 
saries of life, and literally hved in the most abject poverty, for fear 
of being poor. To this perverse disposition does the person you see, 
in a great measure, owe his inheriting his wealth ; for he had an 
elder brother whom the miser had always designed to be his heir, 
till an iU-timed act of filial piety lost him his favour. 

The old man had an ailment in his leg, which, for want of proper 

1 Cihesterfield was made Lord Lieutenant of Ireland in 1744 by the 
Coalition Ministry of Whigs and Tories, known as the 'Broad- 
bottom Administration '. 



64 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

and timely care, had grown to such a degree of malignancy that it 
at length became absolutely necessary to cut it off in order to save 
his hfe. Terrible as the apprehension of such an operation must 
be, the expense of it gave him stiU greater concern. To have it 
done, therefore, in the cheapest manner, he made his eldest son 
disguise himself in a mean dress and take a lodging for him in a garret 
in one of the obscurest comers of the town, whither he removed him- 
self by night, and under the character of a poor tradesman, sent for 
a surgeon who lived in that neighbourhood, and advertised his sMll 
at the lowest price. His son, whose near prospect of such an im- 
mense inheritance did not efface his filial duty and affection, was 
shocked at such an instance of avarice, and, though he dared not 
contradict, was resolved to counteract it. Accordingly, when he 
was sent for the surgeon (for his father had not revealed his retreat 
to any of his servants, for obvious reasons), instead of going to the 
quack, as he was directed, he went to one of the most eminent 
surgeons of the age, and revealing the whole affair to him, prevailed 
on him, for a large gratification, to disguise himself and undertake 
to perform the operation for whatever trifle should be offered him, 
and then told his father with an appearance of joy that as he was 
going for the advertising surgeon, he had luckily met, in an alehouse, 
where he was directed to inquire for him, a person who had been for 
many years a surgeon's mate on board a man-of-war, who he was 
sure would cut off his leg, not only much better, but cheaper also, 
as his appearance showed that he was starving, and must be glad 
to take whatever he could get. 

Such a lucky hit raised the old man's spirits, so that he submitted 
to the operation without further concern, which was performed in 
so masterly a manner that, in a fit of imwonted generosity, he gave 
the surgeon half a guinea, though he had bargained with him for 
a crown ; but then he coniforted hitoself, when he began afterwards 
to reflect upon his extravagance, that he could stop it out of the 
fees for his attendance. In the same manner as he had imposed 
a good surgeon upon him, did his unfashionable son supply him with 
all things necessary for his condition, by making a woman in whom 
he could confide bring them every day, as if from a lady of fortune, 
a patient of the surgeon's, to whom he had represented him as an 
object of charity ; for if he had had no other support but what he 
allowed himself, he must have perished for want of proper nourish- 
ment. When his cure was completed by this management, and he 
came to discharge the surgeon, after lamenting his inabiUty to make 
a more suitable return, he offered him a couple of guineas ; but the 
surgeon not thinking it necessary to carry on the deceit any longer, 
now the end was answered, told him that he need make no apology, 
for his son had already given him two hundred. 

' My son, sir ! I do not understand you ', answered the wretch, 
in the most violent agitations of surprise, confusion, and rage. 

' Yes, sir ', repUed the surgeon, addressing him by his name, and 
telling his own ; ' your son, to whom you are indebted for your Ufa 
more ways than one, for it was he that supplied you with the things 
which you imagined to have been sent you out of charity '. 

Shocking as this discovery was, the old miser recovered presence 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 55 

of mind to carry it ofi in an admirable manner. ' Sir ', said he, 
' I have a proper sense of my son's duty, and of your skill in your 
profession, though you have prevented me from making an acknow- 
ledgment of them in the manner I intended ; for you must not 
think that I have been deceived ; I knew you all along ; and I re- 
moved to this place, and took this method of concealing myself, 
both to avoid the trouble and impertinence of visitors and comph- 
mentary messages and to make trial of my son's duty, of which I 
have now had a sufficient proof '. 

Saying this, he took the surgeon by the hand and accepted his 
offer of continuing to attend him tiU his wound should be quite healed 
with the greater readiness, as he was paid already. But to his son 
he behaved in a different manner ; for he directly made a new will, 
by which he bequeathed his immense fortune to the next brother, 
the person before us, leaving the other to pine out his days in poverty 
on a poor annuity, in reward for his obedience and duty (in the very 
words of his wiU), an injustice that was further aggravated by his 
having made him relinquish the most promising hopes of rising in 
the army, and resign his commission some time before merely to 
attend upon him. Such a shock was almost too great for human for- 
titude ; the injured gentleman sank under it, happy in escaping from 
a world where the highest virtues are despised if destitute of wealth. 

As for the heir, it was his good fortune to be bred at such a 
distance from his father, that he had no opportunity of making 
any observations on him, and therefore, as the miser could not 
carry his wealth with him out of the world, he even left it to him ; 
though, could he have foreseen the scene before us, he would 
sooner have bequeathed it to charitable uses, to enrich overseers, 
and starve the poor, than give it to such a spendthrift. 

I see your senses fail under such an extraordinary exertion. I 
shall therefore close this scene with observing that the whole 
company may be characterized under the few I have pointed out 
to you. In this view of them, I chose to take the silent 
moment, when their business was near over ; for, in the height of 
it, the agitation of such comphoated passions would have been 
too horrible for representation. 



CHAPTER XVin 

CHKYSAJD GIVES A FTJETHBR ACOOTJNT OF HIS LATE LORD — THE 
METHODS BY WHIUH HE TTATI BEEN INITIATED IN THE MYSTEBIES 
or POLITE LIFE — SOME SKETCHES OF THE CHABACTEB OF HIS 
NEXT MASTBE, WHO GIVES HIM TO AN EXTBAOEDINABY PERSON 

I PEOMISBD to give you some account of my late lord. He wets 
the son of one of the most distinguished persons of his age, who 
had acquired a fortune in the service of his country, sufficient to 
support, with proper dignity, the nobility with which his faithful 
zeal was rewarded by his grateful sovereign. 

The youth of his son opened with such promising hopes, that it 



56 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

was expected he would advance, in the steps of his father, to the 
highest rank of a subject. To facilitate these hopes, at his return 
from his travels, in which he had not only gone to see, but had 
also taken time to consider, the principal countries of Europe, with 
those of Africa and Asia, whose interests might any way afiFect 
those of his own, or whose history, illustrated thus by observation, 
might teach him to improve the advantages of his own country, 
and avoid the evils which had been the ruin of others, he was 
placed in the lower house of the senate, with every advantage of 
fortune, interest, and opinion, to support the exertion of his abiUties. 

He had scarce made himself known here, in his proper light, 
when the death of his father raised him into the upper house, 
where he soon established a weight that made him of real conse- 
quence to the nation, and alarmed the fears of the ministry, who, 
as they could not confute, resolved to corrupt him, if possible ; for 
which end, the deepest schemes were put in practice, to relax his 
morals, and embarrass his fortune, as the present situation of both 
raised him above their attempts. 

It would require uncommon virtue to resist the temptations to 
vice, in an age whose refinements have taken off every grossness, 
and almost every horror off its appearance. His regard was won 
by a most delicate application to that vanity which is too often 
the shadow of merit, especially in youth ; the very persons who 
designed to change his principles, seeming to give up theirs to the 
superior force of his reason. 

Such artifice soon won the confidence of his unguarded heart, 
and inclined it to receive their opinions and advice, without 
further examination ; as the heat of youth and a vivid imagination 
assisted their designs against his fortune, the success of which was 
in itself a sufficient reward. 

He had always expressed a dislOie to play, nor ever gave in to it, 
but in complaisance to company. To conquer this aversion was 
therefore their last labour, in which they found easier success than 
they could have even hoped for. The affluence of his fortune 
made him above apprehension of loss, and a disdain to be 
excelled, even in an art he disapproved, engaged him with a 
keenness that soon made his advances in the art a pleasure to him. 

The work was now done ; and a few years of his own industry, 
with the assistance of his friends, and the management of his 
faithful steward, made him wiUing to enter into the pay of a 
ministry, which he might, in less time, have overturned. 

This was his situation at that time ; but some secret struggles, 
which I saw reason and virtue making in hia heart, make me think 
he meditates a revolt from his infatuation, which the least liberty 
to his natural good sense could not fail to accomplish ; an event, 
which the rapacity of Poundage must hasten, to hfe own ruin. 

The person in whose possession I left the scene you have just 
beheld, was one of those who had been so successful in initiating 
my late master into all the mysteries of pleasure. Indeed, he 
seemed designed by nature to extend its empire over all mankind, 
making it the sole object of abilities equal to the most exalted 
pursuits, to invent new, to improve the old methods of gratifying 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 57 

sense, and enforcing his precepts, by an example so keen, and a 
conversation so captivating, as not to be resisted. Appetites so 
extensive required a large support ; to provide which, for fortune 
had so far frowned upon his birth that he was but a younger 
brother, he was compelled to steal some moments from his 
■darling pleasures, and sacrifice them to business. The interest of 
his family and his own abiUties had rabed him to the first 
•employments in the state; but as the sole motive of his sub- 
mitting to the restraint of any application was to acquire a fund 
for the gratification of his pleasures, his haste to arrive at that end 
precipitated him into the most destructive measures, and made 
him ready and eager to embrace every opportunity of sacrificing, 
■or rather selling, the interest of his country for present private gain. 

The proper application of the gifts of heaven makes them a 
jblessing. This cast of his disposition made those abilities, which, 
"Under a right direction, would have been of the highest service to 
himself and his country, a real prejudice to both, making him the 
ready and dangerous instrument of the most enormous crimes, 
^hat could promise present gratification to his passions. 

In such a life, there must necessarily be many disagreeable 
occvurrences, but they made no impression on him ; for his whole 
soul is so devoted to pleasure, that upon the least miscarriage in 
business, he finds immediate reUef in the return to that, which he 
can fly to, without any diffiotilty, the natural vivacity of his 
temper, that makes his conversation so bewitching to others, 
never yielding to a second moment's vexation at any one event. 

As the viper bears in herself the antidote of her poison, this 
■dissipation of temper prevents his abihties from doing aU the 
mischief he otherwise might, by puUing off the mask, and showing 
his designs too soon for their accomplishment. The very persons, 
who would gladly avail themselves of the venahty, not daring to 
trust to the inconstancy of his disposition ; so that he soon lost 
his greatest power of doing evil, otherwise than by opposing, 
and impeding the measures of those, whose successful honesty 
■disappointed his designs, and showed the danger of them in its 
proper light. 

You will not imagine that my stay could be long in his 
possession. He that very day gave me to an author, for throwing 
■dirt on the characters of those who had detected and defeated his 
schemes of leading his country into ruin.- 



CHAPTER XIX 

THE HISTOET AND CHABACTEB OF CHEYSAL's NEW MASTER — HIS 
ADVENTXTRES AT A COFFBE-HOUSB — THE FDH OF A MODEEN aENIXTS 
BBTOBTED UPON HTMSELF, BY THE GEAVB EEBTJKB OF A TESTY 
VBTEEAN 

My new master was a votary of Apollo, in the double capacity of 
physio and letters: for, the former not affording scope enough 
for his genius, he usually dedicated his leisure hours to the 



68 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

gentler entertainments of the latter, through the extensive circle of 
which he had oooaeionally ran; there not being a branch in the 
wide world of science which had not felt his pruning: the lowest 
rudiments of the most vulgar arts being, in his opinion, no more 
beneath the philosophic pen, than the most abstruse heights of 
speculation. 

It must be owned that, in such a latitude of study, he often 
was obliged to prostitute his labours; but for this he had the 
solid consolation, that his gain generally rose in proportion as his 
subject sunk, the caprice of the world paying best, that is, buying 
most eagerly, what it affected to decry most. Nor is this to be 
wondered at, a loose tale, or a receipt for cooking a new dish, 
being better adapted to general taste, than a moral essay, or 
metaphysical speculation. 

From Ms patron's levee, my master went directly home, and 
undressing into his cap and slippers, ascended into his study, and 
took a meditative turn or two, revolving in his mind the many 
grievances that called upon him for redress from the success of that 
morning. 

At length bursting into a rapture, he cried, ' I'U think no more I 
Be the wants of yesterday forgot ! those of to-morrow will come 
too soon without the anticipation of thought ! I cannot pay all I 
owe ! I cannot provide all I want ! Hence, then, vain care ! I'D 
depend on fortune and myself for a greater supply another day, 
and indulge my genius with the present. Big with this heroic 
resolution, he gave orders for dinner, and then, sending for his best 
suit home, he dressed himself in all his pride, and went to a coffee- 
house to look at the papers. 

The pleasure of my company had given such a flow to his spirits, 
naturally high, that he soon drew the attention of the coffee-room, 
the greater part of the company gathering in a circle round him to 
hear his remarks on the publications of the day, which he threw out 
with the confidence of one who thought his opinion the established 
standard of all writing ; and at the same time with a sprightliness 
that made his very impudence and absurdity entertaining. 

While he was thus running on in the torrent of harangue, a veteran 
whose only employment, for many years, was talking over the actions 
of his youth, and comparing them to the mistakes and losses of the 
present times, no longer able to contain his rage at having his 
audience drawn from him in the midst of his daily tale, rose up with 
an execration that shook the room, and called for his cloak and cane. 

' This is not to be borne ', exclaimed he. ' Here, waiter, take 
for my coffee ! I shall stay in such » place no longer ; this is the 
land of freedom, forsooth ! that a man must be disturbed in hia 
discourse, and not have liberty to speak where he spends his money ! 
Had I but the command here, I'd settle other orders ; every prating 
puppy should not presume to interrupt his betters ; things are like 
to go well with us when matters of the highest consequence can be 
broken in upon by noise and nonsense. This is freedom with a 
vengeance '. 

The look and accent with which these words were pronounced 
were too terrible for my master to encounter, both nature and 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 69 

experience having given him so lively an apprehension of danger 
that his readiest presence of mind was not always able to conceal 
it. He was, therefore, out short at once, and could scarce muster 
spirits to throw a wink at some of those about him, as the man of 
war looked another way. 

But the triumph was not so absolute over all the company, one 
of whom, resolving to have some fun, cries out, ' Pray, doctor, 
proceed ; you are just in the most interesting part of your story ; 
the colonel could not mean to interrupt you, he is too fond of telling 
his own story to give another such pain ; go on, you should not be 
frightened at a flash in the pan '. 

' Frightened, indeed ', replied the doctor, gathering courage 
when he saw himself supported ; ' at what, I wonder ! at the sight 
of what old age can sink to. No, no, I am not so easily frightened 1 
I leave that to your antiquated heroes, the exploits of whose youth 
have exhausted their courage. I mean no offence ; but to go on, 
as I was saying, the discovery of the sleep of plants accounts in the 
clearest maimer' 

* Hold, doctor ', cries the other, ' that was not as you were saying ; 
you were telling us of the nobleman who caught his coachman in 
bed with his lady, one morning, when he came home sooner than 
usual from the tavern ; pray how did she bring herself off ' ? 

' Oh ! was that it ', replied the doctor ; ' faith, I had forgot ; 
the fury of Mars had like to have made a gap in the annals of Venus, 
ha ! ha ! ha ! Why, she made nothing of it, but, laughing in his 
face, most heroically, " Tit for tat, my dear, is but fair play ", said 
she ; " while I say nothing at your staying out night after night 
with Kitty, you cannot in conscience blame my comforting myself 
a little with John ".' 

The colonel stood all this while convulsed with rage too big 
for utterance ; but the universal laugh that followed the doctor's 
last words, rousing him, he advanced to him. ' Whom do you dare 
to laugh at, poltroon ' ? says he, taking him by the nose ; ' whose 
courage is exhausted ? But you are beneath my notice or resent- 
ment, further than this '. Then spitting full in his face, he turned 
to the gentleman who had set the doctor on, and who began now 
not to like the joke any further. ' But for you, sir, you, perhaps, 
may be a gentleman worth calling to a further account 1 Will 
you please to walk upstairs with me, and let me know what you 
mean by a flash in the pan ' 7 

The ceremonies of attending him on such an expedition would not 
have been much more agreeable to this gentleman than to my 
master, but he had more command of his fear, and was well used to 
bring himself off with a joke. ' Sir ', says he, ' you need not give 
yourself the trouble of going upstairs, for what I can as well do 
here. By bidchng the doctor not be frightened, I meant at the 
circumstance of his own story, for just as you interrupted him, he 
had said, the lord snapped a pistol at his lady, which had flashed 
in the pan ! That was all, sir ! I could never mean it to oSend you, 
or show a doubt of your courage, which I have heard you relate so 
many surprising instances of, so often, and always so invariably 
alike that they must be true '. 



60 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

' Sir, sir, have a care,' replied the colonel, ' I do not desire to 
be troubled with such a, gentleman as I perceive you are. But 
let me tell you, sir, that I have seen a man's face broke before 
now for wearing such a sneer. As to the stories I tell, I am satisfied 
they will be of no service to you, nor raise the least emulation in 
a man who can stay lounging about town when his country has 
occasion for him. I was younger than you when I went a volunteer 
with Lord Cutts, under the Duke of Marlborough ; nor was I urged 
by want ; I had a good estate, sir, sufficient to supply me with 
what you call the pleasures of Ufe, if I could have thought anything 
a pleasure that was not attended with honour. Sir, I lost this hand 
at Blenheim, and this leg at Malplaquet ! But why do I tell you ! 
You will preserve your hands to take snuff ; and your legs to walk 
the park, the proper scene of your campaigns '. With which 
words the doughty hero marched away to his chariot. 

Though this lecture was rather too grave for the taste of the 
person to whom it was addressed, it gave great pleasure to the 
unconcerned part of the company, and to none more than my 
master, who had wiped his face, and began to come to himself as 
soon as he saw the danger directed another way. 

Before the gentleman could speak, the doctor came up to him, 
and said, ' I am sorry, sir, that you should have drawn this storm 
upon yourself, upon my account. But I bore the worst of it. You 
heard but the whistling of the winds ; the shower fell on me. 'Tis 
well, though, that what such dotards do is not esteemed an affront '. 

' An affront, sir ', replied the other ; ' I do not understand you ! 
I hope you do not insinuate that there was any affront offered to me, 
or that I was in the least concerned at what was said, only to you ' ! 

' Not at all, sir ', returned the doctor, ' not at all, sir, the colonel's 
discourse was all directed to me, to be sure ; and I hope to profit 
by it thus far, that I will never interrupt him again ' ! And with 
these words he left his former friend the field, not caring to enter 
into any further altercation with him, for fear he might take it into 
his head to vindicate his character on him, as he knew his man. 

Such slight rebuffs made not a moment's impression on the temper 
of my master ; he was used to and made nothing of them. A good 
dinner and a bottle of wine sent him in the evening, in a critical 
enthusiasm, to the theatre, where all action fell short of the sub- 
limity of his conception, all expression of the warmth of his feeling, 
as he fully explained to every company in the coffee-house while 
he sat at public supper when the play was done. 



CHAPTER XX 

SOME FURTHER ACCOTTNT OP CHEYSAL'.S MASTEK — HIS CONVEBSA- 
TIGN AND ENQAOBMENTS WITH TWO BOOKSELLEES — SOME OP THE 
SECEETS OP THE TEADB — OHETSAL CHANGES HIS SEBVIOE 

BxTENsrvB as these scenes were, they showed not my master in his 
proper light. His peculiar sphere was his study, where the incon- 
sistency of his work showed the chaos in the brain from whence 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 61 

they sprung. Chaoa, did I say ? Chaos is order to the confusion 
there. For surely the discordant seeds of such Hi-matched things 
were never jumbled together before. An auctioneer's library 
is a regular system, in comparison to his head. Such a heap 
has neither beginning nor end, no fixed point to commence 
a description from. I shah therefore waive such an attempt, and 
only strive to convey some idea of it from its effects. 

At five the next morning he arose to his labours, the first of which 
was to consider what he should begin the day with ; such was the 
multitude he had in hand. But what reason could not determine 
chance must, and he took them as they happened to he : panegyric, 
libel, physic, divinity, cookery, criticism, poUtios, ballads, botany, 
etc., etc., etc. In aU of which he indefatigably worked the task 
of the day, changing his subject with as httle concern as he did 
his paper ; and though such rambUng prevented his ever getting 
deeper than the surface of any subject, yet he showed the extent 
and volubiUty of his capacity, and that it wanted only regular 
apphcation to any science to be eminent in it. 

As soon as he had finished, and the devils had carried away his 
labours, he was just descending to go out when a bookseller came 
to pay him a visit. After much ceremony on one side, and little 
bivUity on the other, Mr Vellum thus accosted my master — 

' Well, sir, I see there is no dependence on the word of an author ! 
I thought I was to have the answer to yesterday's pamphlet last 
night ; somebody else wiU do it, and then I shall be finely off '. 

' Upon my honour, sir ', rephed my master, ' I assure you I should 
have done it, but some business ' 

' What business can you have that should interfere a moment 
with your engagements with me ' ? 

' Dear Mr Vellum, do but hear me ! There is a noble lord going 
to be divorced for impotence. I just got a hint of the matter the 
night before last, and so waited upon his lordship's gentleman 
yesterday morning, with whom I had a particular intimacy, having 
served him in my profession more than once, and from him I have 
learned the whole story ; and now leave me to set it out. I'll engage 
to make a noble eighteenpennyTVorth of it, at least by to-morrow 
morning '. 

' Why, there may be something in that, but in the meantime 
you should not let other matters cool '. 

' Never fear ; pray, how did yesterday's pamphlet do ' ? 

' Why, tolerably well ; but the scandal was so gross, that I was 
almost afraid '. 

' Ay, ay, never fear me for a home cut ; never fear me ' 1 

' But I hear nothing of the exercitations ' ! 

' No ; I sent away the sheet above an hour ago '. 

' Then there's that book you promised to re-write ; someone 
else wiU do it, and prevent you '. 

' Never fear, I have just laid down a scale for the style ; besides, I 
have altered the title already, and thatyouknowis the principal thing'. 

' That is right ! Now you speak of titles, I want half a dozen 
directly, this very day, if possible ' ! 

' It is rather too late now, but where are the books ' ? 



62 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

' In the lumber garret, where they have lain these seven years '. 

' That's well ; they are forgot by this '. 

' Forgot ! why, they were never known ! The author was a man 
of fortime, who printed them at his own expense, but I prevented 
the sale, and so had them for the publishing, ha ! ha ! ha ! besides 
a good consideration for buying up at a double price what I had 
not sold of them ; so that it was not a bad job ; and now he is dead 
they may safely come out under new titles. It wiU be too great 
a delay to wait to see them, but here are the old titles, which I 
suppose may do '- 

' Why, ay, they may do ; but I cannot possibly write them 
this evening. You know I must answer that pamphlet I wrote 
last week, before it is forgotten. I have an answer ready that 
will make a noise ; I expect it will raise a curiosity that mU sell 
another edition of the pamphlet. I left openings for such retorts 
upon the characters I praised in that, and have such pieces of secret 
history to hit them off with that I'U engage for the success '- 

' Ay, secret history and stories of famihar misfortunes, and such 
like, may do something. But I had Uke to have forgot the main 
business of my coming. There is an account of the death of an 
eminent divine this morning ; could we not vamp up a volume or two 
of sermons for him, think you ? He was suspected of heresy and 
atheism, and you know that would make anything in his name go off '- 

* Egad, a good thought ! and particularly lucky at this time ; 
for, as I have been engaged in divinity lately, I know the weak sides 
of the question, and a httle infidelity wiU be a refreshment to me. 
It shall be done ! the sermons shall be ready without delay ! Have 
you not got some by you that did not go off ? Let me have one of 
each, and I'll interline them to save time ; but will you publish 
them yourseK ? I thought you had given up sermons ' ? 

' Myself ! no ! no ! I'll send them in to Mr Vamp. I'll reserve 
the confutation of them to myself ' ! 

' Egad, another good thought ; the confutation wiU do better ! 
and I'll take care to make it a smart one, and play the devil with 
the author, ha ! ha ! ha ! But, Mr Vellum, your coming here 
this morning prevented my waiting on you ; it is a great while since 
you promised to settle with me. You should consider, sir '. 

' What, pray, good sir, should I consider ? that I have supported 
you ' ! 

' Supported me, Mr Vellum ! Sir, I have a profession '. 

' I know you have, Mr Doctor ; a profession indeed, in which 
His Majesty's subjects may bless God that nine in ten of you would 
starve if they had no other way of getting bread beside that '. 

' Mr Vellum, you know this way of talking signifies nothing. 
It is a long time since we have settled any account, and there are 
a great many articles. Let me see ; ay, here they are, and a 
long list it is ! Nineteen pamphlets, with answers to fourteen of 
them : nine rapes, six murders, five fast and four funeral sermons, 
thirty-six essays, twenty-two titles, four quarto volumes re-writ, 
seventeen wills, twenty -four' 

' Go on, sir, go on ! but when you have done, look at this, and 
talk to me of an aocoimt ; your bond for fifteen pounds, which is 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 63 

due these two years ; and it is very likely, to be sure, that you 
should leave it outstanding so long, if you had any account to set 
off against it ! But I am glad I know you, and since you talk of 
accounts, observe that I demand my money due on this bond, 
which I win have, and, when you have paid that, it wiU be time 
enough for me to settle accounts with you ; so, sir, your servant '. 

' Mr Vellum, good Mr VeUum, do not be so hasty ! I did not 
mean to give you offence '. 

' Accounts, indeed, have I not supplied you with paper above 
the weekly allowance we agreed for, and yet you will talk to me ' ! 

' Mr VeUum, I may be in the wrong ; let matters stand as they 
are. But you have not told me what size you would have this 
affair of the divorce that I mentioned to you just now '. 

' There it is now ; that is your way always. You know my eaay 
temper, and that you can bring me down when you please. Why, 
if the story will bear much printing, and the circumstances are 
very strong and plain, I believe you may draw it out to two shiUinga ; 
and to encourage you, and show you that I mean generously by 
you, when you have finished that, and the answer and the sermons, 
and the confutations, and the titles, and the exercitations, I wiU 
give you up your bond, and then we will begin an accoimt on plain 
even terms. But I am in haste. I have three or four other gentlemen 
to call upon. I shall depend upon your promise, and so good morning'. 

' Good morning to you, good Mr Vellum. Damned imposing, 
grinding scoundrel ! but I'll be quit with you for all your tricks ', 
said the doctor, as soon as Mr VeUum was out of the room ; ' and 
teach such stupid rascals to tempt outwitting men of genius '* 

When I considered the nature and importance of my master's 
demand, I could not but wouder at the ease with which he took 
a denial, and the joy he expressed at Mr Vellum's departure ; but 
the mystery was soon cleared up by the arrival of Mr Pamphlet, 
another of the trade, almost the very moment Vellum went down- 
stairs, and whom I saw by his reception my master expected. 

If I was before shocked at the cruelty with which I thought VeUum 
treated my master, I was not less so at the part he acted with 
Pamphlet, with whom he bargained over again for the very same 
ware which he before promised to VeUum, and flattered him with 
an assurance of having his business done, that is, the answers and 
re-writing, before Vellum possibly could, for they were mortal enemies. 

The discourse between these was much the same as the former, 
only it was concluded in a different manner ; Pamphlet giving my 
master a couple of pieces to keep him in mind of his engagement. 

I was utterly at a loss to think how he meant to act between 
these two, when he put an end to my doubts by this soUloquy : 
' So, now I have dispatched you two, the day is my own ; keep 
my engagements 1 I will, with both alike. Let me see, there is 
nothing in it but a little trouble of writing ; I can divide the hits 
between both answers, according to the opens I have left on pur- 
pose, and so send them to both at the same time ; only to divide the 
alterations in my scale of style, and make a second title, and so it 
is done. This method that I have found, of using a feigned name, 
makes it all easy. WeU, let those who were bom to fortunes spend 



64 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

them in sloth and ignorance ; I have an estate in myself that can 
never be exhausted. I am obliged to Nature only for my abilities, 
and carry the fountain of honour and fortune in the fluency of my 
genius ' 

He then descended from his aerial citadel, and going out to visit 
his patients, changed me at a cofiee-house, where I was immediately 
borrowed at the bar by an officer, who was going to dine with the 
general, and wanted money to give his servants. 



CHAPTER XXI 

OHEYSAL ENTERS INTO THE SERVICE OP THE GENTLEMAN OP A GENEBAL 

QRATITTTDB IN HIGH" AND LOW LIPB — THE MODERN WAT OP 

RISING IN THE WORLD ' AND THE HAPPINESS OP DEPENDENCE — 
INPLTTENCE OP CHEYSAL'S MASTER, WITH HIS CTORIOtrS MANNER OF 
SUPPORTING IT 

You may judge that my stay with this owner was but short ; he 
gave me (firectly to the general's gentleman, with a letter to be 
presented to his excellency next morning, as he could not find courage 
to speak to him in person. 

The case of this person, though not uncommon among men, I 
own affected me. He was the son of an officer of distinguished merit, 
the services of whose life had, in the eightieth year of it, been re- 
warded with the command of a regiment, and the hopes of his son 
crowned with a pair of colours ; which, on the death of his father, 
in six months after his elevation, he found to be his whole inherit- 
ance, the fees of office, and the equi for his new rank having 
exhausted all the savings of the old man's subaltern frugality. 
The most exemplary duty, in five warm campaigns, had advanced 
the son to the rank of a lieutenant, when the exaltation of the 
person to whom he now apphed, raised his hopes to a company, 
which was vacant in the regiment, and his right by seniority ; for 
such was his ignorance of mankind, that he biiilt sanguine expecta- 
tions on the very reasons that should have deprived him of any, 
the obligations of the persons to whom he applied, to his father, 
who had taken him up, the poor, friendless orphan of an ensign, 
educated him at his own expense, procured him lus first commission, 
and afterwards lent him the money with which he had purchased 
his company ; a debt which the son was weak enough to expect 
a friendship from, though it, and much more, had long since been 
cleared at play. 

But, though the character of the son, and the general's known 
intimacy with the father, in a manner obliged him to promise him 
his friendship, yet nothing was further from his thoughts than ever 
to do him any real service ; as he imagined that would be acknow- 
ledging the obligations which his very attendance seemed to up- 
braid him with, a dinner now and then being the only favour he 
ever had, or ever meant, to give him. You may, perhaps, have 
experienced the misery of a dependant's dining at the table of his 
patron, where the tortures of Tantalus are aggravated by anxiety 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 65 

of giving oflEence. I shall therefore hasten over this and the other 
Boenes of that evening, which were but the common occurrences 
of military greatness, and ended in a deep debauch, as soon as 
all but the chosen few had retired, to come to the conclusion of 
my late master's story, in which my present bore a considerable 
part. 

As soon as the general > had slept off the fumes of bis wine, and 
awoke next morning, my master's hour of influence arrived, which 
he never failed to improve. After a prelude of coughing and spit- 
ting, the scene opened thus : — 
' Who's there ? William '! 
'Sir'? 

' William, was not I very drunk last night 7 my head aches most 
confoundedly '. 

' Your excellency was a little cut, but you broke up much the 
strongest of the company '. 

' Ay, I wonder at that, I spend myself with talking, when I 
begin to go, and that helps a man on damnably ; that story of 
the battle, where I was taken prisoner, is a bottle in my way 
always '. 

' 'fliat foreign gentleman, who never speaks a word, has a great 
advantage, then ' 1 

' Ay, so he has ; but he is a damned honest fellow, and a very 
good companion ; he always fills a bumper, and never speaks a 
word. — But my head '. 

' Perhaps your excellency had better take something ', 
'No, I have taken too much already, though that's right; give 
me a glass of the old Geneva ; I am to go to council to-day, and 
must settle my head. Ay, that wiU do, I am much better now ; 
there is nothing like a hair of the old dog '. 

This conversation continued till he was seated to breakfast, when 
my master turned to a new topic. ' I was very sorry ', said he, 
' that your excellency happened to sit in last night, as Mrs Motherly 
was to call '. 

' Why, that's true, William ; I did not think of one engagement 
when I made the other ; and when she called me out I was not in 
cue ; I was too far gone. We old fellows are not sparrows ! the 
spirit is often willing when the flesh is weak, ha, ha, ha ! ' 

' Your excellency is pleased to be merry, but, to my thinking, 
the youngest fellow of the age has not more vigour '. 

' Ay, William, do you think so, indeed ? But why do you think 
so, William ' ? 

' Because your excellency always chooses such green things ; now 
I should thiiik a ripe woman would be better ; I am sure she would 
give less trouble '. 
' Ha, ha, ha ! why that's your taste ; but youth is mine, and 

1 Jean Louis Ligonier, first Earl Ligonier [1680-1770] Master-General 
of the Ordnance [1750-62] — an aged man with a glorious career 
behind him, which had now been totally forgotten by the public ; 
who regarded him as obselete ' and as a cover for jobbery among his 
subordinates '. 

E 



66 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

wliile I have powers — and I do not think mine quite gone yet 
— I will please my taste. But what had Mrs Motherly last 
night ' ? 

' A very fine girl as your excellency could wish to see '- 

' How old ' ? 

' About sixteen '. 

' Pshaw, mellow pears ! I loath such trash '. 

' But Mrs Motherly said she could swear she was untouched. 
She came from the country but yesterday, a relation of her own ; 
she, poor thing, knew nothing of the matter, and thought she came 
to be hired for a laundry-maid '. 

' Why, that is something, but I wish she were younger ' 

' If your excellency pleases but to wait a Uttle, I have one in 
my eye that wiU suit your taste exactly ; a sweeter child is not in all 
England.' 

' Ay, good William ', spitting once or twice, and wriggUng in his 
chair ; ' ay, that is something, but how old ' ? 

' Just ten, and finely grown '. 

' Right, the right age. That's true ! I'll speak this very day 
for that place for your brother. Tell him to come to-morrow; 
I will not be refused '. 

' We are both obliged to your excellency for your favours '. 

' But when shall I see this girl ? Give Motherly some excuse 
with her ripe fruit. Sixteen ! sixty ! pshaw ' ! 

' Sir, I shall go about it this very evening. A letter from Captain 
Standard ; will your excellency please to read it ' ? 

' Damn him and his letter ; throw it into the fire ! What would 
the unreasonable scoundrel have ? Did I not give him his dinner 
yesterday ? Has he not been introduced to good company at 
my table ? If he had any industry or spirit, with these advantages 
lie would have learned to play, and made his fortune, as others 
do. Since he grows troublesome on encouragement, I'll starve him 
into better maimers. Bid the porter strike him off the dinner 
list'. 

' I beg your excellency's pardon for mentioning him ; but the 
maimer I have heard you talk to him made me imagine you really 
did design to provide for him ; and he says there is a vacancy in 
the regiment just now '. 

' Damn his impudence ! a vacancy indeed ! I shall never think 
there is a good one till he makes it at Tyburn '. 

' I beg your excellency's pardon ; I shall never mention him 
more. Would you have me go about the child this evening ? It 
is^a httle angel, to be sure '. 

' This moment, if you think you can succeed '. 

' I shall try at any rate, but there is one obstacle '. 

' What is that ? You know I never grudge money on these 
occasions. How much will do ' ? 

' That is not the difficulty here ; money will not do, and I hardly 
know what will '. 

' Money not do ! why, what the devil can it be that money wiU 
not do ' ? 

' I scarce know how to mention it to your excellency, but the 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 67 

little cherub is niece to Captain Standard — his sister's daughter — 
and whUe he is in the way there -will be no possibility of getting at 
lier '. 

' Is that all ? Then he shall join the regiment to-morrow '. 

' But then he will leave such an impression of your unkindness 
upon his sister, if there is nothing done for him, after waiting so long, 
that it wiU be impossible for any person belonging to you to gain 
access '. 

' What would you have me do ? I never will bear to have the 
fellow get a company in my regiment ; that would be acknowledg- 
ing the obligations he has the impudence to say I received from 
his father ; I never wiU bear it '. 

'I beg your esoeUenoy's pardon; I did not presume to point 
out any such thing ; and indeed the possession of such a baby 
(though my eyes never beheld her fellow), is not worth giving 
yourself so much trouble about ; she is quite too young, though so 
well grown '. 

' You say she is but just ten ! and such a beauty ' ? 

' I wish your excellency could but see her, for I am unable to 
■describe her '. 

W^' But cannot some way be found out, beside fixing this fellow 
under my nose ' ? 

' That was just what I was going to take the liberty of hinting 
to your excellency. There are several gentlemen of fortune in 
the troops just ordered to America, who have no liking to the 
voyage. Now, I think, with submission, that you would oblige 
some of them with an exchange into your regiment, and let Captain 
Standard go in his place. And this wiU oblige him too ; for I have 
often heard him wish to go there in hopes of rising when they come 
into action '. 

' A good thought, and so I will. Let the fellow go to America 
and get scalped ; his hot head wants to be cooled ; such poor 
wretches as he are just fit to be transported there. Tell him to 
prepare directly ! I long to be rid of him. But when shall I see 
the dear little creature ' 1 

' In twenty-four hours after he is gone, I'U undertake to have her 
eating sugar-plums, and sobbing in your bosom. It cannot pos- 
sibly be sooner, for you know the captain's spirit, and that he would 
cut the throat of a prince who should dishonour his family, as he 
calls it '. 

' Ay, damn his spirit, that is true ; that is what has kept me 
civil to the fellow so long. I know he has aU the romantic madness 
about honour and such stuff that made his fool of a father live 
and die a beggar '. 

^j this time his excellency waa dressed to go to council, for which 
another dram settled his head. 

I see your surprise at the brutal behaviour of the master, and 
the infamous designs of the man. The former is beyond aggrava- 
tion ; but the latter were only an honest artifice in favour of his 
-friend, who had no such niece in the world. 



68 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 



CHAPTER XXII 

THE HISTORY OF MB WILLIAM — SOME ODD CIBCUMSTANCB3 IN HIS 
CONDUCT ACCOTTNTBD FOE — BY A PEOGRESSION EQUALLY POLITE 
AND FRUGAL — CHRYSAL COMES FROM HIS POSSESSION INTO THAT 
- OF A CELEBRATED FEMALE 

William was a son of the regiment, born of one of the general 
wives that followed it. He was about the same age with Standard, 
who had taken such a liking to him when they were boys that he 
shared his allowance with him, gave him his old clothes, and taught 
him what he had learned at school. A natural acuteness of genius 
improved these advantages so well that William could read and 
write enough for a gentleman, dance, fence, and scrape on the 
violin, before his friend's power of serving him was put an end to, 
by the death of his father, and his spirit and appetites were too 
great to accept of his offer of the best support an ensign could spare 
him, to maintain him as a cadet, till his merit should get him a 
commission. But, though he would not accept, he did not forget 
the offer, nor make his obUgations a cause of hatred, now that it 
was in his power to make some return ; a way of thinking that 
proved the meanness of his birth ; for, quitting the barren paths 
of military honour, he had turned his genius to the more thnving 
profession of a footman, through the various ascents of which he 
had risen to his present rank of his excellency's gentleman, in which 
he had the unfashionable gratitude to return the favours of his former 
benefactor in the above manner, which his experience and know- 
ledge of his master's temper convinced him to be the only one he 
could hope to succeed in. As to his promise about the child, he was 
in no pain about that, there being no person who could contradict 
whatever excuse he should please to give. 

There is one circumstance which I see puzzles you in the character 
of this man, and that is his taking me from his friend, when he must 
be sensible how badly he could spare such a sum. But you must 
consider the power of Nature when strengthened by habit. 

From his mother, WiUiam had inherited venality, which the 
bribery of vails, in his present profession, had confirmed beyond 
all possibility of correction ; so that it was no more in his power 
to refuse a guinea when offered to him, than to change his stature 
or complexion. An attention to this observation would take off 
the wonder, and ease the world from the trouble of the exclamations 
that are daily made against the rapacity of persons in office ; for 
as such are generally taken from the class of WiUiam, it cannot be 
expected but they must act from the same natural principle with 
him. 

I see the depravity of human nature, when stripped of disguise 
and ornament, affects your unexperienced heart too strongly. But 
consider that we see things as they really are, and to represent them 
otherwise to you would invert the design of my mission, and con- 
firm rather than remove the prejudices that lead astray the mind 
of man. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 69 

However, this consolation I can give you, that the vices I have 
abeady drawn, and may hereafter draw, to your view, are not 
particular to this age or country ; they are the weeds which 'in 
every age and clime, have always, and always will overrun the 
human heart. 

Nor is it just to call them vices (though, in compliance with the 
language of men, I do call them so) which perhaps are but ' neces- 
sary parts of this universal system ; and though in a particular 
instance, and viewed by themselves, they may appear deformed, 
yet when thrown into the general representation of things, they 
may have their beauty and use, if only to diversify the scene ; 
and, with respect to men in particular, bo as ^ advantageous to 
the community as they are prejudicial to individuals. 

But to return to my master WiUiam. Besides the advantages 
of education, he had such from nature, that he was not only the 
most accomplished gentleman, but also the handsomest fellow of his 
time ; a happiness of which he availed himself so weU in the polite 
world, that he was the favourite of all the compliant fair, who 
shared with him the pleasures they only suffered from his superiors 
for hire. 

Of this I saw sufficient proof that very evening, when he went 
to an assignation with the most celebrated courtesan of the age, 
who, sacrificing avarice to pleasure, gave orders to be denied to 
everybody, and shut herself up with him, to give a loose to joy 
for the evening. 

This was a scene too sensual for a spirit to describe ; I shall 
therefore only say that their fatigue and waste of spirits were re- 
cruited with the highest delicacies and richest wines, and the pauses 
of joy enlivened with the recital of the adventures of their pro- 
fessions, heightened with the most poignant ridicule of those whose 
folly was their fortune. 

Before satiety could paU their pleasures, time summoned them 
to business — the fair to prepare for the reception of her friend, and 
my master to wait on his ; when to conclude the evening with proper 
gallantry, he presented me to the maid at the door. 

I was a good deal surprised at being received with less emotion 
by the portress of Venus than I had ever found before, the sight 
of me having always raised joy. But this was soon explained, 
when, on returning to her mistress, she threw me on the table, 
and received a shilling in exchange — an instance of that methodical 
economy, which by many savings makes up for one large expense 
and exacts profit even from pleasure. 

The joy of the mistress seemed to make amends to my vanity 
for the indifference of her maid, and promised me the full possession 
of her heart ; but I soon found myself mistaken, and that her love 
for me was only while I was the property of another ; for no sooner 
did I become her own, than she threw me carelessly into her purse, 
and turned her thoughts immediately to the acquisition of more. 

' IFroiu hence it should seem, the hint of the late treatise on the 
■origin of evil was borrowed, or else dictated by the same spirit. 
« Fable of the bees. 



70 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

Bnt, though I lost the greatest part of my power over her, by 
coming into her possession, I still found ample room in her heart 
for my abode. 

The apartments were scarce got in order, and my mistress new 
dressed, when her friend appeared, to whom she flew with all the 
appearance of rapture. But, however he might be deceived, the 
difference was plain to me, between the joyless caresses she sold 
to him, and the ecstasy she shared with my late master, the glow 
of whose kisses yet reeked upon her lips. Nor was this strange ; 
the ardour of her lover met her half-way, and communicated as 
much fire as it received. But with her keeper the case was quite 
otherwise ; all the advances were to come from her ; all her caresses 
were a duty ; nor were the tenderest she could bestow able to warm 
him to the least return. 

You wonder that a person in such circumstances should be at 
the trouble and expense of keeping a mistress, whose extravagance 
was to be equalled only by her insolence. But this is only a small 
instance of the tyranny of fashion ; and how will your astonish- 
ment be increased when I tell you that this very man, in the prime 
of life, was remarkable for the coolness of his constitution, and 
now, in its decUne, was married to a beautiful young lady, whose 
resentment at his conjugal neglect rose so high as to charge it to 
inability. 

Whether this was really the case, and that he kept my mistress 
to hide it as a failing tradesman sets up a coach, or whether the 
passion remained, but so feebly supported, as to require the lascivi- 
ous blandishments of a prostitute, I cannot determine, as I never 
was in his possession to take a view of his heart. 



CHAPTER XXIII 

THE MANNEB IN WHICH CHRTSAL's NEW MISTEE3S BEOBIVED AND 
TOOK CABE OF HER rKIBND — HOW SHE EMPLOYED HEBSELF WHILE 
HE WAS ASLEEP — HEB MANAGEMENT OE HIM NEXT MOBNING 

It was about two in the morning when my mistress received him, 
drunk and stupefied with play, at which he had lost deeply that 
night. On his coming into her room, he threw himself into a chair 
without saying a word, or showing the least sensibility of her 
caresses ; where after some time he fell fast asleep, which my 
mistress no sooner perceived, than calling her maid, to undress 
and roll him into bed — 

' Here, Jane ', said she, ' take my place by this heap of mortality. 

I'U step to Street ; perhaps the company may not be all gone. 

Never fear, I'll ensure you from a rape ! He wants nothing in a 
bed-feUow but to keep him warm, and you may do that, whQe I 
pass my night better than in nursing his infirmities ; I'U be home 
before he stirs '. 

Jane obeyed her mistress, who slipped into a chair, and went 
away directly to a house where she used to piddle away her leisure 
hours with any chance customers, rather than be idle. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 71 

About five ended this scene, in the rites of which my mistress 
bore a distinguished part. I shall not attempt to describe these 
mysteries ; they were too gross for my relation, as well as your 
conception, in your present mortified habit. She then returned 
home, and laying her pure body in her maid's place, beside her 
friend, who had not stirred yet, her fatigues soon threw her into a 
sleep as sound as his. 

It was noon before these fond lovers awoke ; the first was my 
mistress, who, enraged that anything which bore the name of a man 
should show so little sensibility of her charms, resolved to tease him 
with endearments which, as he was seldom in a humour to return 
in kind, he never failed to pay for in a more substantial manner. 

When she had awoke him with her toying, the sjrren thus began 
her song : ' How can my dearest sleep so long when his Httle girl 
lies languishing by his side ? Oh, turn, and let me lay my head on 
that dear bosom' ! 

' Ha ! what is it o'clock ' 1 replied the lover, yawning, and rub- 
bing his eyes. 

' Alas, I know not ! I have told so many tedious hours that I have 
forgotten them. But what is time to us, who only Uve to love ' ? 

' Past twelve ! I must be gone ! Some business ' 

' Business ! Leave that for duller souls who have no taste for 
pleasure ; can you leave love and me for business ' ? 

' I am sorry I happened to oversleep myself, my dear. I believe I 
was bewitched to dnnk so much ; but we'll make it up another time '. 

' So you say always, but that other time will never come. But 
I will not be served so ; I am flesh and blood, whatever other people 
may be ; and you yourself know it is not for want of friends I keep 
myself up thus like a nun, for you ; and all I do not know for what ' ! 

' Is the girl mad ! Do not I give you everything you want, 
everything you desire ' ? 

' No, nor anything I desire ! I desire now. So you wiU get up 
and leave me. I will not be used thus ; you have got some other 
woman, but I here give you a fair warning that I wiU be even with 
you ! Sir George was here yesterday, and so was the young lord, 
but I would not see either of them ; and I am well reqviited now. 
But I know where to send to them ; I will not be made a fool of 
every way for nothing ; and so you may sleep where you please, 
I care not '- 

' Come, my dear, let us not fall out for nothing ; you have not 
shown me the diamond earrings you got last week '. 

' No, my dear, they are not come home '- 

' I thought you told me they were finished when I gave you the 
money to pay for them '. 

' They were so ; but when he brought them home I did not like 
them. The jeweller told me they were not so fine as those he made 
for your lady, some time ago ; so I sent them back, and ordered 
him to make me a pair that should be as good as her's at least '. 

' Not good enough, child ! Were they not to cost one hundred 
and fifty pounds ' ? 

' And what is a hundred and fifty pounds ? Sir Richard gave 
his girl a pair that cost five hundred pounds. But if you think 



72 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

these are too dear, you are not obliged to pay for them ; there is 
another who will be glad to do it '. 

' And pray, what are these fine ones to cost ' ? 

' Why — only — but kiss me first — only two hundred pounds ; 
but then I have bespoke a necklace with them '- 

' Zounds, a diamond necklace ' ! 

■ And what mighty matter is a diamond necklace ? Pray, has 
not your wife one ? But I see how it is ; you think anything good 
enough for me, and nothing good enough for her. But everyone 
does not think so ; I am not at a loss ' ! 

' Well, you saucy little minx ; and what do they come to ' ? 

' Another kiss, and I'll tell you ; why, don't frown, or I won't 
tell you at all — only five hundred pounds '. 

' Kve hundred devils ; that's more than my wife's cost by one 
hundred pounds '. 

' And do not you love me a hundred times better than your wife 7 
I have given up thousands for you. But, as I said before, you need 
not pay for them if you do not choose it ; there are others who 
will. I see I am slighted ; and I deserve it for slighting so many 
good offers. But I will not always be a fool ' ! 

' Well, my dear, for this one time I will humour you. Give me 
the pen and ink ; but you must not expect that I shall ever gratify 
your extravagance so far again '. 

' I thank you, my lord ; I shall not trouble you again this great 
while. But what is this ? Three hundred and fifty pounds ! 
You have made a mistake, my lord ; I told you five hundred pounds '. 

' Well, child, did not I give you a hundred and fifty to pay for the 
other pair ' ? 

' Yes, my lord ; but that was not to pay for this pair though ; 
you know, these are dearer '. 

' But that and this will '. 

' I am afraid not '. 

' How so, child ; do not one hundred and fifty, and three hundred 
and fifty, make five hundred ' ? 

' Indeed, I am a poor accoimtant ; but I know it will not do '. 

' No ? why so ? I do not understand you '. 

' I'U kiss you first and then I'll teU you '. 

' Pshaw ! cease fooling ; I am in haste ; I must go to court, and 
have scarce time to dress. Where is the hundred and fifty pounds ' ? 

• There ' ! (kissing him). 

' Where ' ? 

' Gone, as that kiss is all gone, and only the relish left behind 
to give an appetite for more '. 

' Infernal jade ' ! (Aside). 

' What do you say, my lord ' ? 

' That I cannot, will not bear such extravagance '. 

' I am glad I know your mind, my lord ; then if you do not, 
somebody else will, who will not make such a stir about trifles '. 

' Well, give me that bill '. 

' No, thank you, my dear '. 

' Why so ' ? 

' For fear you should be a bold boy, and not return it. If you 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 73 

please to give me the other hundred and fifty pounds, I'll get the 
necklace and earrings ; if not, this will serve for some other use '. 

' Damnation ! And then I must give it to her all over again '. 
(Aside.) 

' Well, my lord, you said you were in haste, and so am I '- 

' Give me the pen and ink 5 there it is, you little termagant. 
But once more let me caution you against such extravagance for 
the future '. 

' And once more, let me tell you, my lord, not to give yourself 
such airs ; extravagance ! They who want dehoacies must pay 
for them ; and if you think the price too dear, there are more cus- 
tomers in the market. And so, my lord, like it or like it not, I will 
be supported ; and more than that, what I want in pleasure shall 
be made up in profit ; let wives save, who may be the better for 
the savings, our business is to make hay while the sun shines '. 

' CJome, my dear, let us have no disputes ; you have the money 
now ; next time we will clear oflE the other score. Give me a kias. 
I'U call in the evening, and take a dish of tea with you ; farewell '. 

' Good-morrow' ! (After he is gone) ' For an old, impotent, poor- 
spirited lecher that must be treated hke a dog to make you know 
your duty ! What fool would ever be at the trouble of behaving 
well to any fellow when she can so much better mould him to her 
pleasure, by iU-usage ' ! 



CHAPTER XXIV 

THE HISTORY AND CHAEACTEB OF CHBYSAL's MISTRESS — SHE GIVES 
HIM TO A NOTED MATBOiT — SOME ACCOUNT OF HIS NEW MISTRESS, 
AND HER MANNER OP MANAGING HER FAMILY 

This principle she acted up to, for two days that I was in her pos- 
session, without any other variation in her conduct, than just what 
was necessary to work on the various tempers of her lovers, making 
no real difference between them, except it was, that she always 
used those worst, who used her best. 

I have often told you that sensuality is disagreeable to a spiritual 
being. I, therefore, longed to quit this mistress, the succession of 
whose amours was so constant and quick, that I was astonished 
how nature could afford a fund of love for them aU in so young a 
creature ; for she was not twenty years old. I see you have a 
curiosity to know the history of this young votary of Venus, in 
which you think there must be something extraordinary ; but you 
are deceived ; it contains nothing but common occurrences. 

She was the daughter of tradespeople, in moderate circumstances, 
whose foohsh fondness, because she was a pretty, smart child, gave 
her an education above her rank, in hopes of her making her fortune 
by marriage. 

This raised the vanity natural to the female heart so high, that 
she despised her own station, and not being so fortunate as immedi- 
ately to climb to the one she desired, by the way proposed, she 



74 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

fell an easy victim to the first seducer who promised it in any 
other. 

Thus the accomplishments, by which the injudicious tenderness 
of her parents meant to raise her into a rank higher than their own 
became the cause of her faUinginto that of the lowest of all human 
beings ; a fall, though deplorable in itself, yet unafFecting to her, 
as the time in which her mind should have been formed to virtue 
was given up to the nourishing that vanity which proved her ruin ; 
so that she is absolutely insensible of the wretche(hiess of her con- 
dition, and never has the pursuit of her most infamous profession 
disturbed her by a moment's remorse. 

I told you of her spending the hours that were unemployed at 

home, at an house in Street, where she was always sure of 

business. Though this venerable mansion was dedicated to the 
mysterious rites of unrestrained love, yet, as the priests of all temples 
expect to live by the offerings made at them, her conscience would 
not permit the priestess of this to break through an ordinance so 
long established, and she exacted fees from the votaries of her's ; 
not indeed a tithe indiscriminately from aU, whether they received 
benefit from their devotion or not, but always in proportion to the 
fruits they reaped. 

At this shrine was I offered the third night of my being in the 
possession of this young devotee, when the plenteousness of her 
gain from a multitude of lovers seemed to her piety to merit so 
rich a return. 

I now entered into a much more extensive scene than my last, 
the prostitution of which made but a small part of the business of 
the profession. But what I have related in the history of my late 
mistress shall suffice for that branch, nor shall I give more than 
some outlines of the horrors of the rest. 

My new mistress had originally been of the sisterhood of my last, 
who, having fallen a prey to lust, almost in her infancy, and having 
no beauty, nor anything but extreme youth to recommend her, 
as soon as that was worn out, neglect obhged her to apply to other 
business for bread, and her natural turn determining her to this, 
as well as the outrageous virtue of the undiscovered part of her 
own sex excluding her from every other, she changed her occupation 
from yielding to providing pleasure, in which her success was so 
great that she soon became the most eminent of her profession. 

It was near five in the morning when I changed my service ; and 
business being ended, my late mistress having reigned sole mistress 
of the night, and seen out aU the company, there remained nothing 
to do, after she went home, but to see the inmates to their truckle- 
beds in the cock-lofts ; where stripping off every part, not only of the 
finery, but even of the comforts of dress, they were crowded three 
or four together, to keep each other warm, under a ragged coverlet, 
upon a bare mattress, where their shudderings and groans made a 
just contrast to the spirited wickedness of their conversation some 
hours before. 

This was always the fate of those who were not so successful 
in the evening as to earn the price of a better bed, above the fees 
of the house and the hire of clothes. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 75 

These happy few were treated with fondness, while they squan- 
dered their poor peculium in a drop of cordial to settle their heads,, 
and were lodged in apajtments suited to their purses ; though 
the night before, perhaps, they had experienced the same fate with 
their sisters above stairs, and knew they must expect it again the 
next, if they proved xinsuocessful in their business. 

When matters were thus settled, this happy family disposed 
themselves to take the best repose which diseaise in mind and body 
would permit. 

An active spirit disdains rest. Though debauchery had antici- 
pated old age in the constitution of my mistress, yet her apphcation 
to business made her refuse nature even necessary indulgence. 
She was ready to go out before ten that morning, when the modest 
decency of her dress and appearance were such as drew the general 
good opinion, and would almost deceive the devil himself, on whose 
most favourite service she was going. 



CHAPTER XXV 

CHEYSAL's MISTEES3 PAYS A VISIT TO THE LAST PLACE SHE O0in:j> 
HAVE BEEN SUSPECTED OF GOING TO — SHE MEETS A YOUNG 
LADY, WITH WHOM, BY AN AETIPIOE, SHE GOBS HOME — HEB 
SCHEMES TO BNSNABE THE LADY 

If a judgment were to be formed for the whole day, from the manner 
of beginning it, my mistress should have spent hers most happily j 
her &st visit being to church, where the piety of her behaviour 
was an ^dification to the devout matrons, who, having nothing 
to do at home, meet there regularly to compare their aches and 
dreams of the night before, and enjoy the innocent amusement 
of a little gossipping over the afiairs of their neighbours, yit 

But her devotion wasted not itself so fruitlessly ; her industry 
had fornied expectations of drawing considerable advantage from 
it, and so, anticipating futurity, and making sure of the reward 
here, which others waited for in another world. The immediate 
motive of her devotion this morning was to see a young lady with 
whom she had commenced an acquaintance at this church, and who 
constantly attended divine service there. You are surprised how 
she could think of going to such a place, on such an errand ; but 
the wolf roams about for prey everywhere, and is often most suc- 
cessful where his attempts are least suspected, though I must rob her 
industry of the merit of design in the first introduction to this affair. 

Going through St Martin's Lane one morning about a month 
before, she was so struck with the appearance of a lovely young 
creature, in widow's weeds, who was going into the church, that she 
followed her, where the fervency with which she poured out her soul 
in devotion gave such a lustre to her beauty, and made it shine 
so lovely through her grief, that my mistress immediately marked 
her for her list, not doubting but she should be able to turn her 
distress to such advantage as should bring her into her measures, 
and make her beauty yield her a rich return for her pains, from 



76 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

some of her customers. If you consider the nature of womankind, 
you will not wonder at this instance of the profligacy of my mistresa. 
They are ever in extremes ; either the best or worst of human 
creatures. From church she dogged her to her lodging in a little 
court, where she lived with a poor but honest family, in such 
privacy that no one in the neighbourhood could give any account 
•of her. 

Real virtue shines with » lustre that dazzles the most confirmed 
vice, and keeps it at an awful distance. My mistress, hardened 
as she was in all the ways of sin and impudence, dared not go directly 
to her, without some business or introduction ; but as she had 
not either, her ready genius prompted her to win her good opinion 
under an appearance of religion, and then an acquaintance would 
come easily. 

She was not deceived in her expectations ; a few mornings con- 
stant attendance at church, and the exemplary warmth of her 
devotions struck the eye and opened the heart of unexperienced 
innocence to the acquaintance she wished for, which she did not 
fail to improve by the same arts to some degree of intimacy. 

In this situation they were when she went, but without any 
appearance of design, to meet her this morning at church as usuaL 
As they came out together, my mistress, turning with her fair 
friend, said she had some business in Long Acre, and asked her if 
she went that way, to which the young lady innocently answered 
that she did, and that she should be glad to walk with her. 

As they walked together, my mistress turned her conversation 
on the wicked ways of the town, and particularly the many base 
designs that were laid to ensnare unwary innocence, adding, that 
all the pleasure which sensuality could give the most luxurious 
heart, must fall infinitely short of what she felt at that very moment, 
in the design she was then going upon, of relieving the distresses 
of a worthy family. 

She had timed her discourse so as to say these words just as she 
came to the entrance of the court, in which she knew the widow 
lived, when, feigning to slip, she fell all along, crying out, as in the 
utmost agony, that she had wrenched her ankle. 

The lady raising her with the greatest tenderness, expressed 
her concern for the unhappy accident, and desired she would submit 
to be helped into her lodgings, which, fortunately, were at the next 
door, where, though she could be but poorly accommodated, she 
might be more at her ease than in a more sumptuous place, and 
should have all the care in her power. This was just what my 
mistress had schemed for, who, courteously accepting the offer, 
made a shift to limp in, without any other assistance than her's. 
It raised my indignation to see the tenderness with which the 
beautiful young creature pulled off her shoe and stocking, and 
chafed her ankle, thrown away upon so unworthy an object, as 
it did my abhorrence to hear the counterfeit shrieks and groans of 
my mistress, and the assurance with which she attributed the 
swellings caused by debauchery to this immediate accident. 

This affrighted the young lady so, that she, in a manner, forced 
her to send for a surgeon, which with much entreaty she yielded 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 77 

to do ; but it must be for a friend of her own, a gentleman who 
lived a considerable way ofi, at the polite end of the town, for she 
could not think of letting any common low-lived fellow come near 
her. 

Upon this a porter was directly dispatched for her own surgeon, 
and in the meantime, as she began to grow easier, she recovered 
her spirits, and renewed the conversation that had been broken off 
by this accident. 

' I was telling. you, my dear friend ', said she, ' for so I shall ever 
call you from tliis moment (your kindness having completed the 
conquest which your beauty had before made of my heart), I was 
telling you that I was going to visit a family this morning, where 
I promised myself the highest joy that a human heart is capable 
of feeling, in lightening the distress of the virtuous, by sharing with 
them some of that wealth which Heaven has abundantly blessed 
me with, and which can justly be applied to no other use than 
making this grateful return to that goodness which bestowed it. 

' But my heart was too elate with the thought, and I received this 
accident as a caution from Heaven not to flatter myself with any- 
thing so strongly for the future. But, though I could not have 
this pleasure myself, the benefit shall not be delayed to them. I 
will make you my almoner, an office that I know will suit the good- 
ness of your heart. You shall give this packet, which will put an 
end to all their distresses.' 

' Oh, madam 1 your good opinion is the greatest honour to me ', 
replied the lady, ' and I hope I shall never forfeit it, especially in 
this commission, which I shall undertake with the most sincere 
joy ; but, pray, dear madam, who are the persons to whom I must 
dispense your goodness ' ? 

' That's true, my dear ', returned my mistress, ' I should give 
you some account of them, that you may be the better enabled 
to judge of the joy I feel in serving them. It is the widow of an 
officer who has been killed in this war, -and left her with three poor 
babes, destitute of every support but the allowance of the govern- 
ment, which, wretched as it is, and only aggravating misery by 
barely prolonging life under it, is often gasped for by the hungry 
mouth in vain, where interest is wanting to procure the immediate 
relief of it, as was her unhappy case, so that they must have actually 
perished for want of food, had not Providence brought them into 
my knowledge, seemingly by the greatest accident, about six 
months ago, since when, I have myself afforded them the necessary 
comforts of life, and have also made such interest for them, with 
some of my friends, that I have here got them a grant of a pension 
on the Irish Establishment, sufficient to bring up the children, 
and make the remainder of the mother's days happy; for, my 
dear, I never do anything by halves — Good God ! child, what is 
the matter with you ? Wiat do you weep so for ' ? 

' Nothing, dear madam ', replied the lady ; ' nothing ; I only 
sympathize in the distress of the poor widow '. 

' But, my dear, that distress is now at an end '. 

' Oh, madam, let me carry her the blessing ! let me not delay 
her happiness a moment I Who knows but that her heart is this 



78 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

minute bursting with the dreadful apprehensions of want for her- 
self, and her dearer infants ' ! 

' With all my heart, madam ; but you will please to order a chair 
to be called to carry me home, when you go ; for I cannot stay 
here alone '. 

' Dear madam, forgive my rudeness. I beg your pardon, pray 
iorgive me ; the distress of the widow put everything out of my 
head ; indeed it did ; pray excuse me '. 

' Excuse you, my dear, I honour the heart that feels another's 
-(voe. You shall go directly; you shall be the messenger of glad 
tidings to them. But, my dearest young lady, give me leave to 
tell you, that I fear you have not answered me sincerely ; I fear 
your tears flow from some other cause than mere sympathy. Speak, 
my child ! does anything afiect your own heart ? Can I any way 
be serviceable to you ? Command me freely, and make me happy 
in serving one for whom my heart has conceived so tender an 
esteem ! Speak as you would to your own mother, and wrong 
not my friendship with a doubt '. 

' Oh, madam, madam ' ! replied the mourner, as soon as sobbing 
permitted utterance, ' I have no mother to make my complaint 
to. I am the wretched widow you have described ! A widow with- 
out support, without friends, or any other hope than just in Heaven '. 

' And Heaven wiU raise you friends, my dearest child ! Heaven 
has raised you a friend in me ! You shall be my child. I look upon 
you as my own, as a gift from Heaven, from this moment ! You 
flhall leave this place this very day ! It is not fit for my child ! 
I will take a lodging for you near myself till my nephew, who is 
iately come to town to see me, goes home ; and then you shall Uve 
with me for ever '. 

Saying these words she threw her arms round her destined victim 
and wiped away the tears that flowed down her cheeks, while a 
•variety of passions filled her tender heart almost to bursting. 



CHAPTER XXVI 

THE HISTOEY OF THE YOTTNG LADY — SHE IS CRITICAIXY nTTEBRUPTED 
BY THE AERPVAL OP AN TTNEXPECTBD PERSON — SHE IS BECON- 
OILBD TO HER FATHER, WHO REWARDS THE WOMAN OF THE 
HOUSE, AND RESOLVES TO PtTNISH THE BAWD 

When she had recovered herself a little, my mistress thiis resumed 
her lore. ' Weep not, my dearest child, all will be weU. And have 
you any dear little infants too ' ? 

' Oh no ! my wretchedness, thsmk Heaven, is all my own ' ! 

' But may I, my dear, ask your name, and the circumstances 
•of your story ! I would know all that nothing may be unredressed '. 

' You are all goodness, madam ! My story, alas ! has few cir- 
cumstances, and they are all distresses ! I lost my mother while 
I was yet a child ; my father left me in the ooimtry to the care 
of a governess, the wife of his chaplain, who educated me in the 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 79 

sentiments of piety and virtue. When I was scarce fourteen I 
returned the love of her son, the most deserving and most lovely 
of his sex, who was two years older than me ; but, young as we 
were, we concealed our passion, till my father obtained him a 
commission in the army ; when, on the regiment being ordered to 
America, I yielded to his fear of losing me, and consented to a private 
marriage, which was soon discovered by a letter falling into my 
father's hands, who, in his rage, turned my husband's father and 
mother and me out of doors, nor would ever see us more. A small 
vicarage aflforded us a present support. My mother-in-law soon 
died ; the suspicion of her having betrayed the confidence of my 
father, and been instrumental in my marriage, breaking her heart ; 
as did the account of my husband's deat^ his father's. I then 
was left quite destitute, and have since supported a wretched being 
by my work, which the honest woman of this house takes in for 
me, without the least hope of relief in this world, till your goodness 
has this day taken compassion on me '. 

' And what is your father's name, my dear ' ? 

' That I have never yet revealed, as I would willingly hide the 
disgrace my distress may be thought to do him ; but with you I 
need not use that caution ; his name is ' 

Just at this word, the surgeon, who had been sent for to my 
mistress, entered, and presented a new scene. 

At the first sight of this person, the young lady gave a great 
shriek, and swooned away. The gentleman stood a moment stupefied 
with astonishment when, turning hastily to my mistress, ' Is this 
the lady ' ? said he. 

' Ay, and a lovely one she is ', answered she ; ' but help me to 
raise her up, when you will see her better ; she has been just telUng 
me her story, and the grief of it has overcome her ; it is a moving 
one ; and she must be our own '. 

' Oh, my child ! my child ! ' exclaimed he in a transport, and, 
spuming my mistress from her with his feet, raised her himself, 
and leaned her head upon his bosom, kissing her, and almost 
smothering her with his tears. ' Oh, my poor child ! what have you 
escaped ! — what have you endured ' ! 

It is impossible to describe the situation of my mistress at this 
scene. She saw the error she had been guilty of in introducing 
a woman to whom she was a stranger ; and was aware of the danger 
with which the horror of such an interview on such an occasion 
threatened her. While, therefore, the father seemed wrapped 
in an ecstasy that made him as insensible as his daughter, she 
thought it the best way to retire from the first burst of his anger, 
and, forgetting her sprained ankle, was going directly away, but 
he perceived her intent, and caDing her with a voice that nailed 
her to the ground : ' Stir not, upon your life ', said he ; 'I will 
have this whole mystery cleared up '. 

His daughter, just then opening her eyes, and finding herself laid 
upon her father's bosom, love, duty, respect, fear, and joy filled 
her heart with such a variety of passions, that she sunk under their 
weight and swooned away. 

Thia embarrassed the father almost to distraction, till the woman of 



80 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

the house coming in, with her assistance she was at length recovered, 
for my mistress was so terrified, that she did not dare to approach her. 

As soon as the lady had lightened her heart by a flood of tears> 
she threw herself at her father's feet, unable either to look up or 
to speak to him. Moved with the mute eloquence of her grief, and 
melting in the warmth of nature, he raised her from the ground, and 
spoke to her in these words : — 

' Be comforted, my child ! I am ! I will be your father ! But 
tell me what has passed between you and this vile woman ' ! 

' Oh, sir, is she not my best, my only friend ? Has she not 
restored me to your love ' ? 

' Have a care, child ! She your friend ? then you are lost beyond 
recovery indeed ! she is a reproach to her sex ! to human nature ' ! 

' Oh, sir ! how can that be ? Did she not bring you here to me ? 
Does not that show her virtue and compassion to my distress ' ? 

' Compose yourself a Uttle, child ; it is true she brought me here ; 
but tell me, I charge you, on what terms she told you I was to come ; 
and how she came to interest herself in your affairs ! Fear not, 
but speak the truth '. 

On this she told him the whole of her acquaintance with my 
mistress, and by what accident, and in what character she imagined 
he had been sent for ; but that as soon as she saw him enter the 
room, she thought my mistress must have been acquainted with 
her story, and had taken this method of introducing her to him, 
in hopes the surprise and sight of her distress might operate on his 
compassion. 

Truth forces conviction. He was satisfied with the account 
she gave him ; and taking her again in his arms, ' I have found 
you again, my child ', said he, ' and I will never lose you more. 
Be the errors of your youth, be my severity forgotten. Prom 
henceforth you are my child, and I will be your father. As to that 
vile wretch, know that her whole acquaintance with you was sought 
with a premeditated design of betraying you to ruin. She told me 
the whole nearly as you have done ; and encouraged by your 
distress, of which she had got some general hints, but ignorant 
who you were, she laid the scheme of this pretended accident to 
get admission into your house ; for she well knew where you Kved, 
and then sent for me to a place I had appointed, that I might come 
and see you, under the appearance of a surgeon ; that if I hked 
you, I might have the preference of her interest in you : for so deep 
had she laid her scheme, that you could not have escaped her ; 
the trial would have been too great for human fortitude. And 
this most execrable mystery of iniquity did she undertake for the 
paltry reward of fifty pounds, which, I must take the shame upon 
myself to own, I had promised her, little imagining that I was 
bargaining for the seduction of my own innocent child. But I see, 
I acknowledge the hand of Heaven in the whole afiair, that has 
thus opened my eyes to the danger of such a licentious course of 
life, and made the recovery of my child the means, and the reward 
of my conversion. 

' Weep not, my dear ; justly may you turn your eyes with de- 
testation from such a fiend. But I shall take care that she meets 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 81 

a just reward ; while you prepare to go home with me, for I will 
not leave you a moment in this scene of horror '. 

' Oh, mercy, mercy, my lord ' ! cried my mistress ; ' have mercy 
on me ! nor overwhelm with your anger a wretched creature, 
whose remorse is a load too great to bear '. 

' Away, vile wretch ', replied he, in a rage ; ' nor dare to speak 
another word ! And here, fellow ', calling to the porter, who had 
directed him to the house ; ' bring me the parish constable '. 

While the porter went for him, my mistress, wretched now indeed, 
her guilty fears magnifying her danger, stood trembling, but afraid 
to assay his pity with another word. 

After he had walked a turn or two about the room, his daughter 
entered, and with her the woman of the house, with her Uttle effects, 
which were soon packed up. At the sight of them his countenance 
softened. 

' WeU, my dear ', said he to his daughter ; ' I see you are ready 
to come with me ; but I must wait a moment to do justice to the 
wretch who brought me hither. Plead not for her ! I would not 
have you ever sue to me in vain again ; and to anything in her 
favour I cannot yield. But my justice shall not oiily be severe, 
nor confined to her alone. You have said that this honest woman 
has been a friend to you ; she shall be rewarded. Here, good 
woman, is the sum of money I was to have given this vile creature 
for my daughter in another sense. Take it as the reward of your 
honesty and kindness to her ; and call on her every year of your 
life for the same sum '. 

The poor woman took it with reverence, but was unable to speak 
her gratitude, her heart was so fuU, while his daughter dropped 
suddenly upon her knees, and raising her hands and eyes to heaven, 
exclaimed in rapture : ' Oh, pour thy blessings, Heaven, on his head, 
who thus dispenses happiness on all who merit it ' ! As she said 
these words, the constable came, into whose charge his lordship 
gave my mistress to be taken to a justice of the peace, whither he 
appointed to follow her ; and then handed his daughter into a 
coach, in which he took her directly home. 



CHAPTER XXVn 

THE ADDRESS Of CHETSAL's MISTRESS, AND CIVILITY OP A CON- 
STABLE SHE AKBIVES AT THE JUSTICE'S, AND IS SOFTENED BY 

HIS CLERK, AND TERRIFIED BY HIS WORSHIP — OHBYSAL CHANGES 
HB SERVICE 

As soon as this happy couple were gone, my mistress recovered 
her spirits and smiled with contempt at a danger she had often 
gone through before without harm. ' And so ', says she, ' master 
constable, I am given in charge to you ! and for what, pray ? 
But I am no such novice as to yield myself a prisoner, till I see 
proper authority to hold me ; therefore, sir, I shall wish you a good 
morning. If you please you may go tell his lordship that I was 



82 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

not at leisure to wait for him at the justice's ; and, because you 
may be dry after your walk, here is a crown to drink my health '. 

' I thank you, mistress ', replied the constable, taking the money ; 
' but in the meantime you must come. I am sorry I cannot 
let you go '. 

' Cannot let me go ? Pray, sir, where is your authority to keep 
me' ? 

' Here, mistress ' ! producing his staff. 

' But your warrant ' ? 

' Oh ! as for that, I'll make bold to do without one this time, and 
take you to the justice on my own authority, and his lordship's 
request ; and so, mistress, you had better come along, for I am in 
haste. You may have a coach, if you please '. 

' Ay, so I will, to carry me home ; and here's something for you 
to pay the coachman ', putting a guinea in his hand, 

' Tis very well, mistress, I will see you safe home, to be sure, 
if you desire it, and the justice gives you leave ; for to him we must 
go directly '. 

' Then give me my money ; and be assured you shaU answer 
for this false imprisonment '. 

' Your money, mistress ! why, ay ? so I wiU, if I do not earn 
it'. 

' Then let me go home this moment '. 

' No, no, mistress ! that I cannot do till you have been to visit 
his worship ; and then I will see you safe home, if he gives me 
leave, and drink your health into the bargain ; and that was what 
you gave me the money for. Come, come, mistress, one of your 
trade should know better things than to ask for money back again ! 
Have I not showed you aU the civility in my power ? Do you think 
I would stand preaching with you here this hour for nothing ? 
Come along, the coach is at the door ' 

I saw you were surprised at the address and tvim of expression 
in my mistress's conversation with this young lady, before the 
arrival of her father, as above her sphere; but nature had given 
her a capacity equal to anything, and her intercourse with the pohte 
world had gained her an ease of behaviour, and elegance of ex- 
pression, that made every condition of life seem natural to her. 
As to the story of the family whom she was going to relieve, she 
had actually prepared one of her confederates to have acted that 
part, so that the lord might justly say, her design was laid so well 
that it was next to impossible for her to miss of success. For, 
by this deceit, she would have gained the young lady's confidence 
to receive favours from her, and, when she had her in her debt, 
she thought she could make her own terms. 

As soon as my mistress and her conductor were come into the 
ante-chamber of justice, the clerk, recognizing her, addressed her 
thus : ' Good-morrow, mistress ; pray what has got us the favour 
of your company ? You have been so great a stranger of late, that 
I was beginning to think we had lost you '. 

' Pray, sir ', said she ; ' let me speak a word with you in the next 
room '. On which he ordered her to be shown in, and only waited 
to ask the constable, by whom, and for what, she was sent there, 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 83 

who was able to give him no other answer than that the lord had 
ordered him to bring her, and said he would follow himself 
directly. 

Having got this fuU information, the clerk came into the room 
to my mistress and told her, with a look of importance and concern, 
that he was sorry to see her on so bad an account. 

' So bad an account, sir ' ! said she ; ' why ? pray, what do you 
think I am brought here for ? Nothing ia'this world! they can 
charge me with nothing but intention; and I hope that is not 
punishable by the law '. 

' I hope it will appear so ', replied he ; ' but ', shrugging up his 
shoulders, ' my Icwrd has sent a message here that has another 
appearance '. 

' And pray, sir, what does my lord charge me with ' ? 
' You'll excuse my revealing the secrets of a Privy Councillor. 
He will be here too soon, I am afraid, to tell you himself '- 

Versed as my mistress was in aU the wiles of man, the look and 
manner of his saying these words alarmed her conscious fears. 
' Pray, sir ', said she, ' what has his lordship said ? or, if you do 
not think proper to teU me that, at least you can direct me 
how to make the best defence against his designs. I shall not be 
ungrateful ; you know I never was '. 

' Why, that's true, madam ', replied he ; ' and, indeed, I should 
take great pleasure in serving you, and getting you out of this hole ; 
but my lord, you know, is a great man, and can, in a manner, do 
what he pleases with poor people '. 

' Pray, sir, can I speak a word to the justice ' ? 
' I fear he is engaged just now ; besides it is so long since he has 
seen or heard from you, that I believe you must expect but Uttle 
favour from him '. 

' Why, that is the very thing I would speak to him about ; and 
beUeve me, it was my business out so early this morning, till I was 
delayed by this unlucky accident '. 

' Aa for that matter, you know you may say anything to me, 
as well as to him, and I can teD him '. 

' That is true ; why, all I have to say to him at preseiit is to beg 
his acceptance of these five guineas for his past favours, and his 
advice how to get out of this scrape ; and pray do you take these 
three for your trouble. I am sorry I have no more to offer, but 
really the times are very bad, and little or no money stirring among 
the gentlemen ; beside, aU my ladies have been very unlucky of 
late, and the doctor, you know, must be always paid in hand '. 
' I am sorry things go so badly with you ; I will speak to the 
justice, and let you know what he says, and you may depend on 
my friendship and interest at aU times ; though I am afraid this is 
a very bad affair. I will go to him directly, and return to you as 
soon as possible '. 

I here left my mistress to her meditations, having been one of 
the pieces she had given to the clerk. You may imagine I was glad 
to leave such a service, though I could not promise myself much 
pleasure, beside variety, in the exchange, from what I had already 
seen of that which I was entering into. 



84 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

The justice was in Ms office, busied in examining the informations 
of some of liis people who had made some lucky hits the evening 
before. On a wink from his clerk, they were all ordered to with- 
draw, when reaching me and four more of my brethren to his 
worship : ' Here, sir ', said he, ' is five guineas from Mrs '. 

' So then ', replied he, ' she has thought proper to come at last '. 

' To come ? no, no, sir ! she has been brought, or else, I believe, 
you would have hardly seen her '. 

' The ungrateful jade ! but what is the matter now ' ? 

' I really cannot well teU ; nor does the constable know any 

more than that my lord ordered him to bring her, and said 

that he should follow himself '. 

' My lord ! then I must be ready to receive him properly : he 
is a great man : quick ! reach me my green velvet cap, red slippers 
and new gown ; open half a score of those books— the largest of 
them — and lay them on that great table, as if I had been referring. 
There ! now I look like a justice ! and bid those gentry I was speak- 
ing to, go backwards till my lord is gone ; he must not see such 
faces ; they might prejudice him against us ; and he is a great 
man. So now I'U open the new justice, and his lordship may 
come as soon as he pleases '. 

Just as all things were thus prepared for his lordship's reception, 
in proper formality, a servant brought a note from him, to let his 
worship know he could not come himself that morning, but desired 
he would take proper care of the woman he had ordered to be taken 
before him, who kept a house of bad fame in such a street, where, 
upon the least inquiry, he would not fail to find sufficient matter 
against her, from her neighbours. 

Though his lordship's not coming was a disappointment to his 
worship, after the preparations made to receive him ; and balked 
him of an important advertisement for the next morning, yet the 
general wording of this note gave him some consolation, as it might 
seem to authorize any measures he might please to take to squeeze 
the criminal before him. 

' This may do ', said he to the clerk ; ' this may do something ; 

but we must proceed with caution, for Mrs is an old hand ;. 

let her be called in ; I'U soften her a little first, and then you may 
work upon her after as you please '. 

As soon as she came in, his worship accosted her thus : ' So, 
mistress, this is a. fine afiair ; I knew what your doings would come 
to at last ; I have often warned you, but you would take no advice ; 
and now you see the consequence ! Do, make her mittimus ! T 
must wait upon his lordship ; and I cannot go tiU she is committed ? 

' Committed ! dear, your worship, for what must I be committed ? 
I have done nothing '. 

' No ! to be sm-e, you have done nothing ! his lordship would 
prosecute you so severely for nothing ! Look at this letter ! Do- 
yon know this handwriting ? His lordship has here given me an 
account of the whole affair, and desired that I would proceed against 
you with the utmost rigour of the law. I have already sent to search 
your house '. 

This word completed the terrors into which the sight of hi* 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 85 

lordship's well known hand had thrown her, and deprived her of all 
resolution and presence of mind. She burst into tears, and throw- 
ing herself on her knees : ' Oh, good your worship ! dear Mr Clerk ', 
said she, ' advise me ; assist me to get over this misfortune ! Here 
is my watch ; it cost fifty pounds at a pawnbroker's but a month 
ago ; it is a repeater ; take it, Mr Justice ! Mr Clerk, here are my 
rings ; they are the only valuable things I have ; take them, and 
help me out at this dead lift ; send, and stop the people from going 
into my poor house. I shall be blown up ; the gentlemen will all 
desert me. I shall be ruiaed, just when I have brought things 
to a httle bearing ; help me but this once, and I never will give you 
cause to complain of me again. I will always be punctual to my 
promise ' 



CHAPTER XXVIII 

SHE IS DISOHABGED UPOW PKOPBB BAIL — THE LABOUES OF OHETSAL's 
NEW MASTEB, in the SEKVICB OF THE PTTBLIO, WITH SOME OF THE 
VAEIOTJS MYSTBEIES OF HIS OFFICE 

The work was now done, and a wink having settled the cue between 
the justice and his clerk, the latter began thus : ' If I may presume 
to advise your worship, though this is a very bad aflfair, to be sure, 
yet as it is not quite felony by the statute, I am humbly of opinion 
that if bail could be got' 

' Dear Mr Clerk, I am obliged to you. But then consider, my 
lord is a great man '. 

' That is true, please your worship ; but the law is greater than 
any man, and the law is very tender of the liberty of the subject, 
and says expressly ia the statute, in favore libertatis, that no person 
shall be confined that can get bail ; and beside, who knows, but if 
she was at hberty, she might find means to be reconciled to his 
lordship, and so all would be well '. 

' Dear Mr Clerk, that is true ; I would easily be reconciled to 
him ; I know how to gain his favour when his anger is a little cooled '. 

' Why, mistress, if you are quite sure of that, I beheve we may 
venture to bail you ; but where are your friends ' ? 

' Dear, your worship, I have no friends ; I have nothing to make 
friends with ; I throw myself upon you, gentlemen ' ! 

' Why, reaUy, this is a nice case, but if you'll step into the next 
room, we'll coDBider what can be done for you '. 

' Oh ! but send and stop the men that went to my house ' ! 

' Never fear, they were not to go without further orders '. 

When she was gone out: ' Well ', said the justice, ' this has been 
a good hit, it makes up for the bad week ; but cannot you guess 
what this matter is ' ? 

' Not a word of it ', repUed the clerk ; ' she has not dropped a 
syllable herself that could let me the least into it, and I would not 
discover my ignorance by asking her any questions. But, I suppose, 
it is only some trick she has played my lord about a girl, for you 



86 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

know she has often told us that he was one of her best customers, 
and boasted of his protection ; and if it is no more than that, as I 
imagine, he will think no more of it, and, so the best way is to let 
her go ; for indeed we cannot keep her, if we would ; though to 
keep up the form, for fear she should smell us out, she must have 
some bail ; and therefore I'll go and fill a bond, and make a couple 
of our people put on their baihng clothes, and come and sign with 
her, though I do not think she has money left to pay for the bond, 
or make the fellows drink ; but she has done pretty weU already, 
that is the truth '. 

Saying this, he went out, and in a little time returned with my 
late mistress, and two of the fellows, the shabbiness of whose ap- 
pearance had made his worship order them out of the lord's sight 
just before, now dressed out like reputable housekeepers, who 
gravely signed with my mistress, without ever asking what ; and 
upon her returning a negative shrug, to a wink from the clerk, 
went out without a word. 

The business was now over, and my late mistress dismissed to 
follow her occupation, and make up, by double diligence, for the mis- 
fortunes of that morning, only with an assurance to the clerk that 
she would remember his kindness, and be punctual for the future. 

I was now entered into a, service where I had an opportunity 
of seeing into the whole mystery of justice ; but you must not ex- 
pect that I should reveal all the secrets of so venerable a trade, 
though I may give a few general hints for your information in so 
abstruse and intricate a science. 

The afiair of my late mistress was the last of that morning ; my 
worshipful master putting me into his purse, and going directly to 
dinner, which had waited for him some time. But though his fare 
was good, his care for the public would not permit him to make 
long meals, or debauch away his time. After a short refreshment 
of only two hours, he returned to his office, where he reassumed his 
labours in all the various branches of his extensive employment. 
The first thing he looked into was the informations, which the affair 
of my mistress had interrupted in the morning, as I told you before : 
when, calling his people, one after another, before him, he went 
through them regularly in this manner : ' John Gibbet, you here 
inform me that you have found out the person who took the gentle- 
man's hat in the quarrel in Chelsea fields, last Sunday evening, which 
you think to make a robbery of. Let me hear the circumstances 
of that afiair, for you are so keen a bloodhound, when you get 
upon any scent, that you are for making everjrthing robbery, be 
the case what it will '. 

' Please your worship ', replied Gibbet, turning the quid in his 
cheek, and squirting out the juice ; ' I do aU things for the best ; 
and that you know ; and that I have brought many things to bear 
which nobody else would undertake, as witness that affair on 
Shuter's Hill, that got you so much credit, and money too '. 

' Why, that's true, John ; but then you should also remember 
the cursed scrape you brought me into about the young fellow who 
wrote the threatening letters to the farmer, about burning his bams : 
you undertook to prove that too ; but you know how you left me 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 87 

in the lurch, after I had gone such lengths as had like to have ruined 
me. Plain swearing mil not always do, though never so home, 
you should remember that ; you should attend to circumstances 
also. But as to this afiair, let me hear what you can make of it '. 

' Your worship must know that I, and two or three more of our 
people, having nothing to do, shammed a quarrel, in which a gentle- 
man, who was coming by, lost his hat. It was a large hat, with a 
very broad gold lace, such as your foreigners wear. It was I that 
shoved off the hat, and seeing a shabby, idle-looking young fellow 
standing by without one, I took it up, and, asking him if it was 
his, reached it to him, and saw him make off with it directly. Now, 
if this is not a plain robbery, I do not know what is. A fellow runs 
away with a gentleman's hat, who advertises it, with a reward 
for taking the thief, whom he wiU prosecute. Now I have found 
out the fellow's haunts, for indeed, I dogged him, and will have him- 
self whenever you please, and can clench the prosecution, by swear- 
ing that I saw him carry off the hat ; and you know I need say 
no more, nor take any notice who gave it him '. 

' Why, John, there may be something in this afiair. I hke it very 
well, John ; and so, clerk, you may enter him on the hst for next 
sessions. This affair has a good look ; nor is there anything unjust 
in it ; for, though you gave him the hat, as he knew it was not his 
own, and yet carried it off, he is guilty of the theft, and that is the 
same as robbery, in justice, though it may not in law ; and justice 
is the thing to go by with a safe conscience. And so you may go, 
John ; I wiU let you know when it is proper to have him taken up, 
only have an eye to him, for fear anyone else should snap him out of 
our haads. Who comes next 1 Richard Sly, you say you have 
found out the knot of young fellows that have begun to infest the 
streets for some nights past '. 

' Ay, please your worship ', says Sly, shrugging up his shoulders 
and grinning ; ' I have found them out to be sure ; and well I might, 
for it was I first set them on the lay '. 

' How, Richard ! take care of what you say '. 

' Oh ! your worship, never fear Dick Sly for a shppery trick ! 
I know what I say very well ; I have known for some time that 
these youths have been playing a small game, cribbing frota the tiU, 
and building sconces, and such-like tricks, that there was no taking 
hold off ; I, therefore, thought it would be right to bring them to 
justice, at any rate, and so laid the plan of tMs gang, and entered 
them into the business myself, and now, whenever you have a mind 
to nab them, you need only take me up, and I can peach them aU, 
which will be no bad affair, there are so many of them '. 

' Why, that is true, Richard ; but they have done nothing yet 
that deserves so severe a remedy as the gaUows ; therefore let them 
alone ; perhaps they may mend, or, if they do not, it wiU be time 
enougli to take them up when they deserve it more than now. 
To be sure your peaching them, who first drew them in, is not so 
very just ; but then the law will support you in it, and, whUe a man 
has the law on his side, he may laugh at the gallows. And so, 
Richard, have a good look-out tUl these youths are ripe for Tybtim, 
and then your harvest will come '. 



88 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

It would be endless to go through this whole business particularly. 
Be it sufficient to say, that there was no breach of the laws, which 
some of his people did not give him an information of, and almost 
aU, as aocomplicea ; while his whole care was to consider which 
co\ild turn most to his advantage in the conviction, and to settle 
the evidence against them, so as it might be sure not to miscarry. 



CHAPTER XXIX 

A HIGHWAYMAN, IMPROPERLY TAKEN, SAVES HIS UPB BY LOSING 
HIS SEASON — JUDICIAL SAGACITY, AND ELOQUENCE TRIUMPHANT 
OVER COMMON SENSE AND MATTER OP FACT — THIS MYSTERY 
EXPLAINED 

While he was in the midst of this business he was surprised with 
the news of a highwajmian, that moment brought in by a gentle- 
man who had taken him, in the very attempt of robbing him. on 
Tumham Green. This threw the whole house into an uproar. 

' A highwayman taken, and by the very party ' ! exclaimed the 
justice, in an agony of rage and vexation. ' This is most unfor- 
tunate; there is forty pounds dead loss, besides the shame of it; 
how shall I support my consequence if other people can serve the 
publlo without my assistance ' ? 

' I wonder who it can be ', said the clerk ; ' I suppose the man 
on the white mare, or the mask, from Putney Common ! but, who- 
ever it is, something must be done ! He must be saved this time, 
to save OUT credit, and we may have him the next ourselves ! Here 
they come ; do you keep the gentleman in discourse, while I speak 
to the prisoner, and see how he can come down. I shall readily 
give you your cue '. 

Just then entered the gentleman with his prisoner, whom they 
directly knew to be an old offender, who had long baffled their 
pursuit ; a circumstance that heightened the vexation of his being 
taken by another, and was not a little favourable to him at this time. 

His worship received the gentleman most politely, and desired 
him to sit down a moment tiU he should finish a letter he was writing 
to the Secretary of State, and then he would attend to his business, 
ordering the prisoner to be removed into another room for the 
meantime. 

He then sat himself down to write with great deliberation, and 
had jxist finished, when his clerk came to deliver him a letter from 
the Lord Mayor, which he read over attentively, and saying it was 
very well, he then turned to the gentleman, and asking his pardon 
for making him wait so long, ordered the prisoner to be brought in. 

The highwayman appeared now a quite different person from 
what he did when he was in the room a few minutes before ; his 
looks, which were then clouded with the gloom of hstless dejection 
and despair, being inflamed into the fiercest agitations of frenzy. 

The gentleman showed his surprise at this change, as did his 
worship his imeasiness for his own safety, from the fury of so 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 89 

ontrageoiis a madman. As soon as he was secured, the justice, ad- 
dressing himseU, with the height of judicial solemnity, to the prose- 
cutor : ' Pray, sir ', said he ; ' wiU you please to inform me what 
you have to allege against this unhappy person ' ? 

' Sir ', replied the gentleman, ' all I have to say is, that he stopped 
me this afternoon upon Tumham Green, and presenting a pistol 
at me, bade me dehver my money ; but being well armed, and 
having more about me than I chose to lose, instead of my purse, 
I drew a pistol too, and, his missing fire, I grappled with, and took 
him on the spot, and from thence brought him directly here. That 
is all I have to say, sir '. 

' And pray, sir, what did he say when you had taken him ' ? 

' Not a word, sir, nor has he spoken a syllable since, nor answered 
any one question he has been asked '. 

' Ay, it is so, poor gentleman, it is so ! And pray, sir, did he 
make much resistance when you took him ' ? 

' The utmost he was able ; but being better mounted, and much 
stronger than he, I soon overpowered him, though not without 
great danger ; for, after I had him down, he drew his knife and 
very narrowly missed plunging it into my body. You see what a out 
it made in my coat and waistcoat ' ! 

' Ay, poor man, madness is always desperate. I fear, sir, you 
have been too hasty in this afiair '. 

' How, sir, too hasty, to take a man in the very action of high- 
way robbery ? I do not understand you, sir ' ! 

' Sir, I mean that this person is no robber, but an unhappy gentle- 
man of family and fortune, who has been for some time out of his 
mind. I have been appUed to by his relations more than once, to 
try to have him apprehended, that he might be confined ; and, now 
he is secvired, they wiU take proper care of him that he shall not 
frighten anybody for the future ; for I am satisfied, sir, that was all 
he meant ; and that he would not have taken your money had you 
offered it to him. I suppose you searched him when you had over- 
powered him, poor man, as you justly termed it. Pray, sir, did 
you find anything upon him to make you think he was a highway- 
man ? Any watches, jewels, or different purses of money ? or more 
money than you might think it probable a person of his appearance 
might commonly carry about him '. 

' No, really, sir, I did not find anything like what you mention. 
This purse which seems to have about thirty or forty guineas in it 
(for I have not reckoned them), was the only thing in all his pockets, 
except the knife which he drew on me ; his pistols were openly in 
his saddle, as gentlemen commonly wear them '- 

' Very well ; and does not his present behaviour, and whole 
conduct in this affair, convince you that the unhappy man could 
have no felonious intent in his mad attack upon you ? for men, 
mad as he is, have no intention at aU ; and, without a felonious 
intent, there can be no robbery ; but I presume, you may under- 
stand something of the law yourself, sir ' ? 

' No, indeed, sir ; I cannot say I know any more law than just 
not to wrong any person, nor let them wrong me, if I can help it, 
as far as common sense will direct me. I thank God, I have spent 



90 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

my days quietly in the coimtry, and never had a dispute with any 
man in my life '. 

' Common sense, dear sir ! common sense is a blind guide in matters 
of law. Law and common sense are quite different things ; but 
as I was saying, sir, where there is no felonious intent, there can 
be no felony ; now robbery is punished only because it is felony, 
for so the indictment must be laid ; fdonice, sir, fdonice, or it will 
not do ! The indictment will be quashed without that word ; 
and who can charge a man with a felonious intent, who is disordered 
in mind, and can have no intention at all ? 'Tis true, the appear- 
ance was bad and sufficiently terrifying to authorize your apprehend- 
ing him ; but, as you suffered neither loss nor hurt, I cannot suppose 
that a gentleman of your humane appearance would desire to add 
to the misery of his present unhappy condition, that of imprison- 
ment tin the next sessions, when he must be acquitted of course, 
as that would certainly make his madness for ever incurable. What- 
ever expense you have been at in bringing him here, I will take 
upon me to reimburse you out of the money in his purse, beside 
what gratification you please to require for your own time and 
trouble. This, sir, is what I would recommend to you, as a Christian 
and a gentleman, as you appear to be ; but, if you are of another 
opinion, you must only swear to your information, and enter into 
recognizance of prosecution, while I sign his mittimus, and send 
word to his friends, who are people of condition '. 

' Indeed, sir, you judge very rightly of me ; I would not aggra- 
vate the distress of any human being. If you know the unhappy 
man, and that he is under so severe an affliction as the loss of reason, 
I have nothing further to say than that I am sorry for his misfortune, 
and would not for the world be the cause of heightening it, as I had 
no motive for apprehending him but the duty which I and every 
member owe the public. I thank Heaven for my own escape from 
him, and do not desire to make any advantage of it. As to the people 
who assisted me in bringing him hither, they are stiU unpaid, and 
you know best how to deal with them. So I leave the whole affair 
to you, and am your humble servant '. 

I have not interrupted this account with any notice of the be- 
haviour of the criminal, as it consisted only of the most outrageous 
imitation of madness with imprecations and blasphemies, too horrid 
for repetition. 

As soon as the gentleman was gone, and the room cleared of all 
but the justice, his clerk, and the madman, who was left bound tc 
keep up the farce, his worship thus addressed him : ' So, sir, you 
thought to reign for ever ; but you see what your fates have come 
to ! I suppose you are surprised at the pains I have taken to bring 
you through this affair ' ? 

' Not at all, sir ', replied the criminal ; ' the bank-note for two 
hundred pounds which I concealed in the gleeve of my coat, and 
gave your clerk '. 

' How, sir ', said the justice in a rage ; ' do you pretend to say 
it was upon any such account. But you judge of others by your- 
self. However, I shall not stand to argue the matter with you 
now ; you have escaped for this time, and may be glad of it ; but 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 91 

take care for the future ; your luck may not always be so 
good '. 

' Will your worship please to order your people to return my 
horse and arms ? and I hope you will give me my purse ; for Ufe 
without something to support it is no great obligation '. 

' What, sir 1 do you pretend to capitulate ? Your horse you 
shall have, not that you have a right to expect him, but because 
it would not be proper to keep him after the representation that 
imposed upon the fool who took you ; and here are half a score 
guineas to carry you to some place where you are not known, and 
to maintain you till you can get into some honest way of earning 
your bread. The rest is little enough to give the people instead of 
your horse, and to stop their mouths. You may stay here till 
the crowd is dispersed, when you may go where you please '. 

As there was no remedy, the criminal was forced to submit ; nor 
indeed, did he seem much dissatisfied at the heaviness of his 
composition. 



CHAPTER XXX 

AN INSTANOB OF HIS WOBSHIP's EXEMPLARY JUSTICE ON A SHOP- 
LTPTEE — THE TrNEASHIONABLE COMPASSION AND GENEBOSITT Or 
A SAILOR — A DISPUTE ABOUT SUPERIORITY OE SKILL, BETWEEN 
HIS WORSHIP AND HIS OLBEK, OPENS NEW MYSTERIES IN THE 
PROFESSION 

It was now pretty late, and my master was just retiring to supper, 
pleased with having made so good a day, when he was stopped by 
more business. A woman who kept a chandler's shop in the next 
street, had dragged before him one of her poor neighbours whom 
she had caught in the fact of stealing a pound of cheese off her 
counter, as she was reaching a twopenny loaf from the shelf ; a 
crime that was heightened by ingratitude too, as she was giving 
her the loaf on trust ; the thief having owned to her that she 
had not a farthing in the world to pay for it, nor a morsel to 
give her three small children, who had been fasting the whole 
day. 

Enraged at the heinousness of the crime, and at being kept from 
supper while the chickens and asparagus were ooohng on the table, 
his worship, knitting his brows, and putting on all the magistrate, 
asked the trembling wretch, with a voice that pierced her soul : 
' What she had to say for herself, and whether she was guilty of the 
crime laid to her charge, or not '. 

The poor creature, almost dead with wretchedness, want, and 
fear, threw herself at his feet, and pouring out a flood of tears, that 
for some moments choked her utterance : ' Oh, mercy ! mercy ' ! said 
she ; ' for the love of the sweet Jesus, have mercy on a poor 
wretch, whom want alone compelled to this first offence, to save the 
lives of three poor infants, who are this moment perishing with 
hunger. Oh ! send and prove the truth of what I say ; send and 



S2 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

learn their misery, and it -will move you to relieve them, and then 
I care not what becomes of me '. 

' Very fine, truly ; if we admit such excuses for shop-lifting, 
there will be enough ready to plead them. Here, make her mittimus ; 
she confesses the fact ; as for her brats, bastards too, I suppose, 
let them be sent to the workhouse '. 

' Oh, the poor creatures ! they are not bastards ; and they have 
no parish to be sent to. My husband is a sailor, who was pressed 
on board a man-of-war six years ago, and has been in the West Indies 
ever since, tUI the summer, when the ship was ordered home to be 
laid up. Poor soul ! he thought they should be paid off, and so 
wrote me word to Cork to come to him, for he meant to go and settle 
in Scotland, his own country ; but the moment he came to Ports- 
mouth he was turned over into another ship, without getting a 
shilling of his six-years' wages or prize-money, and sent away directly 
to America ; so that after spending every penny I had in the world, 
to come to him from Ireland, as he desired, I am left here with my 
poor children to starve in a strange place, where nobody has any 
compassion for me, though my husband wrote me word that he 
had above three hundred pounds due to him for wages and prize- 
money. Here is his letter ; I never go without it ; it is all the 
comfort I have in my distress '. 

' Ay, I thought so ! I thought you were one of those Irish thieves 
that came to rob us, and cut our throats ; but I shall take care of 
you ; I shall make you wish you had continued eating potatoes 
at home. I wish I could provide as well for every one of your 
country ; we shall never be well tOl we have hanged you aU '. 

' Oh, good your worship ; I am no thief, I never stole anything 
before, and this woman who has brought me before you, knows 
the truth of everything I have told your worship ; and that I have 
always paid her honestly while I had a peimy in the world, for I 
have dealt with her ever since I came to London ; but hunger and 
the cries of three starving children, forced me to this ! Oh, my 
children, my children ' ! 

' Peace, woman ! All you can say signifies nothing ; you were 
taken in the fact, and to Newgate you shaU go directly. And as 
for your brats, it is better for them to die of hunger now, than to 
live to be hanged like their mother '. 

By this time the mittimus was ready, which he signed without 
the least hesitation or pity, and then hurried away to his supper, 
having almost fretted his bowels out to think it was spoiled by 
waiting so long. 

But though the justice's compassion could not be moved by such 
a poor wretch, his clerk was not so inexorable, but 3rielded to the 
persuasion of an honest tar, who seeing a crowd at the door, had 
given sixpence to go in and see the fun ; and for two guineas, which 
barely paid his fees, ventured to make up the affair, and let her go 
about her business, though he did not know what might be the con- 
sequence, if it should come to his worship's knowledge. Jack took no 
notice of what he said, but taking the poor creature, who was just 
sinking under the agitations of fear, joy, and gratitude, by the hand : 

' Ciheer away, sister, sister ', said he ; ' cheer away, we'll bring up 



ADVENTURES OF A OVINE A 9a 

all this leeway the next trip. Damn my eyes and Umbs if I'll see 
a brother seaman's family at short allowance, while I have a shilling. 
Come, heave ahead ; I'U rig and victual you and your children against 
your husband comes, to man you for a voyage home. I'U swing my 
hammock in the next berth, and you shall cook the kettle, wMe I 
stay ashore '. Saying which words he led her ofi in triumph. This 
the clerk told his worship, when he came in to supper, giving him 
one of the guineas, as his share of the composition. 

I now thought the business of the day over, and was preparing to 
take a view of my new master's heart, while he and his clerk were 
enjoying their success over a hearty bottle. But I was prevented 
by an accident, which disturbed for a while, and had like to have 
entirely broken off this harmony between them ; a dispute, like 
those between all conquerors, arising about the division of the spoil 
and the merits in the acquisition of it. 

' This will do ', said his worship, clapping his hands akimbo, after 
a full glass ; ' this wiU do ! what between the bawd in the morning, 
and the highwajrman in the aft«moon, we have made a noble day 
of it ! But what have you ordered about that fellow ? I hope you 
have taken care that we may have him ourselves next '. 

' Never fear ', repUed the clerk ; ' I have done for him ; I have 
sent people to lay all the roads he can go, from the inn where he 
ordered his horse ; and plausible Tom is fixed there to scrape aa 
acquaintance with him, so that he cannot escape '. 

' Ay, let Tom alone to manage him ! many a cunning fellow's 
heart has that Tom crept into, till he has wheedled him to Tyburn ! 
Not a lawyer of them all has a smoother tongue. But did not I. 
improve the hint of his madness well ? How quietly the gudgeon 
swallowed it. Had I set about it, I believe, in my soul, I could 
have persuaded him out of his own senses, and made him think 
himself mad, as well as the highwayman : ha, ha, ha ! though you 
were not quite clear enough in your note, you should have told mfr 
all the particulars ; I was often at a loss, but upon the whole, 
I think I did pretty well, pretty well, I think '. 

' Why, ay, you did manage it pretty well when I had given you 
the cue, and so might any one have done. But how would you have 
contrived to bring him off, if I had not made that hit ' ? 

' How ? why, easily enough ! I would have But what have 

you done with the bank-note ? Let me see that '. 

' The note ! It is safe enough. But you do not tell me how you 
would have managed to have earned it ; I think you should do that 
before you ask for it ' 

' How I would have earned it ? Why, pray, good sir, do you 
know whom you talk to in this manner ' ? 

* Whom I talk to ? I talk to the worshipful justice, whose betters 
I have talked to before now ; and who would not have asked me 
that question some years ago, when he applied to me to instruct 
him in the business of his office '. 

' Insolence 1 Instruct me ! I'll make you know, sir, that 1 
understand my business without your instruction. I'll take an- 
other clerk to-morrow '. 

' With aU my heart [ good master justice ; with all my heart I 



94 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

and see who will be the loser by that. If you do not know it yet, 
you will soon learn then, whether the business comes to the justice 
or his clerk, for I give you notice that I shall take all the people 
with me ; you shall have the credit of making a new set for yourself, 
I assure you '. 

' Very fine, very fine treatment this ' ! 

' Why do you deserve it then, sir, if you do not like it ? I say 
very fine treatment too, that you should take upon you to under- 
value my skill, and assume the credit of it to yourself ; you, whom 
I first taught, and still support in your office, in spite of all your 
blunders ! As for the bank-note, here it is, and here it shall be, 
till we have settled the account of the last sessions, when you were 
so clever upon me, sending me on a fool's errand out of the way, 
while you took up the reward. Perhaps you thought I did not see 
through your design, or that I was afraid to speak of it ; but you 
were quite mistaken; I only waited till the remedy should come into 
my own hands, and now it has, be assured I shall make use of it, 
whatever you may think, sir ? And further let me tell you, that 
if you say much more, I will think of parting in earnest, if you do 
not think proper to come to a new agreement ; for I see no reason 
why you should carry off two-thirds of the profit only because you 
are justice, indeed, though I do all the business ' ! 



CHAPTER XXXI 

THE BEEACH HAPPILY MADE tTP BY THE AEEIVAL OT COMPANY — 
THE EVENING CONCLITDBD IN CHAKACTER — ^HtS WORSHIP GOBS 
NEXT MOKKTNG TO HEAR A CHARITY SERMON, AND PROM THENCE 
TO BAT A CHARITY PEAST, WHERE CHRYSAL ENTERS INTO A NEW 
SERVICE — SOME ACCOTTNT OP THE NATURE OP A CHARITY PEAST 

Matters were now at such a height, that I every minute expected 
they would have proceeded from words to blows, when a ring at 
the bell brought them both to themselves in an instant. 

' Ah ! that is true ! this is quarter -night ', said the justice, ' and 
here the ladies are come ! give me your hand : why should we faU 
out about OUT skill when the business goes on well ? Here's my 
service to you ; and let there be no more of it '. 

' With all my heart ' ! replied the clerk ; ' but why will you urge 
me on thus when you know that I cannot bear to have my skill called 
in question '. 

By this time the ladies entered, whom I directly saw to be the 
commode matrons and compliant fair of this district, who came 
duly to compound with him for the breach of those laws he was 
appointed to support. 

The very mention of this scene sufficiently explains the nature of 
it, and makes a more particular description unnecessary. All 
parties behaved properly on the occasion. They paid their subsidies, 
for which he returned them very wholesome advice, to behave with 
diligence and discretion in their professions ; and especially those 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 95 

who lived in his neighbourhood, he cautioned to avoid all riots and 
causes of offence, -which might bring his connivance and protection 
into suspicion ; then relaxing from the severity of his morals, he 
gave up the rest of the night, and a good part of the next momiag, 
to mirth and good fellowship, in the company of a few of his parti- 
cular favourites, and the best customers of this motley set, having 
dismissed the rest to the pursuit of their occupations. 

The business of the day, and the pleasures of the night, had so 
far exhausted his spirits, that nature required a long pause ; ac- 
cordingly, no business coming in to disturb him (for such was his 
vigilance in his office, and care for the pubUo, that everything gave 
way to that) he made a late morning, not waking till he was called 
to attend a sermon and dinner, which were to be that day for the 
benefit of a charity, to which he was a constant benefactor ; as 
indeed his public spirit made him to aU that were already estab- 
lished, and prompted him to strike out many new ; in which, as 
the author of them, he hoped to have the management, while 
novelty should make it the fashion to support them. 

But in this he was always disappointed. For though, in the 
multitude of his schemes, he sometimes stumbled upon a good one, 
yet his head was so confused, and his notions so wild and unmethodi- 
cal, that before he could digest his plans into any regularity, some 
one else took up the hint, and ran away with the credit of the design. 

At church he edified greatly by a comfortable nap during the 
sermon, which finished his refreshment, and sent him with a clear 
head and keen stomach, to the feast, where every person seemed 
to vie in demonstrating liis attachment to the cause of their meeting, 
by the quantity he ate and drank. 

I here changed my service once more, being given by his worship 
to the subscription, and so came into the possession of a community 
in general, which gave me an opportunity of seeing the human heart 
in a more compUoated view than perhaps any other scene of its 
actions could afford ; as there was hardly a profession, degree, or 
rank of life, which had not a representative in this meeting, nor a 
motive of action, however apparently contrary to its design, or 
contradictory to each other, which did not contribute its influence 
to the bringing them together. 

While I lay in the hands of the treasurer of the charity, un- 
assigned to any particular use, or person, I enjoyed a state of liberty, 
something like that of living in a commonwealth, having it in my 
power to enter into the hearts of all the governors (who were now 
my owners) as I liked, and to make any observations, without 
restraint, to any particular person, time, or place. 

CSharity is the most amiable and most exalted of the human virtues, 
and that which rises to the nearest imitation of the divine. Nor 
can anything be stronger proof of the beneficence of the author of 
the human nature, than his placing this virtue, which is the per- 
fection of it, within the reach of every individuaL 

For charity is a disposition to think well of, and do well to every 
other human being, without partiality, prejudice, or respect to any 
other motive, than this universal duty ; giving of alms being no 
more than one, and that perhaps the very meanest effect of it. 



96 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

But this extensiveness of the nature of charity is the reason of 
ifs being generally misconceived, and most erroneously confined 
to this effect by minds unable to comprehend its greater excellence ; 
and, from this mistake, have proceeded many of the extraordinary 
instances of this effect of charity, which distinguishes the present 
age. 

This is a most dangerous error ; it is too like thinking to bribe 
heaven with the wages of hell ; and yet, profanely absurd as such 
a notion is, daily observation shows the extensive prevalence of it. 

As charity is such a reflned and exalted virtue, and purely scrip- 
tural, it must appear strange to you how it should enter into the 
head of man, to make so gross, dull, and sensual a passion as eating, 
the foundation of it ! Indeed, so unnatural is the thought to pure 
speculation, unacquainted with the perversions of life, that a charity 
feast, in the literal meaning of the phrase, must be taken for a 
meeting of the poor, to eat the provisions supplied for them by the 
rich, instead of the rich meeting to gorge their own appetites. 

But a little observation on the present bias of the world will 
solve this difficulty. Of all the natural appetites and passions 
which possess that part of mankind, whose age has enabled them 
to amass money enough to give away, eating is the most universal. 
I say natural passions, for fraud, avarice, or ambition, or even lust, 
at that time of life, are not the passions of nature. 

To gratify this, therefore, was the most probable scheme for 
drawing them together ; and, when that is sufficiently done, the 
full heart opens easily, and shares its abundance with the empty. 



CHAPTER XXXn 

A REPRESENTATION OF THE COMPANY — THE HISTORY OF ONE OP THE 
PEINCrPAL MEMBERS — THE MODERN METHOD OP BRIBING HEAVDN 
WITH THE WAGES OP HELL 

They had feasted, nor did their minds yet require such another 
banquet ', when I became a member of their society ; you must 
not expect a particular account or description of such a scene. A 
few general hints must satisfy your curiosity, as I have told you on 
other occasions. 

Let your imagination represent to you a number of people whose 
highest pleasure is eating, seated at a large table, covered with al 
the delicacies, all the rarities of the season, in a plenty that promised 
satiety to the keenest appetites. But I must stop ! I see the very 
thought has an effect upon you, that savours too strongly of sen- 
suality, and might, if not checked, put a stop to our conversation, 
by some human hankerings. Let us therefore pass over such a^ 
scene, and turn our observation to the company as they sat after 
tli.e fragments of the feast were removed. And here it will be 
proper to have recourse to the expedient we made use of before, 

1 Homer 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 97 

and, holding up the mirror to imagination, view the whole scene 
as if actually present. 

Observe, then, that enormous bulk of flesh that sits at the head 
of the table, with his waistcoat all unbuttoned, and gasping for 
breath ; the distention of his stomach having left his lungs scarce 
room to perform the animal functions, and his fat almost choking 
the passages of vital air. 

He is one of the principal siipporters of this and every other public 
charity, founded on the modem method of a feast ; the natural 
avarice of his heart outwitting itself in this instance ; for as he is 
sure of satiating his appetite with more and better victuals and wine 
at these meetings, than he could have at home for much more than 
the price of the ticket, the advantage of that bargain always tempts 
him to go ; and then the happiness of his heart, in the fulness of his 
stomach, opens his purse, and he subscribes with a liberality that 
arises almost to profusion. 

But look into his heart, and read the rest of his life ; the very 
money which he bestows with such an appearance of virtue, on this 
best of uses (for no error in motive, or manner, must take ofi the 
merit of an action that does good), this very money, I say, has 
perhaps been acquired by vices the most opposite to the virtues it 
is applied to. 

llie greatest frugality, application, and skill, in the mysterious 
business of a scrivener, have raised this person from the most abject 
poverty to affluence, above the moderation of a rational wish. But 
so powerful is the force of habit, that though the cause has been 
long since removed, the effect still remains, and he persists to save 
and heap up money, by all the mean and iniquitous ways which 
want first suggested to him. One instance, and that not singular 
in him, will give you a sufficient insight into his character. 

A gentleman whom indiscretion and indolence of temper had in- 
volved in some pecuniary distresses, had the greater misfortune, 
some years ago, to be recommended to this person, to borrow such 
a sum of money as should extricate him from his immediate difS- 
oulties on a mortgage of his estate. 

As his security was good, his business was soon done ; but 
the convenience of his estate to another which the person had 
lately purchased in his neighbourhood, and an acquaintance with 
the unwary easiness of his disposition, made him cast a wishful 
eye upon it, and form schemes for getting it absolutely into his 
possession. 

At first he strove to tempt his indiscretion by the offer of more 
money to supply his pleasures ; but finding that would not take, 
and that the sense of his former extravagances dwelt so strongly 
on him, as to give his mind a kind of tm-n to industry, did he know 
how to apply it, his ready genius struck out a method that he imagined 
could not fail of success. 

He therefore cultivated an intimacy with the gentleman, in which 
upon all occasions, he affected to boast of his own success in life 
and to attribute it to his having always a command of money to 
take the advantage of any bargain that might offer. 

As this Uxcn. of conversation seemed to flow only from the fulness 



98 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

of his heart, and to be free from all design, it had the effect he 
proposed, and raised a desire in his friend to follow a method which 
had been so successful with him. He therefore one day communi- 
oated to him a resolution which he had formed of selling his estate 
and applying the money to business, and desired his friend's assist- 
ance to execute his design. After an appearance of surprise, the 
scrivener testified his pleasure and approbation of his prudence 
by the readiness with which he undertook to serve him. 

The ease with which the first part of his scheme had succeeded, 
made him form further hopes, and think of getting the estate he 
desired even at a cheaper rate than purchasing it. 

After some time spent, as he said, in fruitless inquiries for a 
purchaser, he most artfully drew his friend to desire that he would 
buy it himself ; at first he seemed to hesitate, but then, as it were, 
yielding to the impulse of his friendship, he concluded a bargain 
for it, on terms evidently advantageous to the seller. 

All things being agreed upon, the parties met to conclude the 
affair ; when the writings being read over, and the money lying 
on the table, while the scrivener told it, the gentleman executed 
the deeds of conveyance, and receipt before proper witnesses, who 
withdrew as soon as they had signed them. 

In the meantime the scrivener continued to tell the money, till 
a servant entered hastily with a letter as from a lord, who was one 
of his best clients, and desired to see him that moment. The diffi- 
culty this threw him into was soon solved by his friend's compliance 
to defer his business for a few hours, as the lord's urgency would 
not admit the least delay. Accordingly, he put up both the deeds 
and money, in all the apparent confusion of hurry, and went away 
to his lordship. 

Next morning the gentleman called to receive the price of his 
estate, but his friend was not at home, nor to be spoken with 
in the afternoon, for his turn was now served, and he neither desired, 
nor perhaps thought it safe, to keep up any further acquaintance 
with him. 

As such things might happen to a man in business, the gentleman 
took no notice of them, but quietly swallowed the same excuses 
for some days successively. At length his patience began to be 
exhausted, and his fears alarmed at a behaviour so strange and 
contrary to that height of intimacy that had subsisted between 
them, even where there was no business in the case. 

In this perplexity he went one morning, resolving not to quit 
the house till he should see him, and when a message to that purpose 
was, aft«r long attendance, complied with, upon a warm expostula- 
tion, he received for answer, from his friend that, ' he had been of 
late too much engaged in affairs of consequence to attend 
compliments, and knew not any business he could have with 
him '. 

' Not know my business, sir ', replied the gentleman in astonish- 
ment, ' I come, sir, for my money, and shall hereafter never trouble 
you more with business or compliment '. 

' YoTu: money, sir I I do not understand you. Pray, sir, what 
money do you mean ' ? 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 99 

' What money 1 the purchase money of my estate, sir, which you 
were to have paid me above a week ago, when I signed the deeds 
of sale '. 

' Poor gentleman, it is so ! as I was informed, and always 
feared. He has lost his reason, and I should not seem much better 
to trust myself longer with a man in his condition '. 

' Take care, sir, this is too tender a point to be trifled with ; you 
almost make me mad ' ! 

' Ay, there it is ; he is mad, poor man, and is even sensible of 
it himself ' ! 

' Death, sir, do not dare to dally with me a moment longer. 
Answer me directly ! Pay me my money ; and do not really provoke 
me to a madness that may be fatal to us both '. 

' Sir, your madness, or reason, is nothing to me ; however, I will 
answer you directly, that I owe you no money, and none will I pay 
you. As for the purchase money of your estate, your parting with 
which I see has turned your brain, when you come to yourself, you 
wUI recollect that I paid it to you when I executed the deeds of sale ; 
or, if you do not remember it, your own receipt, properly witnessed, 
will prove it for me, and I desire no more ; and therefore, sir, let 
me have no further trouble with you, if you do not choose to take 
up your lodgings in Moorflelds '. 

' This is too much 1 Just Heaven ! this is too much ; too much 
for human patience to endure ! or wait the law's delay for remedy ! 
I will avenge myself, assert the cause of justice, and rid the groaning 
world of such a monster ! ' exclaimed the unhappy gentleman, now 
really irritated into the extremity of that frenzy which the other 
only wanted to impose upon him, and drawing his sword, before 
the wretch could call for help, or take any method of defence, he 
plunged it through his body. 

His shrieks soon alarmed his servants, who, rushing in, found 
him weltering in his blood, and the madman smiling, in the absence 
of frantic ecstacy, over him, and incapable of attention to any other 
circumstance, though some of them dragged him before a magistrate, 
while the rest were busied in procuring relief for their master. 

The madman was committed to prison, to wait the event of the 
wound he had given, which Heaven, to let the measure of the 
scrivener's iniquity be full, had directed to a part where it was not 
mortal. 

In a word, he recovered, though not to a sense of justice or hu- 
manity, but persisting in his iniquity, which now was sharpened 
by a spirit of revenge for what he had endured, the first effort of 
hfa health was to have the unhappy sufferer confined in Bedlam, 
where he still languishes under all the horrors that attend a total 
loss of reason, without relief or even compassion from his base 
undoer, who, this very morning, as he was steppiag into his chariot 
to come to this charity feast, spumed from him with his foot, and 
refused the smallest alms to the wretched wife of the mined mad- 
man, who begs in the common streets, and was driven by misery 
and despair, to throw herself even at his feet, to implore relief. 

I see your abhorrence rise at such a monster, but how will wonder 
even heighten it, when I tell you, that this oppressor has neither 



100 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

child nor kinsman to inherit his wealth ; for he waa himself a 
foundling, and reared at the public expense, without the knowledge 
or tenderness of a parent to soften his rugged soul ; nor would the 
selfishness of his heart ever permit him to marry for fear of the 
expense of a family ; but he is this moment meditating on some 
ostentatious scheme of charity, to the foundation of which he 
designs to dedicate the wealth which he has amassed by such 
viUanies. 



CHAPTER XXXin 

CONTINUED : THE HISTOEY OF A GENERAL AUSIONBB — HIS METHOD 
OF MAKING CHAKITY BEGIN AT HOME — HE CONVBBTS A NOTED 
BAWD, BUT DISAPPOINTS HIS DESIGNS BY TOO GBEAT CONFIDENCE 
IN HIS OWN SKILL — THE CHAEAOTEB OF A CLEBGYMAN 

Move your eye to the left, and view that demure-looking picture 
of devotion, who sits there in silence, lifting up his eyes to Heaven, 
and sighing in spirit, at the festivity and sensual conversation round 
him. 

Who, that can see no deeper than outward appearances, would 
not think that man sincere in his professions of religion and virtue ? 
whereas, in truth, he is the most abandoned contemner of both; 
and deepens the dye of his blackest crimes by the most hardened 
hypocrisy, secretly living on the practice of those very vices, of 
which he professes the greatest abhorrence. 

With all that consequence, which he assumes in the direction 
of this charity, on the merit of the largeness of his subscription to 
it, in reality, he is but the dispenser of other people's benefactions, 
into whose good opinion he so insinuates himself, by his pretended 
piety, that they entrust their charity to his disposal, who always 
pays himself for his trouble, by subducting largely from the sums 
confided to him. For, as real charity vaunteth not itself, they 
never divulge the secret, completely imposed on by his address, 
that never lets one half of his contributors know of the other ; by 
which management, as the sums he gives are always made public, 
for example and imitation, each thinks that he adds most liberally 
to his own donation. But this is not the only method by which 
he turns his piety to advantage. The access which the reputation 
of it gains him in almost every family, opens to him an opportunity 
of carrying on the deepest intrigues, and becoming a pander for 
vices both natural and unnatural, which the interest of the parties 
concerned makes them still keep secret. As for the former, the 
m^ystery of that trade has been in part explained already, and the 
latter is too horrible for explanation. I shall, therefore, pass over 
those scenes, and conclude my account of this extraordinary 
personage, with one instance of his address, in finding out and 
managing the weak side of superstition and vice. 

In the course of his love negotiations, ho had made an acquaint- 
ance with a woman who kept a public bagnio, or house of prostitution, 
which acquaintance mutual interest cemented into an intimacy. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 101 

In this most infamous trade had this woman amassed considerable 
wealth, the disposal of which, after her death, took up much of her 
thoughts, in those moments when the consequences of her debauched 
life forced her to think of djong. 

As the secrets of their trade had removed every reserve from 
between them, she often used to consult him upon this head ; when 
he always comforted her with dissertations upon religion and virtue, 
stripping them of the vain incumbrances of priestcraft, and bringing 
them back to their genuine principles of benevolence and charity. 

Frequent inculcations of this doctrine had the efiect he designed ; 
the matron was pleased with the thought of having all the benefit 
of religion, without the trouble of the practice, and immediately 
began to exercise her donations to public charities, which, as it 
was not quite so much in character for her to offer in person, while 
she continued her profession, and she saw no necessity, nor felt 
inclination to quit that, she always confided to the distribution of 
her spiritual guide. 

Nor did his success stop here ; he improved his influence on her 
superstition so far, that he prevailed on her to compound with 
Heaven for the vices of her life by bequeathing the earnings of 
them to its use, after her death. 

For this purpose he himself drew her will, which pious application 
of her fortune set her conscience at ease ; and she continued her 
usual business to the hour of her death, which happened three years 
after, with such care and industry, that some instance of negligence 
in one of her servants administering to the pleasure of her guests, 
, gave her such uneasiness in her last moments, that, with her dying 
breath, she lamented the ruin her house must come to, after she 
should quit the care of it, for the joys of heaven. 

You must not think that his design extended no further than 
to prevail on her to make such a will ; he had drawn it himself, as 
I have told you, and took care to word it in such a manner, as he 
thought should give him, under the appearance of her executor 
and trustee, as she designed him, a real property in her wealth ; 
as it was immediately to come into his hands on her death, and 
there was no time appointed for the fulfilling her pious intentions. 

But here his sagacity disappointed itself ; for, neglecting to take 
proper advice, or afraid of making any person privy to his designs, 
he had committed such material errors in the form of the will as 
gave room to learned counsel to set it aside in favour of the heir-at- 
law, her nephew, who from cleaning shoes under a gateway, was 
enriched with at least a third part of his aunt's fortune, which re- 
mained to him, after the costs of the suit that had been carried on 
for him in formd pauperis, while her executor had the vexation 
of disappointment aggravated by a decree to pay all the cost. This 
was a severe stroke ; but it did not break his spirit, though it 
obliged him to return to his former occupation of an almoner, which 
you see he pursues with that attention which always insures success. 

I see you sink under the pain of finding the best actions debased, 
by springing from such motives ; but be careful to avoid an error, 
fatally too prevalent, of concluding from the abuse, against the use 
of anything that may, in its end, be conducive to good. 



102 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

These instances I have given, and I could add many more ; not 
to depreciate the custom of giving to public charities, which is the 
noblest use of wealth, but to caution you against the dangerous 
error of thinking that such giving alone, without reformation of life, 
and the active practice of the other virtues, can be acceptable in 
the sight of Him to whom it is offered, or efficacious to procure his 
favour ; and to show the absurd impiety of persisting in vice, with 
a vain hope of bribing Heaven with the wages of Hell. 

But to relieve your pain, behold that venerable person who sits 
opposite to him ; the serenity of whose looks shows the happiness 
of his mind. Read his heart, and you will not find one discontent 
or sorrow there, but what humanity imprints for the distresses of 
his fellow-creatures, which his beneficence, his real charity, is for- 
ever finding methods to relieve, not only by pecuniary benefactions, 
though to these is devoted the far greater part of his ample fortune, 
but also by his advice, instruction, and good office, the judicious appli- 
cation and sincerity of which makes them very rarely fail of success. 
He is a real supporter of charity in its most extensive sense ; hia 
example giving a sanction, a seal of virtue, to everything he appears 
in, which puts wicked wit out of countenance, and stops the tongue 
of calumny ; and is (even were it alone), sufficient to counterbalance 
all the instances which could be brought against it. Hia long life, 
which has been extended by Heaven, as a blessing to mankind, has 
been a constant illustration of the religion he teaches ; not one 
instance of his actions ever contradicting his profession, as near 
as human weakness can act up to divine perfection. 

Such is this clergyman ! such should all clergymen be, to preserve 
the purity, the dignity of a function, whose rules are drawn from 
perfection, and calculated to prepare the human for a participation 
of the divine nature ; to accomplish which greatest end, all profession, 
not enforced by practice, must be ineflfeotual. 

To mention any one instance of his good works would be doing 
injustice to the rest, and contradicting the desire of his heart, which 
next to doing good, is to conceal what he does, his actions being 
so far from ostentation, that to Heaven only, and the parties them- 
selves, are they revealed ; nor to these even is the hand that reaches 
them the blessing always known. 



CHAPTER XXXIV 

OONTINXTED : THE HISTORY OF A BBAB-LBADEB — HIS METHOD OT 
MAKING HIS pupil's MASTERS EARN THEIR MONET — THE GENBBAIi 
CONSEQUENCE OF CLOSE FRIENDSHIPS BETWEEN THE DUTERENT 
SEXES — HE MODESTLY OPFERS HIS PUPIL's MOTHER A NUT ALMOST 
TOO HARD FOR HER LIQUORISH TOOTH ; BUT SHE SWALLOWS IT 
WHOLE TO SAVE THE TROUBLE OF MUMBLING, AND MEETS A JUST 
RETURN FOR HER UNTIMELY PASSION 

Opposite to him, you see a man, whose rich dress and supercilious 
carriage give him the appearance of a superiority to all the rest of 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 103 

the company ; but such artifices impose only upon the ignorant and 
vulgar: to a judicious eye they aggravate the defects they are 
meant to disguise; and the low-bred, avaricious wretch appears 
doubly contemptible, through the unnatural veil of pride and 
mimiflcence. 

There is something so whimsically singular in the story of this 
person, that I will gratify your curiosity with a short sketch of it. 

He was bom in the lowest class of the people, in a poor village, 
in one of the most remote parts of the kingdom ; but the delicacy 
of his constitution making him unfit for a life of labour, the common 
lot of his condition, his poor parents denied themselves almost the 
necessaries of life to send him to school, to quality him for some 
employment better suited to his natural imbeciUty. The master 
of the school, who was a person of discernment and good nature, 
soon perceived that the weakness of his body was amply made up 
by the abilities of his mind, and took a pleasure in giving instruction 
which he saw received with advantage. Nor did he stop here ; 
but, when his pupil had made the ordinary progress of the school, 
he used the persuasive argument of teaching him for nothing, and 
supplying him with books at his own expense, to prevail upon his 
parents to let him pursue his studies. 

When he had advanced, by this assistance, considerably beyond 
the usual boundaries of school education, being not only critically 
skilled in the learned languages, but also well grounded in the 
principles of the liberal sciences, his kind master crowned the 
benefits he had conferred upon him by recommending him warmly 
to a widow lady, of large fortune, to educate her only son, whom 
female fondness would not permit her to trust out of her sight at 
a public school 

In this employment he behaved himself with such circumspection 
and care (for the weakness of his constitution saved him from all 
danger of excess, and the horrors of returning to his former poverty ■ 
and distress, fixed his attention, invariably, to every possible means 
of advancing his fortune), that he won the confidence of his pupil's 
mother so far, that she ventured to send her darling son to the 
university in his care ; and when he had finished his studies there 
with credit, gave him a genteel stipend, to accompany him in his 
travels to the different courts of Europe, to complete an education 
80 happily begun, and enable him to make a figure in life, suitable 
to the affluence of his fortune. 

The unbounded confidence with which this trust was committed 
to him, gave him sufficient opportunities of gratifying the ruling 
passions of his heart, vanity and avarice, as it enabled him to secrete 
to his own use, as much as he pleased of his pupil's fortune, satisfied 
that his accounts would never be examined ; and to acquire, late 
as it was, the ornamental parts of education, which his original 
poverty, and the necessary gravity of his literary life and employ- 
ment had precluded him from. 

Accordingly, as soon as he arrived in Paris, the first place where 
he designed to make any delay, he suffered himself to be prevailed 
upon by his pupil, to remit something of the strictness of his au- 
thority, and, seemingly winked at his plunging into all the levities 



104 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

and excesses of unguarded youth, that he might have the more 
convenient opportunity for executing his own schemes. Thus, 
while his abused charge threw away the time he ought to have spent 
in receiving profitable information and improvement, in idle expense 
and vicious pleasures, the prudent tutor took the advantage of 
his absence to attend the masters he retained for him, and learnt 
dancing, fencing, music, and all the other accomplishments of 
polite education — a conduct which he carefully observed in all 
the different stages of their travels. But still his labour, as you see, 
was for the most part in vain, the rust of his mean original being 
too strongly confirmed, to be worn ofi by so late ' application, 
so that his awkward affectation only makes defects, which 
would otherwise have passed unnoticed, become more visible, and 
exposes him to contempt and ridicule. 

But, eager as he was in these favourite pursuits, he did not let 
them divert his attention from the main point, of continuing to 
cultivate the good opinion and confidence of his pupil's mother, to 
whom he constantly wrote in such a strain of piety, and gave such 
pleasing accounts of her son's conduct, expatiating on his good 
qualities, and palliating his failings, with the tender titles of youth- 
ful levity, and the frailty of nature (for fear she should receive in- 
formation of his excesses from any other person) that she thought 
herself happy in having placed him under a man of such virtue and 
goodness ; her opinion of which was not a little heightened by the 
care he took of his parents, to whom he constantly remitted, through 
her hands, such a portion of his stipend as enabled them to live 
with comfort ; and with his former master he kept up a regular 
correspondence, informing him of everything he saw in his travels 
that he thought would be agreeable and entertaining to him, and 
expressing his gratitude for the friendship which had advanced 
him so happily in life. 

When his pupil had finished his travels in this manner, they re- 
turned home, where the fond mother received them with the high- 
est joy, her esteem for the tutor almost equalled her love for her 
son. But this natural affection did not long maintain the pre- 
eminence ! Her established opinion of the understanding, learning, 
and virtue of the former, levelled the height from which difference 
of condition had made her look down upon him before, and she 
admitted him into all the intimacy of friendship. There is nothing 
more deceitful than connections of this kind between the different 
sexes. Let them be formed with whatever resolution they will, 
at first. Nature will insensibly take the alarm, and force the execu- 
tion of her most powerful laws. 

This intimacy had not been long cultivated before the lady began 
to see perfections in her new friend, which she had never perceived 
before, and to feel a pleasure in his conversation which her heart 
had long been a stranger to. She knew not how it was, but nothing 
pleased her except what he said or did ; even her fondness for her 
son began to cool, and her eyes to open to faults in him which she 
had always been blind to before, though he had never taken any 
pains to conceal them from her. This did not escape the penetra- 
tion of her friend a moment, nor was his judgment at a loss how 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 105 

to improve it to the best advantage. He immediately began to 
assume a timid tenderness in his looks and maimer, and took every 
occasion of displa5ing the genteel accomplishments he had acquired 
in his travels, while her uiJiappy son, as if he had entered into the 
scheme against himself, seldom came near her, and when he did, 
behaved with a careless indifference, scarce short of rudeness and 
insult. 

Such a contrast was too striking to pass unnoticed ; nor did her 
friend fail to aggravate the impressions of it by doubling his assiduity 
and tender complaisance, whenever his former pupil withdrew, and 
lamenting the unhappy turn he had taken in terms of the deepest 
concern, but without ever offering a word in his excuse. 

This subtle conduct had the desired effect ; the love of the mother 
was entirely diverted from her son to her friend ; and as the foolish 
fondness of her deceased husband had left much the greater part of 
his large fortune in her power, the improvement of this change 
was an object worthy of his highest attention. But still the difficulty 
upon both was, how to open the afiair ; for, powerful as the different 
motives that urged them to bring it to a. conclusion were, a sense 
of the impropriety of such an action, made them equally at a loss 
how to mention it. 

But here again the evil genius of the son prevailed, and he did 
that for them which they knew not how to do themselves. For 
some of his friends observing the intimacy between his mother and 
his former tutor, desired him to be upon his guard, and strive to 
prevent the consequences of it, by a change in his behaviour to 
her. Such prudent advice, if properly followed, might probably 
have had effect. But instead of that, he flew immediately to his 
mother, and indiscreetly charged her with a design of betrajdng 
the confidence of his father, and ruining him, to gratify a ridiculous 
passion for a mean, unworthy object ; and then turning to him, 
who happened to be present, he told him fiercely, that, if he did 
not that instant quit his mother's house, he would treat him 
as the villany of such a design deserved, in the next place he 
should ever meet him ; and so flung out of the room in the highest 
rage, leaving them staring at each other, and almost petrified with 
astonishment. 

But a few moments restored them to themselves. The affair 
was now revealed, and so the greatest difiOiculty over. ' I wish ' 
said the tutor, as if he spoke to his former pupil, though he took 
care to wait till he heard him out of the house, ' I wish no other 
person beside me had reason to fear your resentment ; or that I 
had no other obstacle but that, to prevent the happiness my heart 
languishes for '. And then turning to the lady, as if he did not 
know that she had heard what he had said : ' I am most unhappy, 
madam ', proceeded he, ' to find myself the cause of your being 
treated in this manner, and shall immediately withdraw to prevent 
a repetition of it ; as for me, since I am to lose the happiness of 
your conversation, it matters not what becomes of me '. Saying 
which, he made her a most respectful bow, and with a look of 
the highest tenderness and grief, seemed to prepare to leave the 
room. 



106 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

' Hold, sir ' ! exclaimed tlie lady, the warmth of whose resent- 
ment at her son's behaviour made her the more readily melt at the 
distress of her lover. ' Hold, sir ! what are you going to do ? Will 
you desert me in this danger and distress ' ? And then softening 
her voice and looks into the greatest tenderness, ' I thought ', 
continued she, ' I should never want a protector while my friend 
lived '. 

' Nor shall you, madam ', answered he, with an appearance of 
warmth that banished all reserve. ' My life shall protect you from 
every danger and affront. But, oh, that I had a tie to justify such 
an attachment to the world, which else will censure it severely '. And 
then, taking her hand, he bent his knee, and pressed it to his 
lips. 

Such an act of gallantry was not to be resisted in the condition 
she was then in. She bent forward to meet him, and laying her 
head upon his bosom as he arose : ' Let it be justified ', she mm-- 
mured in a broken, faltering accent, ' by every sacred tie of love 
and truth ; of honour and religion '. 

This was all he wanted. He seized her in his arms, and pressing 
her to his breast, sealed the contract on her trembling, withered 
lips. 

The impatient love-sick fair now thought every obstacle to her 
wishes removed, and therefore distantly proposed sending for a 
priest directly to tie the sacred knot and prevent any designs her 
undutiful son might form to disappoint her happiness. But her 
prudent lover was in no such haste ! He now had her secure beyond 
danger of retreating ; but as her person was not the only object 
of his desires, he wisely judged it best to refrain a few moments 
from the possession of that to secure the more solid enjoyment 
of her fortune ; as he was not certain but this fit of fondness might 
wear off, and her natural affection for her son return, when her 
untimely passion should be gratified. He, therefore, resolved to 
improve her present disposition beyond the danger of repentance, 
and sent for the priest directly, passing the intermediate 
moments till his arrival, in the most passionate, endearing 
dalliance. 

But, just as the blushing, bashful bride was going to approach 
the altar, he stopped short, as if upon a sudden thought, and turning 
to her : ' This, madam, secures our present happiness ', said he ; 
' but how are you to be revenged upon your base, ungrateful son ? 
What certainty have I that a return of your former fondness for 
him may not sacrifice me to his implacable resentment ? Some 
settlement should first be made ; and then ansdety and fear won't 
damp the ardour of our joys '. 

' I understand you not ' ! answered she, in confusion and astonish- 
ment. ' What settlement can you mean ? Do I not give you 
the possession of my fortune with myself ' ? 

' True, madam ', repHed he ; ' you do ! And could I be sure of 
having them for ever, I should be satisfied. But death may rob 
me of you, and then your fortune will descend to your ungracious 
son, while I am thrown upon the world, destitute of every means 
of self-defence and support *- 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 107 

' And can you doubt my love ' ? added she, not a little surprised 
and startled at his caution. 

' I doubt it not ! nor would I doubt it ' ! returned he ; ' and 
therefore -will remove all room for doubt '. 

' What must I settle then ' ? said she. ' How much of my fortune 
will remove your fears, and satisfy your wishes ? Here, take this 
paper, and write down your terms '. 

' That is soon done ', said he, and taking the paper, directly wrote 
the word ALL, and reached it to her. 

It is not easy to describe her astonishment and indignation at 
the assurance and unreasonableness of such a demand. ' What ! 
ALL ' ! said she, with evident emotion ; ' will no less do ? Is 
nothing to be left to my disposal ? This is too hard '. 

The lover instantly perceived his ticklish situation. However, 
he was resolved to try the utmost, assured that even if her resolu- 
tion held, he was in no danger of losing her quite. ' Madam ', said 
he, throwing his arms around her, and embracing her tenderly ; ' I 
give you myself, and all I have ; and I expect the like return. I 
pretend not to compare the value of the gifts, but love is delicate, 
and will bear no abatement '. 

If the passions of youth are impetuous, those of old age are silly. 
The ardour of this address, with shame of being refused upon any 
account thus in the very crisis of her hopes, made her comply, 
and she betrayed the confidence of her husband, and signed away 
the inheritance of her child to gratify a preposterous, untimely, 
ridiculous love. 

The return she met with was just ! Her new husband, now all 
his schemes were accomplished, scorned to preserve even the decency 
of appearance, but threw off the mask directly, and treated her with 
such indignity and contempt, that she broke from him in despair, 
in the first week of her marriage, and threw herself upon the mercy 
of her basely ruined son ; whose resentment was not proof to such 
a trial, but, yielding to filial piety, he shared with her the poor 
pittance which he happily had independent of her, till she sunk 
under the weight of misfortune, shame, and remorse. 

Nor did her husband treat his first benefactor, or his parents 
better. With the former he directly dropped aU correspondence ; 
and, giving the latter an allowance of twenty pounds a year, just 
to keep them from starving, he positively forbid their ever letting 
him hear from them more, on the penalty of forfeiting that, and 
every other instance of his favour. 

Far from being satisfied with the success of his villany, or enjoy- 
ing the fortune he had so basely obtained, his whole life has been 
spent, as you see, in anxious attempts to hide the meanness of his 
, original under the splendour of his appearance ; and the iniquity 
by which he acquired his wealth, by vain ostentation of charity 
and munificence. 



108 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

CHAPTER XXXV 

CONTINtTBD : SOME KBI'LECTIONS THAT MAY APPBAE IMPEBTINENT 
TO MANY, AND UNPEOFITABLH TO MORE, BUT STILL ABE NBITHBB 
IMPROPER NOB UNJUST — THE HISTORY OF AN HONEST ATTORNEY 
— MORE WONDERS ! — THE WAY OF THE WORLD EEVERSED : RIGHT 
TRIUMPHANT OVER MIGHT ; AND GRATITUDE SHOWN IN HIGH 
LIFB 

Move your eyes towards the lower end of the table, and behold that 
person whose aspect and appearance command veneration and 
esteem. He was bred in a profession, the very name of which is 
become a reproach, from the abuse of unworthy professors. Nor 
can it be otherwise, while every low-bred person, who is just able 
to give a son the &st rudiments of education, and ambitious of 
seeing him in the character of a gentleman, is admitted to breed him 
an attorney ; and as soon as he has served a time, as to the most 
illiberal mechanic trade, to turn him loose upon the world, to live 
by the practice of the very crimes and iniquities which his profession 
was originally instituted to suppress, without any fortune to save 
him from the necessity of having recourse to such base means ; 
and without being instructed in the principles of probity and virtue, 
to support him against the temptations of the many frauds and 
villanies which his business brings him to the knowledge of. Nay, 
80 far from giving any attention to this indispensable duty, of form- 
ing the mind by proper instruction, such is the perverseness of 
man, that if a child betrays an early propensity to chicane and 
fraud, by setting his play-fellows together by the ears, and cozening 
them of their toys, he is immediately marked for this profession, 
and, instead of being corrected for such a disposition, and having 
it nipped in the bud, is encouraged in it, by hearing it made the 
omen and ground of his future success in life, till it is confirmed 
beyond the sense of shame and remorse, and becomes the ruling 
principle of his life. The conduct, consequent to such education 
and principles, has brought the profession into so great disrepute, 
that scarce any person of character or fortune will breed a son to 
it ; by which means the evil is daily aggravated more and more, 
and threatens to become absolutely irremediable at last. For, at 
present, so many are the opportunities that tempt to iniquity in 
the practice, and so universal the reproach affixed to the very 
name of an attorney, that all regard to reputation, that powerful 
preservative of virtue, seems to be in vain, and it requires an un- 
common rectitude of heart to support the conflict ; but that there 
are some who are equal to this trial, and that the fault is not in 
the profession, but in the abuse of it, the person before us is an 
eminent instance. 

A nobleman, who died some time since without legitimate issue, 
thought proper to bequeath, not only his own great acquisitions, 
but. also the immense possessions of his ancestors, to a spurious 
son, without ever considering whether there might not possibly 
remain some distant branches of his family, capable of inheriting 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 10» 

what they must have a just and legal title to, though the direct 
Sae failed in himself ; accordingly the heir took possession of his 
adventitious fortune, and, as wealth hides every defect, entered into 
aUiance, and made connections with, persons of the most exalted 
rank, whose friendship and interest, supported by the immense 
riches he possessed, seemed to hold every inquiry into the justice 
of his title to them, in defiance. 

But a generous heart is not easily terrified in a just cause ; the 
person before us, by his knowledge in his profession, and the up- 
rightness of his practice, had acquired a fortune and established a 
character that placed him above the reach of slander and the frown 
of power. He had been born under the patronage of this nobleman's 
house, and in the course of his business had happened to get some 
insight into the settlements of his family, by which he found that 
it was not in his power to alienate the acquisitions of his illustrious 
ancestors and give them to a stranger to their blood while any of 
their descendants were in being. Such an act of injustice, there- 
fore, raised the indignation and pity of his honest, generous heart, 
and he resolved to set it aside, notwithstanding the trouble and 
expense that must necessarily attend such an attempt. 

The greatest discouragement to his undertaking was the difSculty 
of finding out and ascertaining the real heir, for the family was 
apparently extinct. But upon examining into the many alliances 
it had formerly made, which his known attachment gave him an 
easy opportunity of doing, he found that some generations 
before, a daughter had been married to a nobleman of a neigh- 
bouring dependent kingdom ; the issue of which marriage, if 
any remained, was the true and only representative of this noble 
house. 

Having made this discovery, he went directly over to that king- 
dom, where, after a long and painful search, he had the mortification 
to find that the family was reduced, by the revolutions of govern- 
ment andjithe calamity of the times, to two poor, low-bred, illiterate 
women, who had been married to mechanics of the meanest rank, 
and, being left widows, and without children, now strove to procure 
a wretched subsistence by joining their poor stocks to keep a chand- 
ler's shop, in a city in the remotest part of the kingdom. 

So melancholy an instance of the instability of human grandeur 
only raised his CQmpassion, and confirmed his resolution to vindicate 
the blood of the illustrious patrons of his family from such injustice 
and disgrace. Accordingly, he instantly relieved their immediate 
distresses, and, taking all the proper methods for ascertaining their 
descent, brought them over to this kingdom, lodged them in his own 
house, and treated them with the respect due to their noble blood 
and better hopes. 

As soon as everything was prepared for the great attempt, he 
regularly demanded a restitution of their right from the unjust 
possessor, and, upon his expected refusal, instituted a suit at law 
for the recovery of it, in the prosecution of which neither diflBoulties 
nor dangers, neither threats nor promises, could slacken his ardour 
till he had obtained the justice he demanded for them. A detail 
of the proceedings, in such an affair, must be distressing to any 



110 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

humane heart, It is suffloient to say that every method which the 
art of man could invent to impose upon judgment and defeat justice 
was exerted against him for several years, in hopes of exhausting 
his fortune, and wearing out the lives of his injured clients (the 
elder of whom actually did die during the suit), and so disappointing 
his hopes. But justice at length prevailed, and he recovered for 
them the inheritance of their ancestors, leaving their antagonist 
only the immediate acquisitions of his reputed father, which, large 
as they are, he eagerly labours to increase by every artifice of sordid 
avarice. 

As for the heiress, the exalted gratitude she showed proved her 
noble blood. As soon as she had executed all the forms of law 
necessary to give her an absolute power over her fortune, and justly 
paid the expense, and rewarded the trouble of recovering it, as 
every branch of her family was extinct, she thought it but justice 
to settle her great fortune upon the generous reooverer of it. Nor 
was she content with leaving it to him when she could no longer 
make use of it herself, but, obliging him to quit the business of his 
profession, she gave the greater part of it into his immediate pos- 
session, and, retiring to one of the principal seats upon her estate, 
spent the remainder of her life in happiness and esteem : the good- 
ness of her heart, and the true nobleness of her soul drowning her 
want of early education in the superior radiance of innate virtue. 

The absolute possession of her entire fortune, which her death 
gave him much sooner than he wished, has made no alteration in 
the conduct of this worthy person, who invariably pursues the 
dictates of justice and benevolence in all his actions, making his 
wealth a blessing to all, whose wants and virtues mark them as 
objects worthy of his regard and assistance. 



CHAPTER XXXVI 

•CONTINTJED : THE HAPPY TRUITS OF UNEQUAL MAEKIAGES — A SHOKT 
WAY TO PAY LOIfQ DEBTS — THE PLEASURES OF POLITE LIFE — A 
BOLD STROKE OF FEMALE GENIUS TBnjMPHAlTT OVER LAW AND 
BBLIGION — AN UNLUCKY MISTAKE BRINGS AN IMPBOPER VISITOE 
INTO TOO GENTEEL COMPANY 

Immediately below him, you see one of those instances of incon- 
sistency which diversify the motley character of man. In the deep 
sunk lines of his face you may read learning and intense thought, 
as the placid serenity of his eye shows a heart warmed with piety 
and moral virtue ; what pity that a listless indolence of mind 
throws a shade over so bright a character, and submission to the 
capricious yoke of female tyranny make him passively guilty of the 
very follies and vices most immediately opposite to his own virtue 
and good sense ! 

The pious care of a good father had so improved the eminent 
Abilities with which nature had blessed this gentleman, by the most 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 111 

judicious education, that the promise of his youth gave hopes of 
his being an ornament and advantage to his age and country ; but 
one indiscreet action overcast this pleasing prospect ; and in its 
consequences has brought him to be the insignificant thing you see. 

This was a marriage of mere inclination, with a person who had 
neither fortune, beauty, nor merit, to justify his choice ; and who 
yet has taken the unjustifiable advantage of this indolence of his 
temper to usurp as absolute an authority over him as if she pos- 
sessed them all in the most eminent degree, and conferred upon him 
the benefit and obligation she herself received. 

This makes his life one scene of the most irreconcilable incon- 
sistenoy, between the wisdom and virtue of the very few actions in 
which he is admitted to follow the dictates of his own judgment, 
and the follies and vices into which she wantonly leads him every 
moment of his life. When I say vices, I mean those of dissipation, 
luxury, and extravagance, which, though the most injurious to 
society, and productive of the worst consequences to particulars, 
are yet too often looked upon in another light, and thought harm- 
less, at least, if not even commendable exertions of greatness and 
generosity of spirit, and the proper use of afiSuenoe of fortune ; for, 
not content with the rational enjoyment of the fortune to which 
he raised her, in her proper sphere, she has assumed the absolute 
disposal of the whole, which she dissipates in every kind of fashion- 
able folly and profusion, so as utterly to disable him from exerting 
the natural generosity and benevolence of his heart in the extent 
and manner suited to his apparent wealth, and too often from 
discharging the moral obligations of honesty, in the payment of his 
just and necessary debts. 

Such an ungrateful abuse of obligation and influence may appear 
strange to you, who have been so little conversant in the ways of 
man ; but, to a more extended view of life, constant observation 
shows that conferring a great benefit actually extinguishes gratitude, 
instead of raising it higher, and that the meaner the hands into which 
power is entrusted, the more exorbitant and tyrannical the use they 
make of it. Whether this arises from a consciousness of inabiUty 
to pay so great a debt, and a consequent desire to cancel it by an 
absolute breach, that may, at the same time, also support the 
debtor's pride, and seem to hide the obligation, by an implied 
disavowal in the former case, and from a desire of returning the 
tyranny felt before in the latter, would be a curious and not unprofit- 
able disquisition, but shall be reserved to another place, where the 
occasion wiU illustrate it more forcibly ; and only the justice of the 
observation, as to the present case in particular, proved by a few, 
out of innumerable instances of the same kind. 

Of all the methods of dissipating wealth, and precipitating ruin, 
the most speedy and effectual is gaming. The present prevalence 
of the passion for this vice (for to call it by any other name would 
be a false tenderness) among all ranks and sexes has been already 
often observed, as it is the characteristic of the times. However, 
to soften the horror, with which the barefaced practice of it, by 
the fairer sex must strike every rational mind, it is blended with 
matters of mere amusement, and represented only as an innocent 



112 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

method of relieving conversation when a number of persons meet 
in public company, which must otherwise languish and grow tire- 
some, or else fall upon improper subjects. This ingenious" ex- 
pedient has given rise to those meetings at the houses of the greatest 
fashion, which, from the noise, bustle, and confusion inseparable 
from such crowds, are emphatically called routs. In these, the 
mistress of the house always presides, and, consequently, attendance 
at them is looked upon as a compliment peculiar to her, and in 
which her husband has no share. For this reason, the greater the 
crowd collected the more important the entertainer appears, and 
therefore no pains or expense is spared in inducing them to attend. 

From the character already given of the wife of this gentleman, 
it may be concluded that she exerted all her efforts to make a figure 
by the frequency and greatness of her own routs, and by the pro- 
fusion with which she gamed away her money at those of others. 
However, the mode was become so universal and so eagerly pursued 
that she soon found it was impossible for her to distinguish herself 
in the manner she desired if she could not strike out some new way. 
But in this she was not long at a loss ; the boldness of her genius 
prompted her to try an expedient which no one before her had 
dared to venture upon. 

This was to fix her routs on the day set apart, by laws human and 
divine, for the duties of religion ; and which till then had been held 
sacred to these alone, from every kind of business and recreation. 
So bold a stroke necessarily attracted the notice of the public, and 
the remissness of the legislature overlooking it, the crowds who, 
from an insensibility to those duties, were utterly at a loss how 
to get rid of so much time, gladly embraced such an opportunity, 
and flocked to her in numbers that amply satisfied her ambition. 
Such success and impunity soon made her example imitated ; but, 
as she had led the way, the merit of that secured her from being 
supplanted by any rival, and having her company decoyed from her. 

The circumstances of her husband's birth, and the principles in 
which he had been educated, made him at first look upon such an 
insult upon religion with the strongest horror ; but she made light 
of his scruples, and overruled all his objections with such an ab- 
solute authority, that, for the sake of peace, he was obUged to 
submit, and join in what he dared not contradict, till he has at 
length forfeited the acquaintance of every serious, rational, and 
religious person. 

He was at first greatly affected at this falling off, and much dis- 
tressed to think what it could proceed from, as he was not sensible 
of any deviation, in his own sentiments, from the principles which 
had made his acquaintance sought by every man of sense and 
virtue ; but an accident soon opened his eyes to the absurdity 
of his situation. 

The acquaintance on which he justly set the greatest value, was 
with a prelate of distinguished merit and virtue, an intimate friend 
of his deceased father. With him he spent the happiest hours of 
his life ; and, in the wisdom and piety of his conversation, found 
relief for the sick heart, from the follies and riotous excesses which 
he was a slave to at home. Though he always met with the most 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 115 

benevolent and friendly reception from tliis worthy person, yet 
the coolness with which he found himself treated by some others, 
made his apprehension so ready to take alarm, that, upon his grace 
not returning a visit or two with the exactest punctuality, either 
from sickness or some necessary engagement, he could not help 
expressing his uneasiness with such warmth, when he went to see 
him next, that his grace, who, though he despised ceremony, would 
not give pain or offence to any person, especially one for whom he 
had so sincere an esteem, accoimted for his late omission, by giving 
the real reason of it, and told him that he would do himself the 
pleasure of visiting him any day when he might be sure of finding 
him at home. 

The gentleman answered that if his grace would appoint any 
day agreeable and convenient to him, he would gladly break through 
all engagements, and attend to receive him. This was a strain 
of complaisance which the prelate would not agree to, but insisted 
upon knowing what day he was usually at home, when he would 
call upon him in a friendly manner without putting him to the 
trouble of waiting for him in particular. 

The affectionate, sincere manner in which this was said, was 
so pleasing to the gentleman, that it put him entirely off his guard, 
and he answered eagerly, and without ever considering that the 
next day was Sunday, when he was always at home. This was 
strictly true ; he was always at home on that day because it was 
his lady's day for seeing company ; if he had in the least reflected 
on which, he would never have appointed his grace to come, as he 
was sensible that he should for ever forfeit his acquaintance by it. 

Though that was a day which the prelate dedicated to employ- 
ments of a very different nature from paying complimentary visits, 
there was something in the earnestness of the manner in which the 
gentleman appointed it, that made him apprehend he had some 
secret uneasiness upon his mind which he wanted to communicate, 
for assistance or advice ; wherefore he complied without hesitation ; 
nor did the other recollect the impropriety of what he had done 
till it was too late to be remedied. For his grace going the next 
evening, as he had promised, was not a little surprised to find a 
crowd of coaches before the door, for he had never heard of, nor 
suspected the scene that was acting ; but, however, being informed 
that his friend was at home, he thought it best to proceed, and so 
alighting from his chariot, was shown up into a room where there 
was a mixed multitude seriously engaged at cards ! 

The very mention of such a scene would have struck him with 
horror ; judge then what his sentiments must be at the sight ; and 
particularly to be betrayed to it, as he imagined, on purpose to 
insult him, by a man whom he esteemed, and whose father he had 
sincerely loved. 

As soon as he had recovered himself from his astonishment, he 
directly turned about and departed, just as he was perceived by 
the master of the house, whose confusion at his own indiscretion, 
in appointing such a time, which he instantly recollected, is not to 
be described. He started from his chair, and exclaiming, ' Good 
God I what have I done ' ? — would have followed him directly, 

B 



114 ADVENTURES OP A GUINEA 

if his lady, with whom he was playing, and who was just then deal- 
ing, had not stopped him and insisted on knowing what was the 
matter. 

' Good God ! madam,' said he in the utmost confusion and 
■distress ; ' did not you see his grace come to the door this moment ? 
I went to pay him a visit yesterday, and unfortunately engaged 
him to return it this evening without ever considering that it was 
your night '. 

' And is that all ' ? answered she, who had gone on with her deal, 
and just turned up an aoe ; ' then pray sit still and play your 
cards ; you see clubs are trumps ! His grace may come at a proper 
time if he pleases '. 

Great as the husband's distress was, the accent with which these 
words were spoken nailed him to the chair, so that he was forced 
to let his grace go home, and remain that night in an opinion so 
painful and injurious to him. But he laid not his head to rest till 
he had written his grace a letter of apology for his mistake, which 
he candidly acknowledged, and conjured him to forgive, in the 
most earnest manner. 

The imaginary insult of being trepanned into such a scene, had 
at first provoked his grace beyond the usual evenness of his temper ; 
\)ut he had had time to cool before he received the letter (for he 
never lay down in anger, nor arose but in charity with all man- 
kind), and, reading it dispassionately, was so moved at the situation 
into which he found his friend fallen, that all thoughts of personal 
resentment vanished, and he answered it with the greatest hu- 
manity and tenderness, drawing the folly and danger of such a 
complaisance in its proper strength, and urging his return to the 
practice of his own principles, with every argument of reason, 
virtue, and religion, promising to renew his acquaintance with the 
same, or greater intimacy than before, as soon as he should desist 
from such an impious profanation and abuse of a day made sacred 
to piety and devotion by every civil and religious law : till he 
should do which, it was inconsistent with his character and prin- 
ciples to keep up any further intercourse with a person in such 
■circumstances. 

The justice of this reasoning was acknowledged by the person 
to whom it was addressed, and the loss which followed the neglect 
of it, severely felt, but he wanted resolution to resume the authority 
that was necessary for putting it in execution, and so tamely submits, 
against his better judgment, to all the impositions of a tyranny 
which was first erected upon his folly, and still subsists by his 
indolence. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 115 



CHAPTER XXXVII 

CONTINUED : CONTUSION WOESE OONPOUTTDED, BOUT ON BOUT : 
THE TKANSPOEMATION OF A CONSTABLE INTO A DEVIL INTBODUOES 
A STOBY OF THE DEVIL's DANCING IN MASQUEBADE, AND EBIGHTENS 
A POLITE ASSEMBLY INTO A FIT OF DEVOTION, WHICH LASTS A 
WHOLE NIGHT WITH MOST OF THEM — A GLIMPSE OF THE COUEAGB 
OF A MODERN MAN OF HONOUB 

But, though such meetings as these are held in apparent defiance 
of the laws, you must not imagine that those who go to them are 
insensible of the impropriety, or unapprehensive of the danger 
of such a conduct. By danger, I mean the immediate one from 
the secular power, for that of the Divine wrath they never gave 
themselves the trouble of thinking about. 

Of this a remarkable instance happened at this place, not very 
long after the afiair of his grace. A gentleman of humour, as well 
as reason, who was intimate in this gentleman's family, and had 
often strove in vain to convince his lady of the disagreeable conse- 
quences that might attend such an avowed disregard to decency 
at least, resolved to take another method, and try what effect 
ridicule and shame might have, where every argument from reason 
had failed. 

Accordingly, one night, in the midst of the riot, he contrived 
to have it whispered in the company, that a neighbouring constable, 
remarkable for punishing every offence for which he did not 
receive a proper composition, intended to come with the church- 
wardens and all the parish officers at his heels and interrupt their 
diversion ; and dressing himself exactly like the constable, whom 
he nearly resembled in size and figure, and buckling on a 
wooden leg like him, he stalks among them just as the servant 
announced his coming by the name of the constable whom he 
personated. 

It is impossible to describe the astonishment and confusion of 
the whole company at such an attack. Though there were several 
present whose rank placed them above his authority, surprise and 
consciousness of their guilt so far deprived them of all resolution 
and presence of mind, that they joined in the just fear of the rest 
and attempted to make an ignominious escape with them. The 
candles were all instantly put out, the windows were broken open, 
and stars and ribbons were seen among the crowd that leaped 
into the court, and ran through the streets, without regarding dirt 
or cold, while the more timorous sex stood petrified with fear, 
vmcertain which to face, shame or danger. 

In the meantime, the pretended constable took the advantage 
to slip off his wooden leg, tie-wig, and long cloak, just as the servants 
had taken the alarm, and come in to see what was the matter, 
and BO had an opportunity of enjoying the whole scene, without 
the danger of being suspected for the author of it. 

The first question which the lady of the house, whose active spirit 
first recovered itself, asked, was, what was become of the constable. 



116 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

and who let him in ? At the mention of a constable, the servants 
all started, as not one of them knew anything of him ; and the very- 
servant, who had announced his entrance, declared he had never 
heard a word of him, for, as he had not told his ofifice, not one of 
them had the least notion of such a person's presuming to come 
among them. But upon telling his name, and describing his ap- 
pearance, their surprise was changed the other way ; they all re- 
membered his entrance, but every one of them positively insisted 
that he had not gone back ; so that the question now was, what 
could have possibly become of him ? as his leaping out of the window, 
as the others had gallantly done, was neither necessary, nor indeed 
possible for him to do, maimed as he was. 

While they were forming sagacious conjectures on so strange 
and unaccountable an affair, the metamorphosed constable, who 
had joined in the conversation, said to an old lady, who seemed 
more strongly affected than any other of the company, that the 
oddness of this affair put him in mind of one, not very unlike it in 
many circumstances, which he had read in accounts of good authority 
to have happened in IVance during the minority of Louis XTV. 

This raised the curiosity of all who heard him, who immediately 
crowded round him, and desired him to tell it. At first he seemed 
rather unwilling, and very gravely prefaced his story with declaring, 
that for his part he believed nothing of the matter, though he owned 
it was related by writers of undoubted veracity, and attested in 
a manner almost beyond any fact he had ever read in history. 
Having thus prepared them for something extraordinary, he pro- 
ceeded thus : ' You know, madam ', addressing himself to the old 
lady, to whom he had first mentioned it, and who he knew plumed 
herself not a little upon her knowledge in secret history, everything 
that bore the name of which she had read, and implicitly believed 
every word of ; ' that, in the minority of Louis the Great, Mazarine, 
who governed the kingdom, took every method of diverting the 
attention of the young monarch from state affairs, by all kinds 
of pleasurable entertainment that could be devised '. 

' True, sir ', answered the old lady, who could not restrain her 
desire of showing her knowledge ; ' and that is said to have influ- 
enced the conduct of his future life, in that expensive pomp and 
vain magnificence, which attracted the admiration of foreigners, 
while it exhausted and ruined his subjects. ' Hem ! hem ! but 
I beg pardon, sir, pray don't let me interrupt you '. 

' As this Mazarine was an Italian, you know, madam ', continued 
he, to which she assented with a nod, as she constantly did, ' it 
wag natural for him to have a fondness for the entertainments of 
his own country, he therefore introduced the Italian opera mto 
Trance. The first time it was presented, one of the principal parts 
of the entertainment consisted of a comic dance that was performed 
by six of the nimblest caperers in all Italy. At first they went 
on expertly, and with great applause ; but immediately found 
themselves at a loss, and were unable to proceed any further, being 
put out by the intrusion of a strange dancer, who came among 
them nobody could tell how, and disconcerted the entire scheme of 
their dance, which had been calculated only for their own number. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 117 

This at length threw them into such confusion, that they were 
obliged to stand still ! when the manager of the entertainment 
coming to them to see what was the matter, perceived the cause 
of their confusion, and obliged them all to unmask (for they were 
dressed exactly alike and wore masks) that he might detect and 
seize the impertinent intruder, when, to his, and to the utter as- 
tonishment of every one present, he vanished as unaccountably 
as he had come, though the eyes of the whole house were upon him, 
and there appeared to be no more than the original number, and 
the same persons who began the dance. I believe, madam, you 
may recollect the other circumstances of the story, which I do not 
choose to mention on this occasion ; they are told in the secret 
memoirs of Cardinal Mazarine '. 

' I do, sir ', returned she, with great emotion, ' remember some- 
thing of it. But really ' 

' Dear madam ', interrupted another, whose curiosity was raised 
too high to bear a moment's delay, ' pray let the gentleman pro- 
ceed ! When he has ended, if he omits anything, you may then 
inform us further. — Pray, sir, do proceed '. 

' Why, really, madam ', continued he, under some apparent 
confusion ; ' I am at a loss how to act, and had much rather be 
excused ; however, I must beg leave to observe, that for my own 
part, I do not believe a single syllable of the stories of ghosts and 
apparitions, and devils, and such-like stuff that ever was told, 
though this story, in particular, is told in a manner, and confirmed 
with circumstances not easily to be contradicted '. 

This solemn preface raised the curiosity of them all to a torture, 
and alarmed apprehensions that would not admit of a moment's 
suspense. ' Dear sir, pray proceed ', echoed from an hundred 
mouths at once, as they pressed closer to him. 

The gentleman bowed and continued : ' The whole company 
was now thrown, into a confusion as great as that of the dancers : 
they had all reckoned a seventh person, and the coimoisseiu-s in 
particular had observed that one of them had shown greater agility, 
and cut higher than any one they had ever seen before, and indeed 
than they thought it possible for any human person to do. This 
hint alarmed the whole house, and it was immediately concluded 
that the devil had maliciously joined in the dance on purpose to 
spoil their sport ; an opinion, which one or two unlucky circum- 
stances seemed to give weight to, which were, that all the dancers 
had been dressed like devils, the opera being The Fall of Man, and 
the dance exhibited, as a triumph of the devils upon the occasion, 
that it was acted on a Sunday evening. Trifling as these circum- 
stances really were, they threw the whole audience into a consterna- 
tion ; some directly fancied the candles burnt blue, others that the 
place smelt strongly of sulphur ; and one more impudently foolish 
than all the rest, insisted that he had observed the cloven foot ; 
but what was most surprising of all, the cardinal, who could not 
be suspected of superstition, was so affected by it, that he ordered 
the house to be dismissed directly, and that opera never to be 
performed again, nor any other on a Sunday, which was observed 
during his life, and for some time after '. 



118 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

It is impossible for words to describe the situation of the company 
at the conclusion of this story. At the mention of the candles burn- 
ing blue, all turned their eyes about, and fancied the same ; as to 
(heir smelling sulphur, it was more than imagination — ^the pre- 
tended constable having taken an opportunity, while they were 
all in confusion, to throw, unperceived, a composition which he had 
brought with him on purpose, into the fire, which had filled the 
room with a most sulphurous smell — and more than one of the 
company declared they thought they saw a cloven foot, or some- 
thing very like it, fly out of the window. 

The scene was now changed to an appearance really frightful. 
Every lengthened visage was as pale as death, every haggard eye 
staring in wild affright. The old lady to whom the tale had been 
particularly addressed, confirmed every syllable of it, and added 
many circumstances from secret histories of her own immediate 
invention : and every one present had some similar story to tell in 
support of it, till they at length terrified one another to that 
degree that they were afraid to look around, or even raise their voices 
to bid their servants prepare for their departure. 

The gentleman, pleased at the success of his artifice, resolved to 
improve it to the utmost, and take advantage of their present 
situation to work them up to some action that should make them 
ashamed, at least, ever to be guilty of the like profanation of that 
sacred day again : ' Defend us, Heaven ' ! exclaimed he, fixing 
his eyes with horror on one of the windows. What can that be ' ? 

This completed the terror ; they all believed the devil was re- 
turning to destroy them, for the boldest of them all had not the 
spirit to turn their eyes to see what he looked at, and joined most 
devoutly in his ejaculation to Heaven for defence. 

He saw this was the proper moment for what he intended, and 
so, dropping suddenly upon his loiees, in which they all followed 
his example, he repeated aloud the confession in the service of the 
Church, adding, with particular emphasis, to the sins of commission, 
this of breaking the Sabbath, and to those of omission, the neglect of 
the duties of religion, to which it was devoted ; and concluded with 
a solemn vow, never to be guilty of either again, if Heaven would 
remit its wrath and spare them for the present. 

All the while he had been performing this ceremony, he had kept his 
eyes fixed on the window, and at the end of it, exclaimed in a rapture : 
' Our vows are heard ! it vanishes ! the danger's over ' ! Upon 
which he arose, as did they all, and fell into the most serious and 
devout conversation, upon so signal an instance of divine favour 
and mercy, while their coaches and chairs were getting ready to 
carry them home, when they retired with thoughts very different 
from those which they usually brought from such places. 

Though every lady in the company had been frightened into 
a fit of devotion by what had happened, none suffered so severely 
by it as the lady of the house, who, notwithstanding the public 
contempt she showed for religion, was so fearful of ghosts and hob- 
goblins, that after having persuaded her husband to lay out a large 
sum of money (much more than prudence would have permitted) 
in repairing and fitting up in the modem taste, a beautiful antique 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 119 

castle that waa upon his estate, upon hearing that a particular 
apartment in it waa haimted by a spirit, quitted it directly, and 
never could be prevailed upon to sleep a second night in it. As 
soon, therefore, as the company was all gone, and she left to 
her own meditations, her fears recurred so fast upon her, that she 
fell into fits, which seemed to threaten her with the total loss of 
her reason, raving of devils and damnation, and railing against 
cards, and Sabbath -breaking, with all the vehemence of a modern, 
enthusiast among his mad brethren in Moorfields. But this did 
not last long ! the gentleman, to avoid detection, had been obliged 
to leave his tie-wig, cloak, and wooden leg behind him. These, 
which were found upon clearing out the apartments, unravelled 
the whole mystery of the afiair, and showed that it had been all 
a trick ; nor was the lady long at a loss for the author of it (for 
the first mention of the discovery had put an end to her fits of fear 
and devotion), the pains he had often taken to persuade her against 
these meetings on this particular day, and the zeal he showed 
in the late affair, convinced her it was all transacted by him. This 
threw her into the most violent rage against him ; but as it waa 
impossible to prove, and he denied the fact when charged with it, 
she could have no other satisfaction of him than that of disappoint- 
ing his design, by returning to her former practice with double 
eagerness, and aggravating the scandal of it by every act of irreligion 
and profaneness that she could devise, in which hopeful course she 
still persists. 

As for the male part of the company who had so manfully leaped 
out of the windows, and made their escape through the cold and 
dirt of the night ; some of them caught cold that cost them their 
noses, and one or two lost their lives in duels, which they fought 
in vindication of their characters from so scandalous an aspersion, 
for it was thought proper to deny the whole story. 



CHAPTER XXXVin 

CONTINUED : MATEBNAL TENDERNESS OF AN TTNCOMMON KIND 

A MOST MAONinCENT WEDDING DISAPPOINTED BY AN tTNHAPPY 
mSTANCH OF FEMALE FBAILTY — ^A NEW METHOD OF CALCULATING 
GENERAL OPINION — AN UNLUCKY ACCIDENT CHANGES A SCENE OF 
JOY INTO OBIEF, AND AFFORDS A USEFUL CAUTION TO OLD AGE 
AND INFIRMITY, TO GUIDE THBIE STEPS WITH PROPER CARE — A 
DRAWN BATTLE — AN INSTANCE OF FELL EBVBNGB MAKES ROOM 
FOB A STRANGER, VTHO RESTORES GENERAL HARMONY 

Nor is she content with offering this flagrant insult to religion 
and law ; the tenderest feelings of nature are also wantonly made 
the objects of her grossest ridicule ; in the absurdity of which, 
to show her matrimonial power in its utmost plenitude, she obliges 
her passive mate to bear his foolish part, and sacrifice common 
sense, as he had before done conscience, to her capricious tyranny. 



120 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

As she has no children, upon whom she can display maternal 
■care and love, she affects holding the important and inexpressible 
tenderness and duty of these in the lowest contempt ; and to show 
this in the most glaring colours, prostitutes them upon some in- 
significant animal, in all the solemn pomp and parade of ceremony, 
usual on such occasions, to make the ridicule more striking. 

The present worthy object of her affection was an owl, which 
she caresses and treats with the endearments of a darling child, 
calling it the fondest names, talking to it for hours together every 
Sunday morning, and entertaining her most intimate acquaintances 
with a particular detail of its most engaging qualities and sensible 
actions. Nor does her humour stop here ; she dresses her favourite 
in all the fantastic extravagance of the mode, makes a compli- 
mentary inquiry after its health, part of the ceremonial of her 
acquaintance, and celebrates the anniversary of its birth, with 
the expensive magnificence of a public entertainment, when the 
dear creature is produced with all the ceremony and state of a 
royal babe, to receive the praise and caresses of the company ; 
And, to finish the farce, her husband is obliged to act his part, 
and join with her in receiving the congratulations paid upon the 
happy occasion. 

Perhaps you will imagine that such an unaccountable caprice 
is meant to expose the servility of complaisance, and to show to 
what a height it is capable of being straiued, to gratify the humours 
of the rich. Such a conclusion is not unnatural, nor the general 
satire implied in it unjust ; but here in respect to her it does not 
hold, for she has no such aim in view, nor thinks of an3rthing beyond 
the immediate gratification of her own whim ; on the contrary, 
she would be as ready to pay the same compliment to any of her 
acquaintance, if they required it ; indeed the share she makes her 
iusband take in the ceremony, bears a different construction, 
and is plainly seen to be designed as a most severe and insolent 
ridicule upon him, as it is no secret that she imputes her want of 
children to his fault : a charge, which his blind submission to her 
will, makes not improbable. 

But this is not the first instance of the extravagance of her humour, 
nor he the only one who has been made the object of public ridicule 
by it, though he has never missed of his share. 

Before her present favourite, a cat engrossed her fondness in as 
eminent a degree, but unhappily lost that and her life together by 
a slip of female frailty : for slighting the example of her mistress's 
chastity, she had taken an opportunity to carry on an intrigue 
with a cat in the neighbourhood, whom she used to meet in the 
evenings upon the leads of the house, while her mistress was abroad, 
and her own attendants engaged in parties of pleasure below stairs. 

This unfortunately broke through all her mistress's great designs, 
who was just then in treaty for a marriage between her and the 
male favourite of a lady of quality in Paris, the preliminaries of 
which were all settled, and nothing remaining but to determine 
where the wedding should be celebrated ; she, for the honour of 
her sex, demanded that the gallant should wait upon his mistress. 
And the other insisting upon the example of all royal marriages. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 121 

■where the bride goes to the bridegroom ; a reason so just, that the 
heroine of our tale disputed it only for form's sake, and was pre- 
paring to set out for Paris, with her husband and a grand retinue, 
to solemnize the wedding, as soon as the proxy, which had been 
proposed to be sent by the other party, should arrive. 

Upon the first discovery of it, therefore, by apparent symptoms 
of the frail one's pregnancy, the whole house was in an uproar, 
«very servant turned off, and a council of her most intimate friends 
■directly summoned, to consider what was to be done in such an 
emergency, and how the treaty of marriage could be broken off, 
without giving ofienoe to the other parties, or exposing her own 
■disgrace. After much and mature deliberation, it was resolved to 
send an express immediately to Paris, to prevent the proxy's setting 
out, and to apologize for breaking off the marriage, on account 
of a pre-contract, into which Madam Grimalkin had inconsiderately 
■entered, without the laiowledge of her mistress ; and to make this 
■embassy the more respected and effectual, the person thought 
most proper to be sent upon it was her husband, who accordingly 
was obliged to set out on his journey directly, but was rescued 
from the ridicule of it by a fit of the gout, which arrested him at hia 
first stage ; so that he was forced to transfer the honour of the 
employment to his gentlemaji, who acquitted himself of it with great 
reputation. 

But this was not the only distress in which this unfortunate 
misbehaviour of the favourite involved her mistress. In the first 
transports of her rage, she had ordered her to be taken out of her 
presence, and publicly avowed that she would never see her more : 
but when her resentment cooled a little, her former fondness returned, 
and she could not bear the thought of abandoning her, for a first 
fault, to the low life of a common cat, or depriving herseU of the 
pleasure she enjoyed in her company. But the difficulty was how 
to receive her again into favour, consistently with the purity of 
her own character, and without seeming, in some measure, to 
countenance the incontinenoy she had been guilty of by such 
lenity. While she was in this perplexity between delicacy and 
love, her instructor in the important science of gaming most luckily 
happened to pay her a morning visit, to give her a lecture and 
inform her of some new discoveries he had made in his mysterious 
art. As, she knew that he was a nice casuist, the moment he ap- 
proached her toilet, she informed him of the whole affair, and 
■desired his advice. 

After taking some time to deliberate upon the case : ' Madam ', 
•said the sage, shaking his hoary head, and extending the forefinger 
of his right hand, ' this is a very difficult point to decide ; however, 
I have calculated the chances on each side, and have foimd that 
the odds are as seven, one-fourth, and two-fifteenths to five, nearly 
(for it would be too great a trouble for you to examine the proof 
of it in more minute fractions) in favour of your receiving the offender 
into your good graces again, which I prove thus : all the ladies 
in the world are liable to some failing or other ; now, as from weak- 
ness of constitution, derived from the goodness of their families, 
or brought on by their own intense application to the pleasures of 



122 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

polite life, there are not above five who are guilty of this particular 
foible (I mean among people of fashion, such as you converse 
with) to eight who are not, it is evident that there will be almost 
eight who vidll not condemn your conduct, for five who will ; it 
being the general maxim always to exclaim against the faults of 
which we are guilty ourselves, to deceive the generality of the 
world, and make an appearance of our being innocent of them. 
If this reasoning does not appear plain, I will draw it out at length, 
and adapt the calculations to the general rules of whist, so that 
they may be proved by the cards, as the method most familiar 
to you, to satisfy your own scruples, and answer the objections 
of your friends ; for ladies cannot be too circumspect in affairs 
of this kind, where so deep a stake is played for. The scheme 
will not take up much time to draw, nor be attended with much 
expense, not above twenty pieces, or some such trifle ; for you 
know I never am in the least unreasonable with my friends '. 

This judicious solution was so agreeable to her that she saw the 
justice of it directly, and embraced it without a moment's delay, 
ordering the poor delinquent to be immediately brought to her, 
and, after a little gentle chiding, almost killing it with her caresses. 
As to the sage casuist, she thanked him for his decision, and, having 
received his lecture, desired him to reduce his arguments into the 
form he proposed, as soon as he pleased, as she never had any ob- 
jection to his demands, and then dispatched cards immediately 
to all her acquaintances, to inform them of the reconciliation, 
and invite them to an entertainment which she gave upon the 
happy occasion. 

Accordingly, they all attended, and poured out their compli- 
ments in the most polite profusion ; but, in the height of their 
joy, an unfortunate accident happened, that changed their con- 
gratulations into condolence. 

As the dear creature was handed about to receive the caresses 
of the company, an elderly gentlewoman, to show her extreme 
fondness for it, by keeping it as long as she could upon her bosom, 
would needs carry it herself to a lady of quality, who sat on the 
other side of the room, and desired to have it brought to her ; but, 
striving to be more alert than her paralytic tottering would permit, 
she fell at her length upon the floor and almost crushed the poor 
animal to death. 

You may conceive what a confusion this threw the whole com- 
pany into : the cat screamed, the old lady roared, and the voice 
of all present echoed a general exclamation ; and, to heighten the 
distress, they all got up at once, and, rushing together to raise the 
falling pair, hindered each other so, that they lay struggling in no 
very agreeable situation or decent posture, on the floor ; for the 
oat, enraged at the injury she had received, exerted all her strength 
for revenge, and fixed her claws in the face and neck of her sup- 
posed enemy, growling with the most envenomed spite, which 
made the innocent author of her disaster roar, kick, and sprawl 
with all her might, as she was unable to disengage herself from the 
claws of her furious adversary, or even rise from the ground where 
she lay. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 123^ 

At length, some of the company made a shift to raise and part 
the combatants, when the poor gentlewoman was hurried to her 
chair, with her face and neck aU in a stream of blood, the attention 
of the company being entirely taken up with the fright of the lady 
of the house for the danger of her favourite. 

The spirit and strength which she had shown in revenge of the 
mjury she had received, was some consolation to her mistress, as- 
it seemed to show that she could not have been very much hurt ; 
but one of the company, happening to mention her condition, 
renewed her fright, and made her resolve instantly to send for one 
of the most eminent male practitioners of the obstetric art, to 
inquire into the circumstances of her case, and administer any 
assistance that might be necessary upon the unhappy occasion. 

Accordingly, a servant was instantly dispatched in the mistress's 
name to the doctor, who attended, without a moment's delay, 
imagining, from the urgency of the message, that some lady of 
distinction might be taken ill in her house, as he knew the lady 
herself had no occasion for him, and the footman could give him 
no further information than that some accident had happened in 
the company, of which there was the usual crowd. As soon as he 
arrived, he was shown directly into the drawing-room, whither the 
lady, with a few select friends, had retired, where one of them 
leading him up to her, and lifting up a handkerchief, that covered 
the poor dear creature, in her lap, opened the case to him, for the 
mistress's grief was so great, that she was not able to speak. 

It is impossible to describe the rage into which this threw the 
doctor. He looked upon it as an insult, not to be forgiven ; and, 
as he could not wreak his resentment upon ladies, by any act of 
violence upon their persons, resolved to show it by his treatment 
of the creature, for which they implored his assistance. Accord- 
ingly, he stooped very gravely, and taking it out of the mistress's 
lap, laid it on the ground, and setting his heel upon its head, crushed 
it to death before any one had time to interpose in its behalf. Then, 
turning to the lady, whose astonishment was so great that 
she had not power to speak, ' There, madam ! ' said he, ' your 
favourite is delivered from all danger of abortion ; but take care 
how you provoke another time the resentment of a man whom 
nobody provokes with impunity '. Saying this, he turned about 
and marched away, leaving the whole company, and particularly 
the mistress of the innocent victim of his vengeance, in a condition 
not to be expressed. She wept, beat her breast, stamped with her 
feet upon the floor, and vowed the bitterest vengeance. Nor is it 
easy to say how far her passion might have transported her, had 
not a gentleman entered the room that very moment with a young 
owl in his hand, which he had taken out of the nest that morning. 

The sovereign remedy for a woman's grief, fqr the loss of any 
favourite, wheth'T a eat, a sparrow, or a husband, is a new one. 
The sight of the »wl instantly struck her ; it had such a gravity 
and wisdom in its looks, that she resolved to make it the coiifidant 
of aU her secrets, and the only counsellor from whom she would 
take advice that should contradict her inclinations. Accordingly, 
poor Grimalkin waa ordered to be taken away, and the new favourite 



124 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

received in her place. This restored the general harmony and 
good humour, and the entertainment that was designed to celebrate 
Mrs Puss's restoration to her mistress's bosom, served for the recep- 
tion of the stranger. However, though a new favourite consoled 
the mistress for the loss of the former, she did not neglect to pay 
a proper respect to its remains. The body was carefully laid up 
till next morning, when an eminent undertaker was sent for, and 
orders given for her decent interment. 



CHAPTER XXXIX 

MORE HAPPY FBtrlTS OF FEMALE GOVERNMENT — THE HISTORY OF 
AN EMINENT PATRONESS OF THE POLITE AETS — HER PECTILIAE 
METHOD OF SHOWING A DISHNGUISHED TASTE AND JUDGMENT — 
AN EXTRAORDINARY CHARGE IN A BILL AT AM INN 

Turn your eye now to the other side, and observe that super- 
annuated figure of foppery at the upper end of the table, who 
plumes himself like a peacock upon the gaudiness of his dress, and 
gives his contribution with an ostentatious and affected dignity 
that would disgrace a prince. He is another instance of the happy 
fruits of woman's government. With all the importance he assumes 
here, in his own house he is a perfect cipher, of no consequence in 
himself, but, as he adds to that of his wife. 

So insignificant a character may be thought incapable of afiFording 
either instruction or improvement sufficient to reward the trouble 
of displaying it ; but then it introduces another, to which it serves 
as a shade to show the glaring colours of it ia a proper light, and 
illustrate the vanity, as the former did the vice, of female caprice 
and ambition. 

He had the solid advantage of entering into life with a very 
affluent fortune ; but instead of making it a means of happiness to 
himself, and benefit to society, by a rational and benevolent use, 
to gratify the most absurd avarice, he gave up every enjoyment 
of it, by marrying an heiress, the known vanity, imperiousness, 
and extravagancy of whose temper so far over-balanced the great- 
ness of her wealth, that no man of reason or spirit, who had any 
-o'iher possible way of earning a morsel of bread, would have linked 
his fate to hers. 

The consequence was just what he deserved. The moment he 
became her husband, she assumed the most absolute authority 
over him and all he possessed, as if the words of their connection 
had been inverted, and he had made the covenant of duty and 
obedience to her, and instantly set up for the patroness of merit 
in the fine arts and sciences, to show her superiority of genius over 
the rest of her sex. 

Such an ambition directly marked her out for a bubble to all the 
needy, sharping adventurers, who, under the pretence of such 
merits, fly like locusts to this fantastic people from every part of 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 125- 

the globe, in swarms that literally devour the fruits of the land in 
such a manner as to starve the natives who are engaged in the same 
pursuits, and thereby discourage and prevent the rising to that 
excellence, the want of which is objected to them. For though 
there may not perhaps be any natural difference between the sexes^ 
in the abilities of mind necessary to form a proper judgment of 
any science, yet the female labours under such disadvantages from 
a wrong education, that it is next to impossible for a woman to- 
exert the faculties of reason in any distinguished degree ; the time 
when the seeds of knowledge should be sown being devoted to- 
trifies or absurdities, that deserve a worse name, which by these 
means take such possession of the mind as to influence the conduct 
of the whole life. Some rare instances indeed there are, of women 
who break through this oppression and rise above the prejudices 
of such an education to a degree of eminence equal to the foremost 
of the other sex. But this requires such uncommon strength of 
genius, as is indulged to a very few, and was by no means the lot 
of this person, all her pretensions to taste and judgment being 
founded on her ability to reward them liberally in others. But 
even in this, her injudicious vanity has always marred the good 
effects of her generosity and wealth, for, not being able herself to- 
discern real merit, and disdaining to follow the opinions of others 
for fear of passing unnoticed among the crowd, she blundered upon 
the most unlucky method of distinguishing herself that ever entered 
into a human head ; for, as if her opinion waa of more weight than 
that of all the world beside, she sets up to contradict the voice of 
the public, and always patronizes those whom they reject and 
decry. 

Such a conduct, as I said, naturally lays her open to the imposi- 
tions of flattery and fraud. Though she professes a taste for all 
the finer arts, music is the particular object of her favour and 
encouragement. As soon as a new performer arrives, if he is ii 
distress, as is almost always the case, he immediately waits upon 
this lady to implore her patronage. This necessarily introduce 
a display of his abilities, which she never fails to reward muni- 
ficently, and profess her approbation of, but cautiously, and in 
general terms only, that she may retract it afterwards, should the 
public unluckily join with her, for her opinion is always in the 
opposite scale to that of the rest of the world. But if he is dis- 
approved, she takes him under her immediate protection ; she 
invites him constantly to her table ; she supplies him with money, 
with the most boundless profusion, and makes parties among that- 
crowd of company which her wealth and turn for expensive pleasure 
constantly collect about her, to support him against the favourites- 
of the public. And to show that she does this merely from a spirit 
of contradiction, should the most eminent of these fall off, or be 
eclipsed by the superior merit of a rival, she instantly forgets the- 
animosities with which she pursued his success, and receives him 
into her protection and patronage, admiring his grossest faults, 
and praising the very defects she decried before ; while her gentle 
mate is obliged to submit to this dissipation of his darling wealth, 
and to be the humble echo of her opinions, in all their various: 



126 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

•changes, without daring to interpose a word in vindication of his 
•own judgment or authority, but thinking himself happy in being 
permitted to make use of the pittances of his fortune, which he thus 
contributes to public charities, to give him the opportunity of 
assuming the momentary consequence you see. 

The many impositions which she has suffered from those rapacious 
sycophants, would be sufficient to make any person see the folly 
■of such a conduct, who had not wilfully resolved against conviction. 
I shall just mention one instance, for the grossness and singularity 
of it, and so conclude the disagreeable representation. 

To show her elegant taste in this most pleasing entertainment, 
and raise an opinion of her importance in the polite world, among 
her tenants and neighbours in the country, whither she retires in 
the summer, she always takes with her some of her favourite per- 
formers, who cannot fail to please persons who never had an oppor- 
tunity of hearing any better, and sometimes even will condescend, 
upon very particular occasions, as when she gives public entertajn- 
ments, to comply so far with the taste of others, as to send for some 
of those who are the highest in general repute, though her country- 
seat is almost at the extremity of the kingdom, which makes the 
expense of such a compliment very considerable ; for she defrays 
all the charges of travelling, besides giving a very genteel gratification 
for the trouble. 

Upon an occasion of this kind, some little time since, she sent 
for a musician of note to conduct a concert, which she designed to 
give her neighbours, in the highest taste. The man, finding he had 
nothing to pay, an unlimited credit being established for him at 
every stage upon the road, travelled down in the highest luxury 
to her house, where his performance was also rewarded with a very 
handsome present. But, whether he thought it imequal to his 
merit and trouble, or imagining that he should never be sent for 
thither again, resolved to make the most of the present oppor- 
tunity. Upon his return, he took up money at every inn he stopped 
at on the road, upon the credit given him, and, where he lay, con- 
stantly prevailed upon one of the compliant females who attended 
■to sleep with him for a considerable gratification, which he also 
ordered to be charged to the bill, and left for this lady to pay. 

Such an insult might be thought to merit her resentment ; but 
as the punishing of it would open scenes which must lay her under 
a necessity of discontinuing her favourite practice of sending for 
-such persons, and expose her extravagance and taste to public 
ridicule and censure, she thought proper to overlook it as unnoticed, 
and pay the bills, without seeming to examine into the particulars 
•of them. And to prevent the story's receiving credit, should it 
happen to be made known, continued to countenance the man, 
and even invited him into the country with her the next summer, 
when he played her many tricks of the same kind, finding he escaped 
■so easy after tliis. 

I have dealt so long upon the characters of this and the former 
lady, to save myself trouble upon other occasions, as their actions 
afford a general representation of female life. I mean the life of 
4hose females who, looking upon themselves as raised above the 



ADVENTURES OF A OVINE A 127 

rest of their sex by rank or fortune, think it necessary to show 
their superiority by breaking through all the rules which reason 
and religion have established for their conduct. 

How prevailing the force of such examples the instances just 
given sufficiently show. Indeed, such is the implicit adoration 
paid to wealth, such is the reigning passion for joining in what ia 
called good company, and partaking of their luxurious entertain- 
ments that, let the rich and great propose any folly and vice, how- 
ever gross and absurd, as the means of introduction to their tables 
and parties of pleasure, they will be sure of finding persons enough 
to comply with their humours. These instances are taken from 
the most licentious caprices and absurd vanity of this ambition. 
The former admit of no excuse, and though the latter may be less 
blamable in themselves, and even bear a kind of resemblance to 
virtue in many cases, the success is not much better, nor ever 
sufficient to justify this ambition in females to quit the subordinate 
sphere allotted them by nature, and strive to make a figure in the 
busier and more extensive province of man. 

Nor is this the only useful instruction that may be drawn from 
a display of these characters. It shows also the ridiculous and 
unhappy situation into which man falls when he tamely gives up 
the reins put into his hands by Providence, and submits to the 
government of a woman, whom he was born to command. 



CHAPTER XL 

AN IBKEMBDIABLiB: DEFECT IN HDMAN POLICY — THE HISTOEy OB' A 
MOST EMINENT PERSONAGE — A NEW WAY OP PAYING THE DEBTS 
OF GDABDIANSHtP — A. DATJQHTBB's DI30BBDIENOE IN KEFUSING 
TO COMPLY WITH MORE THAN PATERNAL LOVE — THE HERO OF THE 
TALE EXTRACTS PROFIT FROM CHARITY, AND ASSERTS THE RIGHTS 
OF AGENCY IN DEFIANCE OF PXTBLIC OPINION AND SHAME 

Take notice of the person immediately below him, whom I have 
just given you an account of. By his large athletic make, nature 
seemed to design him for some of the most laborious employments 
in life ; but his genius led him to other pursmts, and made fiim 
depend upon the sharpness of his mind, rather than the strength of 
his body, for his support and advancement in the world. 

The depravity of man makes many employments necessary in a 
community for public safety and advantage, the execution of which 
is attended with so many circumstances of horror in the punish- 
ment of unhappy delinquents, that no man, who is not destitute 
of that sympathetic tenderness which is the highest honour of his 
nature, can bear to undertake them. This throws them upon 
persons, speculatively speaking, the most unfit for such offices 
whose poverty obliges them to practise every iniquity of the pro- 
fession into which they were first initiated by vice, and whose hearts 
are hardened by habit, against every sentiment of virtue and 



128 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

honour, every finer feeling of nature. Thus the hangman, whose 
crimes first reduced him to take up the horrid trade, continues it 
from distress, and puts to death wretched offenders, for facts which 
he is hourly guilty of himself, without compassion or remorse till 
he is detected, and suffers the same punishment from another hand. 
But this is one of those defects of human policy which no human 
heart can remedy. 

In an employment not very dissimilar in its nature, though 
dignified by a less opprobrious name, has this person displayed his 
abilities for many years, to the astonishment of all who have been 
witnesses of his exploits. There is a mystery in such scenes, too 
horrid for representation ; I shall therefore pass them over, and 
barely relate a few anecdotes of his private life, which will suffi- 
ciently enable you to form a judgment of his whole character. 

A man who, from one of the poorest employments by which a 
wretched life can be honestly sustained, came unexpectedly to the 
possession of a considerable fortune by the death of a relation, 
who would have suffered him to perish for want of a morsel of 
bread, had some way conceived such a confidence in this person, 
that upon his own death, in a very little time after his elevation, 
he entrusted his orphan daughter to his care, together with what 
he had been able to save for her during his short possession of hia 
estate, the inheritance of it passing away, for want of his having 
male issue, to another branch of the family. 

During the minority of his ward, he took care to educate her 
according to the direction of her father, in a decent but frugal 
manner, as the fortune she had a right to expect was not sufficient 
to place her above the necessity of industry and economy; but 
upon her coming of age, he was obliged to act another part. He 
had spent the greatest part of her fortune in his pleasures, for,, 
strange to think, even he had a passion for the pleasures of polite 
life, and was admitted into the genteelest company, to enjoy them, 
without any inquiry into his character or station, while he was able 
to bear the expense. Such a situation must have been distressing 
to any other man, but the business of his profession soon suggested 
a method of disengaging himself, which his extensive principles- 
made no objection to his putting in practice. 

On the day before she was to receive from him the fortune 
which was the whole foundation of her future hopes in life, he- 
showed no signs of uneasiness, but confidently gave her notice that 
he designed to pay her the moment she was entitled to receive it, 
and even appointed the other trustees of the will to meet at his- 
house and be witnesses to his punctual execution of his trust. Such 
a conduct naturally gave satisfaction to every person concerned, 
and entirely removed some apprehension which they had entertained 
before. But they soon found reason to change their sentiments 
again, for, that very evening he took an occasion to go through a bye- 
street, just after it became dark, and when he thought himself in no 
danger of being taken notice of, where he rolled himself in the kennel, 
battered his head against the stones, as if he had received several 
severe strokes, and scattered some paper he had in his pocket for 
that purpose about the streets ; and then, in that abased appearance 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 12» 

and -with all the symptoms of afiright and despair in his looks, 
ran into a neighbouring coffee-house, where he told the company 
that he had been just knocked down and robbed of a considerable 
sum of money, which he was to pay the next day. Some of them 
instantly went to the place in which he said this had happened, 
where they found his hat and wig, and the papers he had left for 
them, which at first gained credit to the story. But when the 
general tenor of his character, and the circumstances of his being' 
to pay that sum the nest day, came to be considered, the whole 
artifice was seen through, especially as he never offered to prove 
where he had received the money, nor gave any reason for his- 
carrying such a sum about him, the very bulk and weight of which 
(for he said it was all in specie to prevent too particular an inquiry 
about bank-notes) must have been a trouble and incumbrance to 
him, but barely alleged that he had always kept the money by him 
in cash, ever since he had received it ; and if any one expressed the 
least doubt of what he said, or desired to have these particulars 
better explained, he directly charged them with making insinuations 
injurious to his character and credit, which he threatened to vindicate 
by law. 

Such a menace from such a man was not ineffectual ! The in- 
jured lady was absolutely deprived of every means of doing herself 
justice, and, as the poor are ever friendless, no unconcerned person 
cared to enter into a dispute with one of his known experience, 
and who was acquainted with methods of putting his menaces into 
execution, which the most innocent might not find it easy to guard 
against. Besides, it was universally and well known, that even 
if the whole afiair could be detected, he was not able to make satis- 
faction. Thus every circumstance concurred to give success to 
his scheme, though not quite so smoothly as he could wish, and the 
poor young lady, having no redress, was obhged to return to the 
low state from which she had so lately been raised, and in which 
she still lives a lite of servitude ; happy had she never been flattered 
with better hopes. 

But though he could escape the reach of man. Divine Justice 
was not to be defeated so. Whose vengeance attacked him in so 
signal a manner, as plainly showed the just retaliation of the im- 
erring hand of Heaven. 

Seared as his heart must be by such a Hfe, to the more general 
feelings of humanity, nature was not quite debauched, and he felt 
the tenderness and fond anxiety of paternal love in all its force 
for an only daughter, on whose education, in all the polite accom- 
plishments of the more exalted ranks of life, he spared neither pains 
nor expense, supporting and adorning her in the genteelest manner, 
and taking evident delight in lavishing, on such uses, all that he 
could acquire by every possible means. 

Such a conduct, though carried to an excess, had something so- 
amiable in it that, in some measure, it palliated the blacker parts- 
of his character, and even weakened the credit of many of the 
stories told of him. But just as he was beginning to enjoy the fruits- 
of his care, by seeing his daughter's eminence in the accomplish, 
ments he had taken such pains to teach universally acknowledged. 



130 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

an event happened, that not only deprived him of that pleasure, 
but also turned the merit of all his former fondness into the 
foulest reproach. 

His daughter was observed for some time to bear the appearance 
of the most poignant distress. Whenever she was asked the cause 
of it by any of her friends, she would melt into a flood of tears, nor 
would give any other answer than that she was the most miserable 
of human beings. This raised a variety of conjectures, some of 
which were far from being advantageous to her ; but at length the 
secret was revealed. She flew one day, in the utmost agony of 
•distress, to a lady of her acquaintance, who had seemed to show 
the liveliest sense of her grief, and begged her protection from the 
cruelty of her father, which, she said, was too great to be borne, 
ever since she bad refused to gratify an impious passion which he 
had long entertained for her, and which had been the motive of all 
his care and expense in her education. 

Such stories are so shocking to human nature, that they are 
generally doubted ; but his character gave such weight to any 
charge against him, that this was imiversally believed. At first 
he made some efforts to induce his daughter to return to him, but 
she was deaf to his solicitations, and, being destitute of every other 
means of support, threw herself upon the favour of the public, 
and lives by her skill in the accomplishments which he took so 
much pains to have her taught. This was not only a severe mortifi- 
cation to his pride, but also made him be looked upon with such horror 
and detestation, that he has been ever since secluded from the 
society of every person of virtue or reputation. 

I see you wonder at the inconsistency of such a person's appearing 
in the situation you see him at present, contributing to a public 
charity, for the relief of the calamities of the poor. To one who can 
look no farther into man than as he appears at the present moment, 
such a conduct justly appears imaccoun table ; but consider that 
these are the only places now open for him to tth't with persona of 
character and fortune ; for institutions of this kind make no dis- 
tinctions of persons, but receive, indiscriminately, the benefactions 
of all who ofier. Besides, a genius so ready as his can turn every- 
thing to advantage, and extract profit even from giving charity. 
One instance of this kind of address will prove the justice of 
this reflection and show, that in every action of his life, he really 
preserves a consistency of character. 

Some years ago, the sea broke over its banks in a distant part of 
the kingdom, and not only laid the country waste for a great extent, 
but also threatened the ruin of the whole, if some means were not 
immediately applied to put a stop to it. Such an exigence reqiiired 
instant care. The government sent workmen directly to repair 
the breach, who were obliged to struggle with all the severities of 
the season in a most inhospitable climate, to effect their work, 
it being in the depth of winter, and the danger admitting of no 
delay. 

So severe a service naturally excited the compassion of this 
people, the most humane and generous under heaven. Accord- 
in;jly, a public subscription was opened to buy warm clothing for 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 131 

the labourers thus employed for the advantage of the public, which 
met -with such general approbation, that a fund, suflaoient for the 
purpose, was immediately raised. This person, from the reason 
hinted above, was one of the first subscribers, and appeared most 
active in promoting the scheme, ofEering frequently to undertake 
the most troublesome part of the conduct of it. But some of them 
wio were acquainted with his character, absolutely refused to let 
him interfere in any manner that should give him the least power 
over the fund. However, as they did not think proper to make the 
motives of this caution public, he took an opportunity one day, 
when they were indispensably obliged to be absent, to renew Ms 
ofEer, which his assiduity and success in soliciting subscriptions gave 
such weight to that it was received, and he was appointed to pur- 
chase and send down some particular articles that appeared to be 
immediately wanted, to pay for which, five hundred pounds were 
directly given into his hancfe. 

This was what he had all along laboured for. Accordingly, as 
soon as he received the money, he remitted of his assiduity, and 
came no more to their meetings, never taking the least care about 
the things, for the purchase of which it had been given to him. 
So flagrant an act of injustice raised the resentment of every one 
concerned ; but that he was prepared for, and despised ; and, 
when they required him to return the money, he gave them a bill 
for his own trouble, in wMch he charged every step he had ever 
gone, to solicit and promote the subscription, and fees of agency 
for every shilling he had received and paid in the course of it, by 
which meajis he greatly overbalanced their demand. 

Barefaced as such an imposition was, they had no redress, for he 
had carefully made his charge, according to the rates of his pro- 
fession ; and, though it had been always the intention of every one 
to bestow their labour as well as their money, without any lucrative 
view of return, yet, as he had never entered into an actual engage- 
ment to that effect, there was now no possibility of defeating his 
charge. 

Such an attempt can never be made with success a second time, 
as the first instance raises a general alarm. However, he still 
persists to join in everything of the kind that is proposed, in hopes 
of seizing some such lucky opportunity as he did before. But it 
is easy to foresee he will be disappointed, for though he exerts 
himself so strenuously, and takes upon him to offer his advice and 
direction, as you see, the prejudice against him is so strong, that 
everything he says is suspected of design, everything he proposes 
rejected, even without examining. Nay, so strong is the detestation 
of him grown, since this affair of his daughter, that some societies 
have refused him admission, and others even gone so far as to expel 
him, in the most ignominious manner, from among them. 



132 ADVENTUBE3 OF A GUINEA 



CHAPTER XLI 

THE EBPBESENTATION CONOLTJDBD WITH XS EMINENT MAN-IDDWITE 
— HIS MOTIVES FOB TAKING UP THAT PROFESSION, WITH SOME 
UNFORTTTNATB ANECDOTES OP HIS PRACTICE 

I SHALL now present you with a character, the folly of which is * 
shade to its virtues, and shows them through a medium of ridicule 
and contempt, more humbling to human vanity than the most 
atrocious vice. 

Observe that skeleton, that figure of famine, who, even after a 
feast, looks as if he had fasted for a month, and was just ready to 
perish for want. That is another of the principal promoters, and 
indeed supporters of public charity, from the best motives, his 
benefactions always flowing from the benevolence of his heart, 
though too often qualified in the manner by circumstances that 
throw both the gift and giver into ridicule. 

For such is the vehemence of his temper that, not satisfied with 
providing for the wants of the poor, he will see that the supplies 
which he bestows are applied in the manner he directs, which 
introduces him too familiarly into the domestic distresses of the 
unJiappy, many of whom would rather perish for want than make 
the circumstances of their wants known. Nor is his fortune only 
devoted to those uses ; his very personal service is always ready, 
particularly in some oases where, unfortunately, a motive of a 
different nature from his real one is liable to be mistaken for it, by 
the malignant temper of the times. 

There is no situation of human distress that calls so strongly 
for compassion and relief as child-birth. How severe, then, must 
the case of those unhappy creatures be, who are left to struggle 
through such pangs unassisted, unprovided with any of the com- 
forts so necessary to support Nature in such a conflict. 

A sense of this struck his humane heart. He felt the distress, 
and Uberally supplied the relief. Well had he stopped here ! But 
fearing that such relief should be misappUed or insufficient, he 
would attend himself, to see that nothing was wanted ; and at 
length, to make his assistance complete, learned the obstetric art, 
and now necessarily has more business in it, as he pays for being 
employed, by the benefactions he bestows, than any one member 
of the profession. 

Laudable as this care and the motives of it are, it would have 
been much better had not the sanguineness of his temper hurried 
him so far, had he been content to supply their wants, and let 
others, whose profession it more immediately is, administer relief. 
For now, what a field does it open for iU-natured ridicule to see a 
man of his consequence descend to ofiSces, in the ordinary accepta- 
tion of the world, so far beneath him. How easy it is to say, how 
easy to be believed, that idle curiosity, or some grosser motive, 
prompts to such uncommon assiduity. 

Nor is the evil of this indiscretion confined to him alone ; it 
reflects a kind of ridicule upon the very virtue it would serve, and 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 133 

makes less sanguine minds refrain from the good, for fear they should 
■also share in the reproach. For it is not sufficient for a man to 
have the testimony of his ovm conscience for the rectitude of his 
intentions ; there is also a debt of appearance due to the public 
io avoid ofience, and inculcate virtue by example. One instance 
will illustrate this, and show the inconveniences of his inconsiderate 
zeal. 

A poor woman applied to him for relief some time before the 
moment. According to his custom, he supplied her necessities 
and took a direction where to call and see her. The woman, either 
mistaken herself, or tempted by distress to deceive him, told him 
a. wrong time, which made him come too soon, and, as he always 
made her some charitable present whenever he came, she still found 
some complaints to induce him to repeat his visits. 

At length the frequency of hia coming took the notice of the alley 
in which she Uved, who could not conceive any honest business 
that a gentleman of his fine appearance could have with such a 
poor woman, in so obscure a place, and, as such remarks are always 
improved, some friend hinted to the woman's husband, a labouring 
man, who was at his work all day, and therefore could not be wit- 
ness of his disgrace, that his wife had many improper visitors come 
to her, and must certainly have taken to bad courses, to encourage 
such doings. 

The cuckold in imagination went directly home in the greatest 
rage at his dishonour, but the name of the visitor, and an assurance 
that there came no other, soon pacified him, especially as a ready 
thought struck him that he might turn the good man's humanity 
to an advantage of a nature very different from what he had de- 
signed ; for the fellow was well supplied with what is called mother 
wit, which want had sharpened, and freed from every restraint 
of honesty. He therefore sullenly told his wife that it might be 
so as she said, but he would have a better proof than her word for 
it, and therefore she must let him see her visitor the next time he 
came, and, as she valued her life, assent to everything which he, 
her husband, should do or say. 

The readiness of her consent encouraged him to open his design 
to her, which her nuptial obedience and hopes of gain made her 
not only give in to, but she also improved the scheme to a certainty 
■of success. 

The husband accordingly, having prepared some of his associates, 
placed them properly the next time the gentleman went to visit 
his wife, who immediately, upon his coming into the room, began 
to cry out and implore his assistance. 

Though the business came a little inconveniently upon him 
as he was full dressed, he would not desert her in her distress, but 
directly set about, giving her the necessary assistance, in the hurry 
of which some unlucky stoop burst the string that tied his breeches 
behind, and down they fell about his heels. 

Though this disaster disconcerted him a good deal, the cries of 
his patient would not give him time to adjust himself ; but he waa 
proceeding in his business with the most anxious assiduity, when in 
rushed the husband with his gang, and rewarded his care with a 



134 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

stroke that felled him, fettered aa he was in hia breeches to the 
ground. 

The scene was now changed ! The woman, no longer in labour, 
cried only for revenge on the baae man who had attempted her 
virtue, as the witnesses present attested they had heard her before, 
and now caught him in the very fact, which the posture he was in, 
and, above all, the circumstance of his breechea, too strongly con- 
firmed to the crowd whom the noise had drawn together. 

Terrified almost to death at the threats of the enraged husband, 
who could hardly be held from taking personal vengeance that 
very moment, and sensible of the consequence should public fame 
catch hold of such a tale, the poor criminal threw himself on his 
knees, and, convinced that all vindication of his innocence would 
be in vain, besought only a composition for his offence. 

This was just what the parties wanted ; but still, to increase his 
terrors, and enhance the price of his escape, such difficulties were 
raised, as made him glad to yield to any terms they could impose ; 
and, accordingly, he not only purged himself of having done any 
actual dishonour to her husband, for the attention they would 
not permit him to controvert, but also made satisfaction to his 
resentment for the attempt, with one hundred pounds, for which, 
as he had not a sum immediately about him, he gave a draught 
on his banker, and waited in duress, till the arrival of it released 
him. 

This misfortune made him more cautious for some time ; but 
he begins to forget it now, and goes on with his business as before. 
One thing, indeed, he takes sufficient care about, and that is, that 
the waist of his breeches is properly secured ; for so strong is the 
impression which that accident made upon him, that he never 
walks a dozen steps without pulling them up. 

You see, most of them begin to nod. I shall therefore draw the 
curtain here, and leave them to their nap with this observation, 
that a few such examples as the clergjrman, and many of the kind 
there are, particularly eminent in this exalted virtue of charity 
ia both the sexes, are sufficient to take off the prejudice which"^the 
others must excite, and to preserve the proper respect to principles 
they propose to imitation. 



CHAPTER XLII 

SOME AOCOTTirT OF THE OFFICERS OF THE CHARITT — THBIB CAKE OF 
THEMSELVES — THEY FALL OUT AB0t7T THE DIVISION OF THE 
SPOIL — A TBBBIBLE TTPKOAR IS APPEASED BY A DEMAND OF QENBKAL 
CONCERN — THE CONCISE MANNER OF PASSING PUBLIC ACCOUNTS — 
CHBYSAL CHANGES HIS SERVICE 

When I had taken sufficient view of the governors, I had leisure 
to turn my observations to the servants of the society, whose be- 
haviour raised an indignation too strong to be expressed by words. 
If the governors feasted, they paid for their feasting ; but th& 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 135 

servants feasted no less, and were paid for it ! Nor was this enor- 
mity confined to this day ; their whole time was one continued 
scene of it, and much the greater part of the contributions of the 
public was prostituted to this abominable abuse, while the poor, 
for whose relief they were given, too often languished in want of 
the meanest necessaries, the fund being insufficient for their wants, 
and the luxury and wages of their servants. 

I was diverted from these reflections by an uproar in one of the 
private apartments of the house, where some of the superior servants 
had got together over a bottle of wine to settle their respective 
dividends of the subscriptions of the day. I call them servants, 
for that is the proper appellation of all who serve for hire. As 
I was yet vunfisposed of, to any particular person, I had it in 
my power, as I have told you before, to range through the whole 
territories of the society to which I belonged, and therefore 
flew to see what might be the cause of this riot in so improper a 
place, where I was witness to such a scene as almost transcends 
belief. 

At the upper end of the table sat the treasurer, for it would be 
a reproach to the poorest society to have fewer officers than the 
state, with his accounts before him. After a bumper to the success 
of the charity, ' Mr Steward ', said he, ' our subscriptions have 
been so good this year that I think we may venture to enlarge our 
salaries a little, for last year they were really scarce worth a gentle- 
man's acceptance '. 

' That is true ', replied the steward, ' and I beUeve we may 
enlarge the house allowance too, for, upon the present establish- 
ment, it is hardly enough for the days we meet here, and will not 
afford anything to carry home, to entertain a friend with, as a 
gentleman would desire. It is but swelling some of the sick articles, 
which at present are scarce above the consumption. When I was 
overseer of the parish, we managed things better. We then lived 
like gentlemen. Nay, I remember when I was churchwarden, 
that we spent the whole summer jaunting about the country in 
pursuit of a gentleman who had a child sworn to him, for fifty 
shillings, which he had been ordered to pay, till the bill of our 
e3;penses came to fifteen pounds ; and yet nobody could say against 
it, so that it is our own fault if we do not live well.' 

' Right ! ' joined the apothecary ; ' nor was the appointment for 
medicines any way sufficient. Had half what the physicians 
prescribed been given, there would have been nothing to be goi; 
by the contract '. 

' How, Mr Apothecary ' ? returned the cook, with a sneer. ' Noth- 
ing to be got ! pray was not all you got clear gain ? I am sure 
from the benefit received by the patients, there did not appear to 
have been anything above brick -dust, or powder of rotten post, 
in any of the stuffs they took ' I 

' Pray, s — s — sir ', stuttered the apothecary, in a rage, ' wh — 
wh — what's that you say ? Who m — m — made you a judge of 
medicines ' ? 

' Not you, I thank God, sir ', said the cook, ' as my health shows. 
But I have a good reason for what I say, for though I put double- 



136 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

-the quantity of meat in my broth, I could not prevent the people's 
•dying, nor make the few who recovered able to go out in twice the 
usual time '. 

' S — 3 — sir, 'tis all a d — d — damned lie. Their d — d — dying was 
■occasioned by the p — p — poorness of the b — b — broth and the 
badness of their p — p — provisions, and not by the w — w — want of 
medicines ; and I'll p — p — prove it, sir ; and how you sup — p — 
ported your family on the m — m — meat that shoiid have been 
■d — d — dressed for the sick ' ! 

' You'll prove it, sir ? Take care that you do ! Gentlemen ! 
"take notice of what he says! This is striMng at my character, 
and must affect my bread '. 

' That is true, Mr Cook ', said the secretary, who had been an 
Attorney's clerk, ' and whatever strikes at a man's character, so 
as to affect his bread, is actionable '. 

' B — b — but, sir, he attacked my ch — cha — character first, and 
I'll b — b — bring my action, too '. 

' So you may, sir ', replied the lawyer, ' the action will lie on both 
isides '. 

The disputes had hitherto been kept up with such heat, that the 
company could not interpose a word to pacify them, but the mention 
■of the law made it everyone's concern in a moment. 

' Silence, gentlemen ', said the treasurer, raising slowly his august 
bulk, and striking his hand upon the table. ' Silence, I say, and 
let me hear no more of this brawling. Mr Cook I Mr Apothecary ! 
What do you both mean ? to discover the secrets of our society, 
and to blow us all up at once ? You both heard me say that every- 
thing which was wrong should be adjusted ? Could you not wait 
for that, without falling into this indecent, this vmprofitable wrangle ? 
As for you, Mr Secretary, the leaven of your profession will break 
out ; it is suflScient to infect the whole mass. Is this your promise, 
your oath, to follow your business and do as you were ordered, 
quietly and implicitly, without meddling any farther, or perplexing 
us with the tricks of your former trade 1 But it was in vain to 
■expect it. A lawyer can as well live without food as without 
fomenting quarrels and setting his neighbours together by the ears. 
Bring an action, indeed ! and so betray our mystery to the imperti- 
nent remarks of counsellors, and the scoffs of Templars and attorney's 
clerks. Let me hear one word more of the kind, and this moment 
I declare off all connection, and leave every man to shift for himself. 
Our general oath of secrecy, attested under our hands, secures me 
from information, as it would invalidate the testimony of us all '. 

With these words, he turned about to leave the room, when the 
steward, catching him by the breast, pulled liim iuto his chair, and 
holding him down by main force, addressed him thus : — 

' Good God, sir, what do you mean, to take notice of the warmth 
of madmen, who know not what they say ? You, Mr Treasurer, 
have moved in a higher sphere of life, and ought to be above such 
things. You were not raised from the cleaning the shoes of a 
pettifogging attorney, in whose drudgery you lost your ears ! from 
being scullion in a nobleman's kitchen, or servant of a mounte- 
Ijank, to dispense his packets to the mob I Ton were not raised, 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 137 

I say, from any of these stations to the rank of a gentleman, by this 
office, and should be above taking offence at the low-lived behaviour 
of such creatures who know no better '. 

' Nor w — w — w — was I a full-handed ten times b — b — b — bank- 
rupt ', interrupted the apothecary, as he would have done sooner, 
had rage left him power of utterance, ' that b — b — b — being 
unable to get credit any 1 — ^1 — ^1 — longer, came from cheating the 
p — p — p — public, to cheating the p — p — p — poor ; nor a o — o — c — 
■cast-oS, worn-out p — p — p — pimping footman, whose dirty services 
w — w — were rewarded with this place '. 

This made the madness general, and they were just going to 
proceed to blows, when the porter entered hastily, and told them 
the committee were adjourned to their chamber, and sent for their 
accounts, to sit upon them directly. 

This brought them all to their senses, and made them friends in 
A moment. 

' Gentlemen ', said the treasurer, ' we have all been too hot — all 
to blame ; but let there be no more of it. Let us agree among 
ourselves, and we may defy the world '. 

Upon this, a general shake of the hand put an end to the whole 
•contest, and they proceeded to business, as if no such thing had 
•ever happened, unanimous in their endeavours to cheat the public, 
and fatten on the spoils of the poor. 

By that time, the committee had smoked a pipe and drank their 
■coffee. The accounts were laid before them, over which they 
nodded a few moments, and then passed them, without exceptions. 
The next thing was to pay the salaries of the officers, in which 
■distribution it fell to my lot to be given to the chaplain. 



CHAPTER XLin 

SOME BEMAEKS ON LANGTJAGE — CiHAEACTEB OF CHBYSAL's NEW 
MASTER — CHEYSAL ATTENDS HIS MASTEB's WIFE ON A VISIT TO 
A STTPEBIOR LADY — ^POUCTE EEOEPTION 

I HAVE often been apprehensive that the manner in which I express 
myself may lead you into some mistakes of my meaning, the signifi- 
cation of words, in the language of men, being so unsettled, that it is 
scarce possible to convey a determinate sense without such a peri- 
phrasis as would take up too much time in such complicated scenes 
■SB those I describe ; for where different, or perhaps contrary mean- 
ings are signified by the same word, how easy it is for a mind prone 
to error, to take the wrong one ! 

For instance, the character of a good man may be thought to be 
as safe from misapprehension, from the immutability of the -virtues 
which constitute it, as any that can be attributed either by or to 
human frailty; and yet how variously, how contradictorily, is it 
-applied ! 

On the Royal Exchange he is a good man who is worth ten 
thousand pounds, and pays his bills punctually, by whatever private 



138 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

and public frauds and injuatice he has amassed that sum, and 
maintains his credit. At the politer end of the world, goodness 
assumes another appearance, and is attributed to him who enter- 
tains his company well, pays his play -debts, and supports his honour 
with his sword, though he is guilty of the basest breaches of every 
civil and moral virtue, and lives in professed violation of all laws, 
human and divine ; while in the strictness of truth and propriety of 
expression, no greater abuse of words can be conceived than that of 
prostituting this character on either, except it were in compliance 
with the modern, modish way of speaking by contraries. 

I do not give this as the only instance ; they are innumerable, 
and occur in every moment's conversation. The horse that wing 
the match goes damned fast, as the one that loses goes damned 
Blow. The weather in summer is hell -lire hot, in winter, hell -fire cold. 

Now, what sense can the very devil himself, to whom you refer 
all difficulties, make of such contradictions 1 Though, indeed, 
these particular phrases give him pleasure, as they show the inclina- 
tion which men have to his empire, by making the very terrors of 
it familiar to their minds in their common conversation. 

But I am not at leisure to prescribe rules for avoiding this confu- 
sion, one of the most extensive causes of human error. I shall only 
give you some cautions to prevent your falling into it, in respect to 
what I say to you. 

You are to observe, then, that whenever I speak in the person of 
another, I always would be understood in the sense which that 
person would be understood in at that time, without any further 
regard to moral or physical truth, or propriety of speech. But, 
when I speak my own sentiments (which indeed I very rarely do), 
I shall always deliver them with per.spicuity and precision, as far 
as the jargon I am obliged to use will allow, and would have my 
words taken in the sense usually given to them, in the particular 
subject I may be then speaking of, as the barrenness of language 
has not been able to afford distinct terms to them all, but is forced 
to wrest known ones to different, and often unknown meanings — 
a proof of the injustice of the general complaint against the verbosity 
of the modems — whereas, if (by many) distinct words are meant, 
their fault is directly the reverse. 

My new master was a person of some learning, and what was of 
more use, of thorough knowledge of the world ; but wanting friends 
and interest to advance him to those dignities, which he thought 
due to his merit, he had solicited this place, in discharge of the 
duties of which he was indefatigably diligent, not merely for the 
paltry consideration of a poor salary (for, as he was not in the secret 
he had no share of the spoils), though his circumstances and know- 
ledge of the value of money could not let him refuse it, but to place 
his abilities in a more conspicuous light, where they might take th& 
notice of his superiors. 

As soon as he had received his stipend, he went home, where he 
found his wife, dressed in all her best clothes, and expecting him with 
the utmost impatience. ' My dear ', said she, ' how could you stay 
abroad so late ? I have been waiting for you above these twa 
hours, and was just going without seeing you '- 



ADVENTVREa OF A GUINEA 139' 

' So late, my dear, it is scarcely six o'clock I But where are yoir 
going in such haste ' 1 

' To the bishop's 1 The Rector of died in an apoplectio- 

fit as he was taking his nap after dinner this evening, and, you 
know, my intimacy with the bishop's lady entitles me to ask 
anything from her '. 

I But, child, this is not in her power to give, and, even if it was^ 
it is too much for a common acquaintance to expect '. 

' This diffidence has been your ruin ! You are always afraid of 
asking, as if there was ruin in being refused ; but that is not the 
case. Ask, and you shall have, is my text ! Nowadays, nothing 
is got without it '. 

' Yes, child, but too frequent and improper asking brings contempt '.. 
' The manner — the manner of asking is the thing. And you 
cannot think I want to be taught that now, after having lived so 
long among the great. Often have I known a request properly 
made gain a man a place, for which he was never dreamed of. As to- 
the greatness of this living, never mind that ; the greater it is, the 
greater will be your obligation to the person who gets it for you. 
What money have yx)u got about you ? We shall make a party, 
perhaps. And let me have the five hundred pound note ; I may 
have occasion for that, too, to make a bet '- 

' There, my dear, is the money I received to-day. I'll step 
up for the note. But, my dearest, take care what you do ; it is- 
our all ; and be sure you are not tempted to anything like simony ; 
it is a great crime, and makes a man incapable of ever rising if it 
is detected '. 

' And the fool that is detected deserves never to rise. You may 
call a thing by what nonsensical name you please, but, if knowledge 
of the world were to prevent people's rising in it, I do not know 
who would be uppermost nowadays. Bring me the note, and leave 
the rest to me. You shall know nothing of what I intend till it is 
done, and then the fault, if any, will be all mine. Here, Jane, 
settle the furbelows of my scarf, and John, call a chair to the door 
directly '. 

' Well, my dear, here is the note ; I leave all to you. I do not 
desire to know what you intend, but remember, my dear, this note is 
our all '- 

' Never fear ; the chair is come, and I must lose no time. You 
will divert yourself with your children or books, I suppose, or go- 
to the cofiee -house. Perhaps I may not return till it is late '. 
' I wish you success, my dear, and pray be cautious '. 
With these words, the doctor retired, but to which of the amuse- 
ments his wife mentioned, I cannot say, for he had given me to 
her, who carried me away to the bishop's. 

When she came there, the footman answered that it was not his 
lady's night, and she was not at home ; but my mistress had lived 
too long among the great to take his words in their literal meaning, 
and putting half-a-crown into his hand, told him she had some 
earnest business, and must see her. The doors instantly flew open,, 
his lady was at home, and my mistress shown up without any further 
difSculty. 



140 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

The bishop's lady was sitting at a snug party, with three or four 
■select friends, and seemed not much pleased at the intrusion of my 
mistress, to whom she scarce deigned a nod, but turning to the 
-footman, ' I thought, sirrah ', said she, ' that I was not to be at 
home this evening. I suppose I shall have all the mob of the town 
let in upon me '. 

' Dear madam ', replied my mistress, ' the man is not to blame. 
He told me you were not at home ; but, having some very earnest 
business, I made bold to break through your orders, but hope for 
your pardon when you know the cause of my intrusion '. 

' Oh, madam ', returned the lady, ' you know I am always glad 
of your company. I only chide the fellow for not obeying my 
■orders. Pray be seated, madam ; as soon as the rubber is up I 
shall wait upon you '. 

' Dear madam ', added my mistress, ' you need not give yourself 
-that trouble. Now I am with you, my business can wait your 
leisure '. 



CHAPTER XLIV 

.A QENTBEL EVENING — A DREAM AND A BET, AND A FAMILY SUTPEB 
— CONJTTOAL TENDBBNESS — THE BISHOP'S DEJECTION AT THE 
DEATH OF THE DOCTOR AND DANCER OF THE ARCHBISHOP 13 
DIVERTED BY ANOTHER DREAM 

When the rubber was finished, my mistress was asked to out in — 
■one of the party being taken suddenly ill — which she did, and sat 
-out the whole evening, her success at cards keeping up her spirits, 
and giving her hopes of the like in the greater affair she came about. 
But her patroness had very different fortune, having lost every 
rubber, and, what was still worse, several by -bets, which she made 
to bring herself home. 

This put her into such a temper, that the moment the rest of the 
company was gone, she turned to my mistress, who saw them all 
-out — ' And now, pray, madam, may I ask you what was the great 
business that brought you here this evening,' said she. 'Unlucky 
business it has been for me, I know, for I have never held a card since 
you came. But I shall take care that rascal who let you in shall 
never serve me so again. He shall strip, and turn off without his 
breakfast, the moment I am up in the morning '. 

' Dear madam ', rephed my mistress, unabashed at such a salute, 
' have patience a moment, and I hope to make you amends for aU. 
Will you please to sit doivn to one sober party of piquet ? You 
are always too hard for me, yet I'll venture all my winnings, and 
perhaps what I have to say in the meantime may compensate for 
my intrusion '. 

The lady could not imagine what she meant ; but the thought 
of so good a match brought her a little to her temper, and, though 
it was near ten o'clock, she sat down to cards with aa much 



ADVENTUEES OF A GUINEA 141 

keenness as if six hours drudging at them had only whetted her 
desire for play. 

As soon as a repique or two had confirmed her good humour, my 
mistress says to her : ' Dear madam, that is right. Have you heard 
of the sad accident that happened this eyening ' ? 

• Not I ', replied the other. ' Pray, what was it ' ? 

' Why, poor Dr was taken ill shortly after dinner, and died 

in his chair '. 

' Ah, then, I suppose he had plum-porridge, and over-eat himself,^ 
and so burst a pudding, as we say to children. Ha ! ha ! ha ! 
Ha ! ha ! ha ' ! 

' But pray, madam, have you any faith in dreams 7 What do- 
you think 7 I dreamed last night that I saw you at court, on some 
great occasion, with just such a diamond necklace on as the Coun- 
tess's, which you had bought with five hundred pounds, that you 
won from me on a bet, you laying that my husband would, 
and I that he would not get the doctor's living. Well, to be sure, 
there must be something more than ordinary in it, for, can you 
believe it 7 this very morning I put a bank-note for five hundred 
pounds in my pocket. Here it is ; though I did not think of the 
poor man's death till I heard it as I came by this evening, when 
the dream ran so strongly in my head, that I could not forbear 
breaking in upon you, a rudeness I never should have been guilty 
of upon any other occasion '. 

' Dear madam, you need make no apology to me ; you know your 
company is always welcome ; I am always at home to you '. 

' But, madam, what do you think of my dream ' 7 

' I don't know. I only wish it were to prove true, for five hun- 
dred pounds could never come more seasonably '. 

' Then you must win it, for my heart is set upon making the 
bet ; and I assure you, I have such a regard for you, that I 
do not even wish you to lose, and that is what few gamesters- 
can say '- 

' You are a pleasant creature ; but as for the bet, it shall be upon 
condition that my lord is not under any engagement to the minister, 
or her grace who got him the bishopric. If he is disengaged, I will 
lay you, and you shall lose, my girl, if it was ten times as much, 
and there's encouragement for you to hold. The bell rings. Will 
you walk down and take a bit of supper 7 There is nobody but 
my lord and I. But do not take the least notice of anything about 
the matter, nor even seem to have heard of the doctor's death, 
should my lord mention it. But muster all your spirits, and be as 
entertaining as you can, for I always work him up best when he 
goes to bed in a good humour '. 

The piquet match being thus at an end, I was paid away to the 
bishop's lady, whose winnings and expectations sent her to supper 
in high spirits, where she found his lordship already seated in a very 
thoughtful mood. 

After the usual complimentary expletives that usher in every 
polite conversation, ' Pray, my lord ', says my new mistress to her 
husband, ' what will you eat 7 Shall I help you to a bit of this- 
fricassee 7 I believe it is very good '- 



142 ADVENTURES OF A aVINEA 

' No, my dear, I thank you ', replied his lordship, ' I have not the 
least appetite. What is it, pray ' ? 

' Sweet-breads and cocks' -combs ', returned his lady. ' You 
used to like them, and they are very nice ; or ■will you help yourself 
to a bit of that fowl before you ? Something you must eat '. 

' No, my dear, I am obliged to your care ; but I do not choose 
anything to-night ; I am not very well. We all eat too much. 
Repletion kills half the people of England ; we eat too much *. 

' You are going to be hipped, my dear. John, give your master 
a glass of Madeira. Fill the glass ; eating never hurt anyone who 
washed down his victuals with a glass of good wine ; horse-meals, 
indeed, are enough to choke human creatures. So 1 do you not 
find yourself better now ? Taste this fricassee ; you cannot think 
how good it is '. 

' Well, you will have your way ; you may do as you please, 
though never so contrary to my inclinations. Do you call this a 
fricassee ? I thought fricassees had spice put in them ; this is aa 
insipid as chopped hay. Lord deliver us from such cooks. The 
badness of servants, in general, seems to be a judgment on the vices 
of the age '. 

' Well, my dear, taste that fowl ; it looks like a good one, and 
the cook could not spoil that. Pray, madam, shall I trouble you 
to help his lordship to a leg and a wing, and a bit of the breast ' ? 

' You give me too much ; I shall never be able to eat aU this ; 
besides, you know, my dear, I choose a bit of the rump '. 

' Eat that first, my dear, and then you shall have the 
rump. But what has happened to make you so low-spirited this 
evening ' ? 

' Oh, child, who can be other than low-spirited when such in- 
stances of mortality happen before our eyes every hour T Who can 
tell but the misfortune may be his own next moment ? There's 

Doctor , poor man, was taken off this evening, without a 

minute's warning to prepare for such a tremendous change, just 
after he had made an hearty dinner. — Here, John, take away my 
plate ; I will not eat a bit more, nor ever sleep after dinner again '. 

' And, John, give your master another bumper of Madeira ; that 
was what the doctor wanted ; he ate a great deal, and did not aUow 
himself any drink. Driuk good wine, and never fear that eating 
will hurt you '. 

' Ah ! but that was not the case of his grace of , who lies 

this moment in the agonies of death ; his physicians left him two 
hours ago. The Lord prepare us all, and give us notice of His 
coming I He did not stint himself of wine ; he took his bottle 
^!heerfully, good man ' 

'Cheerfully, did you say? I should have said sottishly;' for 
he has done nothing but drink for these many years past. He has 
run into the opposite extreme from the doctor— drinking too much, 
and not eating enough to support nature. And I hope you do not 
say he is gone without warning at fourscore ? He has had time 
enough to prepare ; but why should these examples affect you 
particularly ? You do not eat like the doctor, nor drink like his 
grace, and are young enough to be son to the youngest of them. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA US 

Why, then, should you fear their fate ? Here, John, give me a 
pint glass half full of Madeira, and reach me three or four of those 
jeUies. Now, my dear, if you are afraid to eat or drink, sup thia 
with a bit of bread, and I will answer for its agreeing with you '. 

My late mistress sat all this time at her supper, without being 
able to join in the conversation ; but as soon as his lordship's taking 
the jelUes made a pause ia his lady's tenderness, she called for a 
glass of wiae, and, bowing to the bishop, drank to him by the title 
of hia grace, very gravely. t' 

His lordship started, and his lady stared, while she finished her 
glass without any emotion, and seemed quite unconscious of having 
said anything unusual or improper. This behaviour still embarrassed 
them more, when the lady, unable to contain her surprise — 
' Dear madam ', said she, ' what have you said 7 or how came you 
to address my lord by that title ' ? 

' I hope, madam ', replied the other, ' I have not said anything 
improper. You really frighten me. I hope I have not been failing 
in my respect, or addressed his lordship by any improper title ' ? 

' I cannot say an improper one, indeed ! but one that does not 
belong to him, at least as yet ', returned the lady. 

' Dear madam, what do you mean ? Pray do not distress me. 
But you must divert yourself, surely. It is not possible that I 
could fail in any respect to his grace '. 

'Hal ha! ha! There it is again. Fail in your respect ? No. You 
only raised your respect too high. You called him his grace, that's all'. 

* And is that all 7 Thank Heaven that I did. And long live hia 
grace, I say again ', said she, dropping on her knees and eagerly 
kissing his hand. ' Long live your grace. There is, there must be, 
truth in dreams, and infidels alone can doubt it '. 

At the mention of dreams, the bishop, who had hitherto continued 
to sip up his jelly without seeming to take any notice of what they 
were saying, could not forbear showing some emotion ; for he had 
the strongest faith in them, and always sanguinely defended their 
credit, especially since his present elevation had confirmed those 
of his grandmother. 

' What dreams, pray, good madam ' 7 said he, addressing my late 
mistress with a visible anxiety. ' What dreams do you mean 7 
Those which were thought to have respect to me are understood 
to be already accomplished '- 

' Please, your grace, the impulse of the spirit is upon me, and I 
cannot call you by any other title. Please, your grace, I say I 
dreamed last night, as I told your lady but just now, that I met her 
at court on some very great occasion, as fine as hands could make 
her (I told her this just now, before I knew one syllable of his grace's 
death), and that she came up to me smiling, and thanked me for 
the cause of her coming there, for it was I who had made you a great 
man. Now, what could this possibly mean, but what has happened 
here this moment, when, by giving you this title first (and, Lord 
knows, I did it without the least design, or even being sensible ot 
it when I did it), I may, in some manner, be said to have made you 
the great man it belonged to. Let the world say what they will, 
I do believe there is truth in dreams, and I think mine is out now '. 



144 ADVENTUBES OF A GUINEA 

She ran on with this rant at such a rate, that it was impossible 
for the bishop to interrupt her, even had he been so inclined. But 
that was far from being the case. He heard her with attention, 
and what she said made such an impression on him, that he sat 
some time musing on it after she had stopped, before he had power 
to speak a word. 

As for hia lady, she at once took it to be all a fetch, calculated 
merely to forward the scheme of the wager about the doctor's 
living, and as such, resolved to humour it, and not interrupt 
his meditations ; but addressing herself to the other, ' Indeed 
madam ', said she, ' I do not know what to say to this affair. When 
you told me your dream just now, I made nothing of it, but this 
account of his grace's death almost staggers me. Well, if this 
succeeds, and who knows what may happen, I shall ever hereafter 
have more faith in dreams '- 



CHAPTER XLV 

A DISSERTATION ON DBBAMINO — THE DEBAM PTTEStTBD TO THE ASTON- 
ISHMENT AND ALMOST CONVBKSION OF THE BISHOP'S LADY — HEB 
VEBACITY IN BECOtTNTINO SOME CIEODMSTANCBS RELATING TO IT 
— SHE AND HIS LOEDSHIP PERSUADE EACH OTHER TO DREAM THAT 
IT IS TBTJE 

By this time his lordship had considered the matter, and addressing 
himself to the dreamer — ' Pray, madam ', said he, ' what time had 
you this vision or dream ? In the night, or towards the morning ' ? 

' In the morning, my lord ', replied she, ' at the conclusion of my 
second sleep ; and, indeed, it made such an impression upon my 
mind, that I could not go to sleep after ; for it was not in the con- 
fusion of common dreams. I saw everything distinctly and regu- 
larly, as if I was in the very place ; and particularly your lady 
appeared as plainly to me as she sits there, Lord bless her ! And 
by the same token, she was dressed in white damask, spick and 
span new, and had the most beautiful diamond necklace on that 
ever my eyes beheld ; and charmingly she looked, I thought '. 

' I really do not know what to say to this matter ', replied his 
lordship, with great deliberation. ' The visions of the morning hav& 
ever been held in most repute, for then the mind has recovered 
from the fatigues of the preceding day, and is able to exert its- 
abilities, and look forward into the time to come. There are some 
good circumstances, I own, in this dream. I am glad that my wife 
was not dressed in colours ; that would have been an ill omen ; 
but white is the peculiar garment of success — angels are clad in 
white — and in this case particularly, it may prefigure the episcopal 
lawn, as that is an emblematical type of the purity of the episcopal 
fimction, and the episcopal and archiepiscopal differ only in degree. 
As for the necklace, there may be more in that also than is appre- 
hended. Precious stones are the insignia of dignity, and in the 
Jewish priesthood, particularly, were symbolical of the highest 



4.J>7MNTTJRES OF 4 QVINBA 145 

order ; for none of the priests wore them but the supreme or high 
priest, whose dignity answered nearly to that of primate with us ; 
andif such further blessings should be the Divine Will, it were 
impious and ungrateful to refuse its favours. Perhaps I speak 
unintelligibly to you, but the opinions of the learned must be 
delivered in their phrase '- 

' Pray, my lord, proceed ; I could hear your lordship for ever. 
I am always the wiser and the better for hearing your lordship '. 

' Then, as to the credit to be given to dreams ', resumed his 
lordship, ' though the scepticism of these xmhappy times may 
deny it, yet the piety of wiser antiquity was of another opinion, of 
which numberless instances might be given out of the holy Sorip- 
tujes. And among the Gentiles, the greatest of their poets says, 

" Ovap cK dios esi." 

That is, in English, dreams proceed from Jove — that is, from the 
Supreme Deity — whom they erroneously call by that name. And 
though the heathens were guilty of great superstitions in this 
particular of dreams, it was not in the credit they gave them, but 
in the methods which they used to procure them ; such as offering 
sacrifices, and sleeping in the skins of the victims, and many others ; 
whereas the dream that comes from Heaven, comes unsought and 
unexpected, and should be received with reverence. And if this is 
such, and I own it has much of the appearance. Thy will be done, 
O Lord ! Thy servant submits as it is his duty '. 

Greatly as they must have been edified by this elaborate disserta- 
tion, the ladies had much ado to refrain from laughing in his face 
while he delivered it, especially his wife, who knew not which to 
admire most, the readiness of the thought, or the ease with which it 
was received. But the dreamer had a further scheme in her head, 
to carry on which she now got up to go away ; and, bending the 
knee to the bishop, ' My lord ', said she, ' may I beg your lordship's 
blessing ? I hope, and I am confident in that hope, that mine 
was not a common dream, from the impression it made on my 
mind, which could not have been stronger, if I had actually been 
present at your lady's kissing the king's hand, on your promotion. 
But, if my zeal has hurried me too far in my expressions of it, I 
rely on your goodness to forgive my fault, which was rather an 
enthusiasm than a design ; and so, my lord, I beg leave to wish 
you a good night '. 

With these words, she withdrew, and her patroness, wondering 
she had not thrown her a wink, and desirous to have a laugh with 
her at her husband's credulity, went as to see her to her chair ; 
when turning with her into another room-^' That was an excellent 
thought ', said she, ' and will make our affair quite easy if he is 
not engaged ' 

' I do not imderstand you, madam ', replied the other, ' pray 
what thought do you mean ' ? 

' Why, child, that of the dream. What else should I mean ' ? 

' A thought, dear madam ! Why, do not you think I was serious, 
and the dream real ' 1 



146 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

' Not one word of either, I assure you ; and I wonder at your 
asking me that question here, where no one is present to observe us '. 

' Dear madam, you have quite mistaken me, I assure you. It is 
true, I can jest sometimes, but in this, give me leave to say that 
I was most serious ; and what is more, that I am sure the event 
will confirm it '. 

' You astonish me, madam ; I declare, I looked upon the whole 
as a mere finesse to promote our scheme about the doctor's living 
for your husband '. 

' I am sorry, madam, that you should have such an opinion of 
me, as that I could invent such a story on any account '. 

' Well, as I said before, though in another sense, I know not what 
to make of the whole. But, as you are so positive, and my lord 
seems inclined to believe you, perhaps there may be more in it than I 
can see, and therefore I shall suspend my opinion till I see the end. of 
it. This though I promise, that my assistance shall not be wanting 
to either part of the dream '. 

' And I promise you that I will make good all I said, particularly 
about the wager and the necklace ; and so, madam, I wish you a 
good night. I shall do myself the pleasure to call and see how you 
are in the morning ' 

This gave the whole affair a new face, and threw the bishop's 
lady into a meditation as profound as his lordship's. 

' Can this be possible ' ? said she to herself. ' And yet, how could 
she have the face to stand it out so, if it was not true ? But then 
it was but a dream. Ay, but my husband says dreams are not to 
be slighted, and he should know more than I, at least of those things 
that are to be found in books. And what if it should be so after all ? 

and that I should take place of Mrs , and Mrs , and Mrs 

, and all the rest of the bishops' ladies ? That would be 

charming. And I believe in my soul I shall ; for I have always 
looked upon them with a contempt that showed I should be one 
day their superior. Well, happy come lucky, says the proverb ; 

my endeavours shall not be wanting, as I promised Mrs , whose 

five hundred pounds will be a pretty earnest of the archbishopric '. 

Having thus argued herself into a kind of belief of the dream, 
she went in to his lordship, whom she found absorbed in thought 
about the vision. 

' Well, my dear ', said she, sitting down by him, ' what is your 
opinion of this strange matter ? I own it is above my comprehen- 
sion. At first I imagined she might have been only in jest, and 
have invented the whole story merely to divert your lowness of 
spirits ; but when I went out with her into the next parlour, and 
put it home to her, she still persisted in it, and confirmed the truth 
of what she said by such asservations that I could not avoid believing 
her '. '■ '• 

' But, my dear,' replied his lordship, ' she said she told you her 
dream before she came in here, or had heard a word of his grace's 
illness '- 

' She most certainly did, my lord, and with other circumstances, 
that make the whole still more surprising. Pray, what time did 
the doctor die, my dear ' ? 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 147 

' About half an hour after four '. 

' That is most wonderful. And pray, my dear, who is to have his 
living ? or are you under any engagement about it ' 1 

' No, child, I am not ; nor have I determined whom to give it 
to. But why do you ask these questions ? What are they to the 
purpose of the dream ' ? 

' I shall tell you, my lord. You must know, then, that she came 
here about four o'clock, just as I had got up from dinner, all in the 
greatest hurry, and with a kind of wildness, I do not know how, 
in her looks, told me her dream ; but with some circumstances 
that I know her bashf ulness would not permit her to mention before 
you ; and these were, that I had bought the diamond necklace 
she thought I had on at court, with five hundred pounds which I 
had won from her, on a wager that you would give her husband the 
doctor's living. Now, as he was not even sick at the time of her 
telUng me this, there could be no design in it; and this is what 
makes me take the more notice of the matter '. 

' But are you sure,^"ohild, that she told you this so early as four 
o'clock ' ? 

' Rather before it, my dear ; and what makes me so positive about 
it is, that a little after she had finished her story she happened to 
look at her watch ; but it was down, and so she asked me what 
o'clock it was by mine, that she might set by it, and I remember 
it wanted exactly six minutes of four '. 

' Pray, let me look at your watch ; have you not altered it since ' ? 

' No, my dear. But why do you ask ' ? 

' Because it is nine minutes faster than mine, and it was just 
half an hour past four by his watch, as they told me, when he died, 
and his and mine were exactly together, so that the six minutes 
which your watch wanted of fovir, and the nine minutes it is faster 
than mine, make a quarter before four, which was three quarters 
before he died. This is most wonderful, for there could be no design 
or art in it. This is most wonderful ! But there have been many 
revelations made in dreams, even in our own times, as for instance, 
that in Drelinoourt ; for it could be no other than a dream ; and 
that other of the great Duke of Buckingham's rise, and afterwards 
of his death, as it is most judiciously and faithfully represented by 
the Reverend Historian', not to mention many more. As to the 
doctor's living, my dear, I make you a compliment of it ; you may 
give it to whom you please. Though the curate is a very learned 
and good man, and has a large family, beside that, he has been 
recommended to me by the whole parish, whom his long residence 
among them — for he has been there above thirty years — has made 
love and respect him as a father '. 

' Then let them provide for him, like dutiful children. What 
assurance ! to pretend to dictate to you, as if you were not the 
proper judge of such matters. If it was for no other reason, I 
would not give it to him, to teach them their duty and distance 
another time '. 

' There may be something in that. I do not like such interfering 

1 Eohard. 



148 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

in my conduct neither ; and therefore you may give it to whom you 
please. And her husband is a man of learning and good character, 
too, who will not discredit any preferment ; but take care that you 
do not anything improper. As to your wager, there is no harm 
in that ; but even so, it should be kept a secret. I must know 
nothing of the matter '. 

' I thank you, my dear lord. I shall be sure to observe your 
directions ; and the accomplishment of this part of the dream I 
take a happy presage of the rest. But you must not be wanting to 
yourself. You had better, I think, go to her grace, and see what 
may offer to promote our hopes '. 

' That is not a bad thought, my dear ; but it grows late ; in the 
morning we shall see what is to be done '. 

Saying this, they withdrew whither we must not follow them ; 
for of the genial bed ' with most mysterious reverence I deem '. 



CHAPTER XLVI 

HISTOBY OF THE DREAMER — SHE LOSES HER WAGES, WHICH SHE 
PAYS WITH PLEASURE — ^HIS LORDSHIP WAITS UPON HER GRACE — 
HIS KNOWLEDQE OF THE WORLD PROMOTES A NOBLE INSTANCE OF 
CHARITY — OHRYSAL ENTERS INTO THE SERVICE OF HER GRACE 

I HAVE observed your surprise and admiration at the ready presence 
of mind and confidence of my late mistress, who could, in a moment, 
invent such a story, and persist in it so steadily, as not only to 
impose upon the bishop's easy credulity, but even upon his 
wife also, who was, in a manner, in the secret of her design, but 
could not interrupt my story to satisfy it sooner by giving you her 
history. 

She was a distant relation to a noble lord, on whom the extrava- 
gance of her father left her dependent. This occasioned her being 
taken into his family, where she lived several years as a humble 
companion to his lady. As she was handsome, his lordship had a 
mind for a nearer relation with her ; but an unfashionable virtue 
prevented her compliance, which turned his love into the strongest 
hatred, for fear she should inform his lady, to whom she was not 
more agreeable, and upon the same account, as her observing temper 
had given her an opportunity of seeing much more than her lady- 
ship desired to have her tell. 

This made her situation very unhappy in the family, and inclined 
her to hearken to the addresses of the chaplain, to whom his lord- 
ship gave a small vicarage with her, as did his lady five hundred 
pounds, that they might part decently, and not provoke her to 
speak. As for herself, you have seen that Nature was liberal to her 
in the endowments of her mind, which the state which she was bred 
in improved, or rather sharpened into a thorough knowledge of the 
world, that enables her to take the advantage of all its follies. 

But to return to the bishop and his lady. This affair had made 
Buoh an impression on their minds, that they could dream of nothing 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 149 

«Ise all night but pomp and precedence, which effectually secuied 
the grant in favour of my late mistress' from all danger of revocation. 

They were scarce seated to breakfast, when word was brought 
them that she was below, upon which she was immediately invited 
np, her-company being too agreeable to admit of any distance or 
reserve. 

The compliments of the morning being paid on all sides, his 
lordship, with a look of great benevolence, asked her for her husband, 
and if he was at home, to which she answered that he was, and ready 
"to pay his duty to his lordship, if he had any commands to honour 
iim with. 

' None that wiU be disagreeable, I hope ', replied his lordship, 
* and if he is at leisure '. 

' At leisur^ my lord ' ! replied she, in a kind of rapture, for a 
"wink from the lady had explained the matter to her. ' He is, he 
must be at leisure. No business can interfere with his duty. I'll 
«tep for him this moment '. 

' You need not give yourself that trouble, madam ', returned his 

lordship. ' John, do you go and tell Mr that I should be glad 

to speak with him ; for, madam, I think I cannot do less than re- 
ward his learning, piety, and good life, with the living of the poor 
doctor. It is what I have long resolved, though I never mentioned 
it before, because I would not torture him with expectations ; and 
I give it to him now, thus early and unasked, to spare his modesty, 
and to save myself from the solicitations of others '. 

' Long live, God bless your grace ' ! said she, throwing herself at 
his feet, and embracing his knees in ecstacy ; ' for so I see it will 
be ; everjrthing will come out just according to my dream. I 
•could not forbear sending to the late archbishop's just before I came 
here, and the porter (for I would not send a servant, for fear my 
known attachment to your lordship should make it taken notice of) 
brought me word that he was at peace '. 

This completed the bishop's faith, and prevented his sending to 
inquire, for the same delicate reason that she gave. 

' I must wish you joy, madam ', said the bishop's lady, ' of this 
advance in your fortune, though I am almost angry that my lord 
idid not let me into the secret. I have lost some hours' happiness 
by his reserve, for I always make the happiness of my friends 
my own '. 

' Dear madam, I thank you ; on my knees I thank, I pray for 
you both. And give me leave, madam, to wish you joy of his 
lordship's promotion, and of your just advance in rank, as well as 
■of all the ornaments belonging to it '. 

' The necklace, I suppose you mean ? Ha, ha, ha ' ! 

' I do, indeed, dear madam, and of every other happiness that 
-can attend so elevated a station '. 

Her husband now entered, in the utmost agitation of spirits 
between hope and fear, for he was not a stranger to his wife's scheme ; 
.(indeed he had suggested the first hint of the bet himself, but with 
an address that made her think it was her own, he spoke so distantly ; 
■for he always preserved the appearance of character, even with her), 
and the ladies, not thinking it proper to be present at the mysterious 



150 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

ceremony of the bishop's signing the collation — which he did directly 
to avoid giving offence, by refusing other applications — they -with- 
drew, when my mistress was paid her bet, with as great pleasure, 
by the loser, as she felt in receiving it. 

The dream, being thus far happily accomplished, the successful 
dreamer and her husband went home in the highest joy at being at 
length relieved from the anxiety of dependence and the fears of 
want, while my lord prepared to pay his duty at her grace's levee,' 
and see whether anything should offer that might promote his part 
of it. 

When he was ready to go, he called to his lady to receive her 
advice, and, recollecting that he had forgot his purse, he desired to 
borrow her's, in which I was, and thus I changed my service once 
more. 

When his lordship entered her grace's levee, and had paid his 
most humble respects, he found the conversation turn on a melan- 
choly accident that had lately happened to a village in his diocese, 
which was entirely burnt to the groimd by an accidental fire. 
There were many circumstances so moving in the account of this 
misfortmie as to raise the compassion of the whole company, and 
particularly of her grace, who said that she would most willingly 
contribute to the relief of their distress, but that unluckily she had 
not less than a bank-note for twenty pounds about her. 

All the company, who knew the world, understood her grace, and 
dropped the subject ; but my new master, who had his knowledge 
of mankind mostly from books, was so far from taking the hint, 
that he thought he showed his respect to his patroness by offering to 
change her note, or lend her whatever money she wanted. 

Her grace was svirprised, as the company were confounded, at the 
ignorant insolence of such an offer. However, as this was not an 
occasion for showing her resentment, she coldly told him she would 
trouble him for the change, and having received it, gave two guineas 
to the person who had mentioned the affair, and carelessly threw 
the rest, among which I was, into her pocket, not caring to puU out 
her purse, as it was full of money. 

My late master, pleased with the thought of having been instru- 
mental in so meritorious a benevolence, displayed his eloquence 
in thanks to her for her eminent charity to his poor flock, and then, 
gave a guinea himself (for respect to her grace would not permit 
him to exceed the half of her bounty), as did the rest of the com- 
pany, who all laughed in their sleeves to think how my master had 
ruined himself with her grace by his blunder. 

But his mind was too full of the dream to observe their looks ; 
and he was so far from beiug sensible that he had done amiss, that 
when her grace was going to retire, he boldly stepped up to her, 
and begged leave to speak a word or two with her in private. 

Though the assurance of this request greatly aggravated his 
former offence, yet she could not decently refuse such a favour to 
his rank, and therefore slightly nodded to him to follow her. 

' The Countess of Yarmouth, George the Second's mistress, Amalie 
Wallmoden, n$e Von Wendt. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 151 



CHAPTER XLVII 

THE BISHOP OBTAINS THE HONOtJE OF A FEIVrATE AUDIENCE— HIS 
EXTENSIVE CHAMTy — ^HB MAKES HEB OEACB HIS ALMONER TO 
BELIEVE HIS PELLOW-PEOTESTANTS IN GERMANY — HE IS STBANGELY 
AEEECTED AT THE NEWS OE THE AEOHBISHOP's EECOVBBY — HEB 
gbaoe's CHAEACTBE 

The great honour of this private audience at first put him into 
some confusion, but, recollecting the consequence at staJie, he, 
after much hesitation, made a shift to tell her that, ' sensible 
of her grace's great humanity and commiseration for the suffer- 
ings of the distressed, of wluoh she had just given so noble an 
instance '. 

_ ' Pray, my lord, no compliments ', said her grace, interrupti" j 
him with a look and accent not very encouraging, ' I am not at 
present at leisure for them ; and if you have no other business ' 

' May it please your grace ', replied the bishop, ' your virtues are 
above compliment ; and I come to give you an opportunity of 
exerting them, not solely to praise them '. 

' I do not understand you, my lord, and I am in some haste '. 

' I most humbly beg your grace's pardon ; I shall not delay you 
long. To come, then, briefly to the purpose, I must inform your 
grace that out of the income which it hath pleased the Divine 
Providence, through your grace's means to give me, I have thought 
it my duty to lay by some little matter, to make a return with, to 
the Divine beneficence, in charity to His distressed creatures. Now, 
aa your grace's kind interest was the means through which this 
ability was conferred upon me, I have made bold to trouble you 
with the distribution of my mite '. 

' Me, my lord ? You astonish me ! I cannot comprehend you '. 

' I beg your grace's indulgence for a moment. You will forgive 
this boldness when you know the motive — hem ! hem ! — 
The sufferings of my Protestant brethren in Germany — I say 
brethren, for men should know no distinction but religion — their 
sufferings, I say, in this calamitous time of war and rapine, when 
the ambition of princes works the ruin of their people, has made 
such an impression upon my heart, that I come to offer this small 
matter to your grace, to be applied to their relief, as your better 
knowledge shall see most proper ; a trouble which I should not 
have presumed to give your grace, did not I know that such works 
of charity are a pleasure to you, and that the better information, 
which in your high rank you must necessarily have, will enable you 
to apply it more effectually to their relief than I, in the darkness 
and ignorance of my humble station, possibly can. I am almost 
ashamed of the smallness of the sum (it is but two thousand pounds), 
but it is all that I have yet been able to save, though I hope to give 
a better account of my stewardship another time, and that I shall 
be found not to have buried my talent, especially if it should 
please the Divine Providence to raise me to a higher station, 
and thereby put the means more liberally into my power. ' I most 

fir 



152 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

humbly beg your grace's forgiveness of this intrusion of your 
time. I am your grace's most humble servant '. 

• Stay, my lord ', returned her grace, with a look and accent 
softened into the most engaging afiability. ' Pray, do not go. I 
see you so seldom, except in the crowd, that I cannot part with 
you BO soon. I thank you for the confidence you place in me, and 
shall apply your charity to the best of my judgment. Poor people ! 
they greatly want relief, and if the invincible fortitude of the Bul- 
garian monarch does not extricate them soon, they will be entirely 
ruined. But everything is to be hoped for from such a hero. You 
are very good to consider the distresses of the poor people. 
There are few now who think of anything but themselves ; so their 
appetites are satisfied, they have no feeling for what others suffer. 
But, my lord, is there anything that I can serve you in ? You may 
depend upon my interest at all times '. 

' I am much beholden to your grace ', replied his lordship, elevated 
at such an offer, and now secure, as he thought, of his hopes. ' I 
am much beholden to your grace. I have had too much experience 
of your grace's goodness to doubt it. Nothing that I know of, at 
present. If anything should happen, I shall be most grateful to 
your grace for your kind remembrance. We are all desirous of 
having our power to do good enlarged '. 

' Yes, my lord, all good men, like your lordship, are. It is a duty 
to desire so. But, have you heard anything of the Archbishop 
of lately ' ? 

' Not very lately, please your grace '. 

' I believe that old man will never die. He was taken with a fit 
yesterday, and it was thought he would expire every moment ; 
but he has got over it, and is abroad to-day, as well as he has been 
for many years '. 

' In— d-e-e-d ' ! 

' What is the matter, my lord ? Something seems to ail you '- 

' A — a — sud — den — f — aint — ness— has — come — o — o — ver — me ; 
I— mu-st — beg— y— our — Grace — 's — p-ardon. — I — am y — our — 
Grace — 's — m — ost — h — h — umble servant '. With which words 
he made a bad shift to crawl out, muttering to himself — ' Oh, my 
money, my money ! Oh, this cursed dream ; my money, my 
money ' ! 

Her grace looked earnestly after him for a few minutes, as if lost 
in thought, and then, bursting into a loud laughter : ' And is it so, 
my good lord ? does the wind sit that way ? Then I can account 
for your charity. Ha ! ha ! ha ! But you are disappointed this 
time, and, I fear, will be the next, too, if you do not bid better. 
Two thousand for five hundred a year ! Is that your conscience ? 
but it will never do '- 

I was now at the summit of human grandeur, the favourite of the 
favourite of a mighty monarch. For curiosity tempting me to 
take a view of my new mistress's heart as she sat at her toilet, I 
found myself established there without a rival, in the most absolute 
authority, every passion being subservient to my rule ; even th^ 
love of power, which had, in every other instance, disputed the 
empire with me, being here my most abject slave, and encouraged 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 153 

for no other reason than solely to promote my interest, the mighty 
spirit of the immense mass of gold which my mistress had 
accumulated having taken entire possession of her soul. 



CHAPTER XLVIII 

THE TRITE USE OF COUBT FAVOUB — THE BITBB BITTEN — AN EASY 
WAY TO OBTAIN A FINE FEATHER FOB A FOOL's CAP — THE IN- 
SOLBNOE OF OFFICE IN HINDEBINO A HOUSE TO BE BUILT INSTEAD 
OF A HEN-COOP, AND SPOILING HEE OEACE's DAIBY — ^HOW TO 
MAKE THE MOST OF A COMMON — A BEAU LORD BEATEN BY A 
BAILIFF FOE WALKING THE FIELDS IN AH UNDRESS 

While my late master retired, to meditate on the exposition of 
dreams and to please himself with the virtuous reflection of so 
singular an act of charity, her grace sat down to her toilet, where I 
saw art triumph over the depredations of time, and create a beauty 
denied by nature. 

When this serious work was so far completed that she could attend 
to other business, one of her most favourite domestics told her that 
ehe had that very morning received an ofier from a man who kept 
a noted beer -house and shuffle -board for the place of a tapster to 
the Lord-Mayor, which she was sure her grace's interest would 
readily obtain. 

' Tapster ', answered her grace, ' what is the value of that place ? 
Reach me the list of employments, with their salaries and perquisites, 
out of that drawer. Let me see : Tapster to the Lord -Mayor : 
ay, here it is. Well, and pray, what does he ofier for it ' ? 

' A thousand guineas, please your grace ', replied her woman, 
■ which I really think enough for it, considering everything '. 

' Do you, indeed ; but I do not. Why, it is rated to me here 
as worth five hundred pounds a year, and is that worth no more 
than a thousand guineas ? Does the fellow value his own life only 
at two years' purchase ' ? 

' Five hundred pounds a year I How can that be ? The salary 
is no more than sixty ; there must be some mistake in your return 't 

' The salary, the salary signifies nothing ; it is the perqxiisitesi 
The perquisites are the thing ! Do you think any place is valued 
by the salary ? The perquisites of this place are very considerable^ 
Let me see.i Why, he buys in all the beer and gin himself, for 
which he can charge what price he pleases, and then his own account 
is taken fori the quantity that is drank. Ay, indeed ; there must 
be a mistake in my return, to be sure, but not of the kind you mean. 
The place is rated too low, for, with such opportunities, it must be 
worth twice the sum, and I shall inquire into that matter before I 
dispose of the place. A thousand guineas for such a place ! I 
wonder at the fellow's conscience to make such an offer '. 

' All this is very true ; but then there are some circumstances 
that must be considered on the other hand too. You know the 
Lord -Mayor's year is almost ended, and then, who knows whether 



154 ADVENTVRE8 OF A GUINEA 

his successor will continue all the servants or not ? This one^t 
certainly is most likely he will not ; for, as he is a known enemy to 
gambling, and has publicly declared that he will put the laws in 
execution against all such practices, it cannot be thought that he 
will permit a fellow who has kept a house that has been so notorious 
for it, and where so many men have been brought to the gallows 
and their families to beggary, to hold a place of such profit under 
him. Besides, he has people of his own to provide for, who have 
served his father and himself in such a manner as to deserve his 
confidence and regard, so that every chance, to speak in his own 
way, is against this man, which is so well known, that nobody else 
would bid for the thing at all ; wherefore, if I may presume to 
speak my opinion, his offer should be immediately accepted '. 

' There may be something in what you say ; but then, if it was 
so very precarious a place, do you think some of his customers 
would not inform him of it ? they certainly must know it '. 

' Why, the very reason of my desiring your grace to close with 
him directly is for fear they should tell him, as they undoubtedly 
would, if they suspected his Intention in the least ; but he conceals 
it from them, for the principal motive of his quitting the business 
he is in, and seeking this place is, because the greatest part of his 
customers have got deeply into hia debt, which he can never expect 
them to pay, while he continues his business ; whereas, he thinks, 
if he can get this place, it will be a good excuse for his calling in his 
money, and then the Lord Mayor's power will protect him from 
their resentments. This is the true secret of the matter, for, if it 
was not on this account, he has a much better opportunity of 
getting money where he is than in any place '. 

' Well, then, be it so ; make the most you can of it, and I care 
not how soon the fellow is turned out after. What is the matter ? 
What do you laugh at ' ? 

' I beg your grace's pardon ; an odd thought just came in my 
head, but it does not signify ' 

' What is it ? Come, I must know it '. 

' Why, I am almost ashamed to mention it ; though it is but a 
trifle neither, as such matters go now. Your grace knows that my 
husband has a place under the Lord Mayor. Now, it just came 
into my head that, when his lordship comes to wait upon the king 
to be knighted, it would be no bad joke if his majesty could be 
prevailed on to knight my husband also '- 

' Ha ! ha ! ha ! And so madam has a mind to be a lady ? Why, 
with all my heart. There is no great matter in it, to be sure, and 
I see no reason why you should not have that title as well as a 
chandler or shoemaker's wife. Indeed, the candidates for knight- 
hood have run so very low of late that a man of honour should be 
ashamed to accept of it. But that is no concern of mine. I get 
the money and where I can do that, I care not if it was from Jack 
Ketch ; let others look to that. Well, since you have taken a 
fancy to stick a fool's feather in your cap, tell your good man, 
when he Imeels by his master at the important ceremony, not to be 
too hasty to rise, and I'll take care that your ambition shall be 
satisfied, though I do not know what we must do then. Your 



ADVENTVBES OF A GUINEA 155 

ladyship will never condescend to put on my shoes, or take away the 
bed -pan, so that I believe I must look out for another servant '. 

' Your grace is pleased to joke ; but you are very well convinced 
that I have no ambition above your service, and shall ever be 
proud to perform the meanest oflEices about you. Indeed, in this 
aSair, I have more respect to your grace's honour than to myself. 
While I wait upon you (and I would not give up that to be made a 
countess), I am but your servant, let me be called by what title 
I will ; but then I think it is not proper that you should be waited 
on by common servants, like any other person of your apparent 
rank. As you are the fountain of all honour and nobility, you 
should have nobles to attend you as well as knights, if I could have 
my wish. And it was this tenderness of your grace's honour that 
made me so particularly aflEected at what happened yesterday '. 

' Yesterday ? I do not understand you. What happened yes- 
terday ' ? 

' Your grace may remember that you were so kind some tiine ago 
as to obtain leave for me, from the lord of the manor, to build a 
little poultry house in a comer of yonder common field. I accord- 
ingly set the masons to work, ajii, liking the situation, thought it 
was no great trespass to enlarge the yard a little, and build a lodge, 
with a room or two,' where I could have my clothes washed, and 
drink a dish of tea with a friend at any time when I might have a 
mind to be retired. But, behold, after the wall of the yard was 
built, and the lodge raised as high as the first storey, the bailiff of 
the manor happened to come by, and, seeing what I intended, 
had the insolence to fly into a passion, and, saying it was an en- 
croachment beyond the leave I had obtained, obliged the workmen 
to pull down every stone they had laid, though I myself, on receiving 
notice of it, went there, and told him it was by your grace's order, 
and for your own use, and alleged the expense you had been at. 
But it was all to no purpose, for he would not leave the place till 
his orders were executed. Nor was this all. He has had the 
assurance also to send me word this very morning that he will 
distrain the cows that you desired me to put to graze in that field, 
if I do not directly pay for their pasture, according to the rate he is 
pleased to charge, which is more than I have been able to make of 
the milk, though, by your grace's recommendation, I have had 
such good customers for it ; so that instead of the profit I expected 
to make for you of your dairy, your grace is like to be a loser '. 

' Insolent, imreasonable fellow ! not to be content with his own 
extravagant profits, without hindering everybody else of coming 
in for the least advantage with him ; but he has neither shame nor 
conscience, or else he would be satisfied with plimdering the ponds, 
and selling the fish, and hiring out the grass as he does, without 
putting the parish to the expense of fencing in the common to pre- 
vent the people even from walking over the grass. But I may, 
some time or other, find a way to be even with him. He stands 
but badly in his master's favour, who despises such avarice, and 
would turn him out of his place directly, but that, unluckily, he 
has it under his hand for life. However, I shall watch every oppor- 
tunity to return him the compliment ; that I can assure him. Let 



156 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

him take such liberties with his equals ; I'll have him to know that 
he shall treat me with more respect '. 

' That is true. Has your grace heard how cavalierly he behaved 

lately to the young Lord ? I forget his name. The great 

beau that made such a noise by dangling after the gentleman's 
wife '. 

' I know whom you mean. No, I have heard nothing about him. 
What has been the matter ' ? 

' Ha ! ha ! ha ! I do not believe I shall be able to tell it for 
laughing. Why, your grace must know that the beau was walking 
one morning in a very plain dress, across the upper part of the 
common, where, happening to meet a farmer's maid going to drive 
home her cows, he entered into chat with her, and prevailed upon 
her to quit the path and walk with him to an unfrequented part of 
the field, where they sat down under a clump of trees, for the sake 
of a little very iimocent conversation, to be sure. Well, they had 
not been there long, when one of the under bailifis, whom this in- 
solent fellow keeps to watch the grass, seeing them go out of the 
road followed them, and, coming upon them in a very unseasonable 
minute, not only interrupted their conversation, but also asked 
the lord, whose quality he never suspected, in an imperious manner, 
how he dared to trample the grass, and threatened to take him and 
his whore before a justice and have them directly sent to BridewelL 
This insult aggravated the offence of his intrusion to such a height, 
that the lord in a rage bade the scoundrel instantly get out of his 
sight, or he would break his head. Such words, from a person of 
his appearance, raised the insolence of office so high, that the bailifE, 
without any more ado, lifted liis staff and knocked his lordship 
down, where he belaboured him severely, repeating the word 
scoundrel between every blow, till the poor battered beau was in a 
most doleful plight, though he had often told him who he was, and 
roared out his quality with all his might ; but the enraged fellow 
either did not, or pretended that he did not, believe him. 
I ' When he had beaten him as much as he thought he could, without 
danger of the gallows, he dragged him along to the highway, where, 
fortunately, a coach happened to come by, the owner of which 
knew his lordship, and took him up, ordering his servants to appre- 
hend the bailifi. But he was too nimble for them, and made his 
escape ; and now, finding his mistake and the danger into which 
he had fallen, he went directly to his master, and telling him the 
story in the most favourable manner for himself, prevailed upon him 
to promise to stand by him, particularly as he alleged that the affair 
had proceeded from his great care of his master's grass, which could 
never be kept, if he should be left to suffer for defending it. 

' In the meantime, the poor lord was in so very bad a taking that 
all the physicians and surgeons in town were gathered about him, 
by whose assistance he was confined to his bed for near a week. As 
soon as he was permitted to speak and see his friends, he sent directly 
to the head bailiff, to let him know how his man had used him ; but 
all the satisfaction he could obtain, even when he went and applied 
in person, was to have the fellow removed to another part of the 
common ; nor could he obtain this, till he declared that he would 



ADVENTVBES OF A GUINEA 157 

ma<ke his complaint directly to the lord of the manor if he had not 
some redress. It is said he talked of challenging him, but he is 
one of the grand jury of the oourt-leet, and therefore cannot be called 
to an account that way '. 



CHAPTER XLIX 

AN ODD VTSITOE TO A LADY — THE MYSTERY Or STOCK -JOBBING 

CHARITY BEGINS AT HOME — HBE GRACE'S KIND INTENTIONS FOR 
HONEST AMINADAB — ANOTHER VISITOR — THE WORTH OF HONOtTK 
— THE BEST SALVE FOB A BROKEN CHARACTER 

By tliis time the mysteries of the toilet were over, and my mistress's 
face finished for the day, when a person entered to her, whose 
appearance was far from promisiag such an intimacy with a lady 
of her rank. 

The most shabby, squalid dress covered a distorted carcass, not 
much above four feet high, but so gross that, laid upon his back, 
he would have cast a shadow near as long as when he stood upright. 
A deep olive complexion, an aquiline nose, and a mouth from ear 
to ear, fringed round with a greasy curled beard, made the beauty 
of his face correspond with the elegance of his figure. 

This extraordinary person approached her grace without intro- 
duction or ceremony, and, entering immediately upon business, 
told her that he came to know if she meant to buy in that day ; 
for the report raised in the alley, by their express from abroad, had 
given such a stroke to the funds that they had tumbled to the 
ground, but would most certainly rise again the next day, as soon 
aa the news wlrich had arrived that morning should be known, 
which could not be kept a secret, as the people wanted something to 
keep up their spirits among so many miscarriages, and divert them 
from making too close inquiries into the conduct of affairs. 

' Why, my honest friend Aminadab ', replied her grace, ' I must 
be directed in these matters by you. If you think there ia anjrthing 
to be got by buying in to-day, with all my heart ; though I must 
own I cannot conceive why you should sell out the very last week to 
buy in tins '. 

' Ah ! my lady ', returned Aminadab, ' there ia a myatery in all 
busineas, and in none greater than ours. The Bulgarian king's 
success last week raised people's spirits so high that they thought 
the world was to be all their own, and therefore bought at any price. 
Now that was the time for a prudent person to sell, as I advised 
your grace, which we had no sooner done, than instantly comes an 
express of our own, with an account that the enemy had turned 
upon him in their retreat, and entirely vanquished the vanquishers. 

' This news quite overthrew the spirits raised by the former, and 
made every one eager to sell out at any loss, for fear the enemy 
should get wings and fly over to take all they had. Now, as this 
was but a terror raised by ourselves, we take the advantage of it, 
and so buy in when others are selling out at twenty per cent, cheaper 
than we ourselves sold out last week, when the madness bent the 



158 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

other way, and may perhaps sell again the next, when another 
packet shall set things right, and bring the people back their senses. 
For the senses of the people of this country are as inconstant as the 
sea, depending entirely upon the winds that blow them news '. 

' But is it really possible that any people can be such fools ' ? 

' Oh ! please your grace, they are only too rich ; they have more 
money than they know what to do with, that is all '- 

' Then, Aminadab, we will ease them of some of the burthen. 
And would it not be better to conceal this news for another day ? 
Might not that make them fall still lower ' ? 

' But, my lady, the people want the good news '. 

' The people may hang themselves in despair ; I care not, so I 
get money '. 

' The government, though '. 

' What is the government to me ? I will get all I can, and then leave 
them to themselves to sink or swim as they will ; it is all one to me '. 

' That is true ; your grace says right. A people who do not 
know, or, at least, will not follow their own interest, are not worth 
any person's care longer than while he can make something of 
them. But we must reserve that stroke for another time. This 
news has got into the of&ces, and nothing there is a secret, you 
know. Besides, the panic was too violent to last ; it begins to 
wear oil already. In another day, they would recover their senses 
•of themselves. I think, therefore, with your grace's approbation, 
to buy in all I can to-day, without you had rather lay out your 
money in the supplies for the Protestants of Germany '. 

' With all my heart, if you can make as much of it that way as 
in the funds ; but not otherwise. I would not lose one BhiUing for 
any people under heaven '. 

. ' Your grace has a just notion of the world, and of the value of 
money that governs it. Indeed, I must say that the terms for these 
supplies are very unreasonable, considering how such things have 
been done for some time past. It is expected that people should 
bring ia their money without any premium or other advantage 
than what was publicly calculated for at the granting them. But 
these economists will find themselves mistaken. The world is 
wiser nowadays than to give up advantages which they have once 
gotten possession of. As to that affair, therefore, I should think it 
better to let it stand a little longer till the necessity becomes more 
urgent, and then they will be glad to come into our terms, if it 
were not that the poor people may be ruined in the meantime ; 
so that indeed I am at a loss what to advise your grace to do in so 
nice an affair '. 

' Why, let them be ruined, then ; it is not my fault, nor is it my 
"business to save them, nor will I part with a stalling to do it. Be- 
sides, if they do suffer by the delay, those who gave them this supply 
to prevent their ruin may give them another to repair it '. 

' I cannot but admire your grace's judgment in all things. You 
are above the foolish weakness of nature, and have the noble resolu- 
-tion to see your own family perish, rather than injure your own 
interest to relieve them. I shall obey your grace in all things. I 
go now to the alley, where business will soon begin '. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 159 

' Do, honest Aminadab, and fear not ; though I could not pro- 
cure an establishment for your whole nation, as I would have done, 
I certainly will for your family, and that is enough for you. Your 
son shall be made a baronet, at least ; you have riches enough to 
support the title '. 

' Your grace is very good. Our people are all satisfied of your 
kind intentions ; but, alas ! that was a severe disappointment to 
us, after costing us so much money. The children of the Lord weep 
over it ia their synagogues, and the daughters of Sion lament it in 
their songs ; but my household shall rejoice in thy favour, and the 
labours of my life prove my gratitude for it '. 

Honest Aminadab was no sooner gone than there entered an 
agent, seemingly of another nature, this dealing in honour, as the 
other did in money ; but the difference between them was only in 
appearance, the end of both being ultimately the same. 

' May it please your grace ', said he, advancing with due reverence 
and ceremony, ' I come to wait upon you about that place in the 

; that gentleman will not, indeed cannot, give one shilling 

more for it '. 

' Then, let the other have it ; I will not lose fivepence, much less 
five hundred pounds, for him '. 

' But, please your grace, you know what grounds he has to expect 
iton ; besides, your promise, which oaimot well be broken through, 
it was so positive '. 

■ My promise was only conditional, in my own intention, that he 
should give me as much as another, and in no other sense will I 
keep it. As for his grounds of expectations, I regard them not ; 
let him make the most of them where he can '. 

' Just as your grace pleases. I only took the liberty of speaking 
my own opinion, but always in submission to yours. Not but I 
must own I am apprehensive of this gentleman's resentment, though 
not immediately for myself, so much as for your grace's character, 
with which he may be provoked to make too free upon such an affair '. 
' Ah ! that is liberty, boasted English liberty, to speak dis- 
respectfully of your superiors. But I despise whatever he can say, 
rior will I give up my own way for fear of his impertinence '. 

• Very right ; your grace is very right. It were by no means fit 
that you should. Then it is to be considered whether this breach 
of promise may not be attended with inconveniences that may 
overbalance the advantage, as it may make others afraid to deal 
with you at another time '. 

' I will venture that : none can come to me, but for their own 
advantage, and while they can find that, they will scarce stay away 
for punctilios. So, let me hear no more of this, but close with the 
other directly '. 

' Will not your grace please to abate of your demand for that 
place in Ireland ? I really fear you rate it too high '. 

' Not a shilling ; I will not abate a shilling. Surely I ought to 

know the value of things in Ireland by this time ; I have had sufficient 

dealings thereto teachme ; it has been my privy purse for many years.' 

' But what I fear is, that if your grace does not fix upon some one 

directly, the lord-deputy may, and that would disappoint you; 



160 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

for this place has ever been immediately in his gift, and it would 
reflect a kind of dishonour on him to give it up '. 

' Dishonour, indeed ! I am much concerned for his honour, 
certainly ; and as for his naming anyone to contradict me, I believe 
he will be cautious how he does that. The example of his prede- 
cessor will teach him '. 

' However, if your grace pleases to prevent any disputes, I will 
wait on him and tell him that you have a friend whom you design 
to recommend." 

' With all my heart ; you may, if you will. But as to the price, 
I will not abate one shilling, as I said before. Do not I know that 
places in that country are either mere pensions, without anything 
to do, or even necessity of ever governing there at all, or where that 
cannot be dispensed with from the nature of the place, that no 
learning, no abilities are requisite. If it was here, indeed, where 
knowledge in a profession is absolutely necessary to a place in it, 
there might be something in higgling about the price ; but for a 
coward to scruple paying for being made a general, or a blockhead 
a judge, there can be nothing more unreasonable, and I will not hear 
another word about it. But what have you done about those titles 
which I gave you to dispose of ' ? 

' Really, I do not know what to say to your grace about them ; 
the bent of the people does not seem to incline to honours of late '. 

' No, I thought they were always as good as ready money, especi- 
ally with those who have more money than sense, and think it easier 
to buy than earn honour by merit. An Irish title was the constant 
refuge of those sons of fortune who, not being bom in the rank of 
gentlemen, or having forfeited it by their villanies, were desirous of 
changing their names for sonorous titles, to hide their disgrace, as it 
were, under an heap of honours, which, in reality only make them 
the more exposed to the view, and consequently to the censure of 
the world. But I find even that imaginary sense of honour is gone 
out of fashion, and the shadow is in no more request than the sub- 
stance at present. But since they are grown such a drug, even 
make the most you can of them ; sell them to whoever wiU buy ; 
I shall take no exceptions to persons '. 

' I shall certainly do the best I can for your grace, though they 
have been so oddly given away of late, that I verily believe people 
are ashamed of taking them, for fear of being laughed at. Rattles 
are given to children, but titles to old men, to divert them ; to some, 
in reward for not doing the very worst possibly in their power, and 
to others, for doing nothing at all. But pray, has your grace 
seen the old colonel yet ? He got his commission yesterday ; I 
wish he may mean your grace fairly '. 

' Why ? Sure you do not imagine he can have the assurance to 
think of plajdng me a trick ' ? 

' I do not positively say so, but his behaviour has been very 
mysterious '. 

Just then a servant let her grace know that the very colonel of 
whom they were talking desired leave to wait upon her. 

' I thought so ', said she, ' show him up ; I thought he would not 
dare to trifle with me ' 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 161 



CHAPTER L 

THE COLONEL PUTS THE OLD SOLDIEE trPON HEB GEACE^HEK EAGE 
AND RESENTMENT PALL TTPON HEB AGENT — HEB JTTDICIOirS AP- 
PLICATION OE THE bishop's CHAEITY, WITH HEB TENDEE CONOEEN 
FOB HEB EBIENDS ABBOAD 

The colonel advanced to her grace ■with the assurance of conscious 
virtue sparkling in hia eye, though sharpened by a oast of indigna- 
tion. ' I come ', said he, ' please your grace, to return you my 
thanks for your favours ; I have got my commission, and had the 
honour, just now, to kiss his majesty's hand upon it. As your 
recommendation was more efiectual to procure me this reward than 
the labours of a life which has not been undistinguished in the 
service, I thought it my duty to make your grace this acknowledg- 
ment, and to offer you any service in the power of an honest heart, 
and no bad hand in return '. 

' Colonel ', repUed her grace, ' I am glad it has been in my power 
to serve a man of your character, and I do not desire any such 
return '- 

' I am much obliged to your grace for your good opinion ', returned 
he, ' which I hope I shall never forfeit. I thank God my character 
will not disgrace your recommendation ; nor shall you ever have 
reason to blush at the mention of my name. I have the honour to 
be your grace's most humble servant '. 

' But colonel ', said the gentleman, the agent, who stood by, 
' though her grace has no occasion for such a return as you offer, 
having no quarrels to be fought, there is a return of another nature 
which you should not forget, especially as you promised it, too '. 

' Why, look you, sir ', replied the colonel, ' as to that matter, it 
is most certain that I did something like, promise some such thing ; 
but when I have told the whole affair honestly to her grace, I am 
sure she will be above demanding it '. 

' Sir ', said her grace, ' I do not desire to hear anything more 
about it ; and I must tell you that you have behaved like an old 
knave '. 

' Say an old soldier, rather, madam ', replied he, with some 
warmth ; ' the other is a term I am not used to '. 

' A nice distinction, truly, and well worthy of a man of honour ', 
said the agent with a sneer. 

' Have a care, sir ; guard your expressions ; my respect, my 
obligations to her grace will make me bear anything from her. But 
I must be so free as to tell you that I have not the same sentiments 
for you '. 

' What, are you going to make a riot in my apartments ' ? 

' Not in the least, madam ; my respect for your grace is a suffi- 
cient security from that. I would only hint it to that gentleman, 
that he may not always have the protection of your grace's presence ; 
that is all, madam '. 

' You are a knavish old ruffian ; but I shall take care that you do 
not come off so '. 



162 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

' As your grace pleases for that. By the laws of my country I 
oannot lose my commission while I do my duty, nor will my gracious 
master be influenced to do me wrong, though, in the multiplicity of 
greater affairs, my services, my hardships could not reach his eye. 
But as I would not bear the imputation of any crime, much more so 
black ones as dishonesty or ingratitude, you must give me leave to 
set this affair in a just light to your grace now, especially as I may 
never have another opportunity of doing myself that justice. 

' Enraged, almost to desperation, to find that thirty years' service 
— the merits of which were often written in my blood, and stand 
recorded in these scars — were not sufficient to procure me the regular 
advances of my rank, without a merit of another nature, I resolved 
to quit the barren paths which I had so long pursued in vain, and 
try those methods which I saw practised with success by others. 
I therefore applied myself to your grace, who seemed struck with 
my hardships, and promised me your favour, referring me, for more 
particular information, to this gentleman, who would have lowered 
my sense of your goodness, by loadiug it with terms which were not 
in my power to fulfil. 

' Had your grace mentioned them to me yourself, I should most 
certainly have owned my inability ; but, coming from him, I looked 
upon them as the finesse of his own art, which it was not imjustifi- 
able to return with a feint of mine ; and therefore I gave an equi- 
vocal acquiescence with his proposal, for he dares not say I made a 
particular or positive promise of anything. 

' If I have done wrong in this, I am mistaken, and sorry for it ; 
but still it is not within the article of war that makes an error in 
judgment criminal, because it was not against an enemy ; but by 
all the rules of war, and that is my profession, and the only one I 
have studied, it is allowable to oppose art to art, and try to foil 
the devil at his own weapons. This is what I have done ; and the 
success of this stratagem, which has effected by a coup de main 
what I had been making regular advances to so long in vain, proves 
the justness of my plan, and must extort your grace's approbation, 
when the passion raised by this gentleman's mercenary influence 
shall cool '. 

Saying this, the veteran marched off in triumph, leaving my 
mistress and her agent staring at each other in the strongest surprise. 

Her grace found utterance first, and having no other object of her 
rage, turned all its violence upon her agent. 

' So then ', said she, ' after all, I find the old ruffian has outwitted 
you, with a general promise, or no promise at all, it seems, for you 
did not dare to contradict him. I thought, sir, that I had cautioned 
you before against this very thing, and given you positive orders to 
take nothing but the money. But you shall pay for your neglect ; 
you shall make good the loss to me. As for the old ruffian, I will 
speak to his general, and have him broke for a cheat. Talk to me 
of his services ! what are his services to me ? But I will have him 
broke ; his example shall terrify others from attempting to abuse 
me so again '. 

' I wish it were proper or possible ', replied her agent, as soon as 
want of breath made her stop, ' for your grace to have him punished 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 163 

for his insolence ; but suoh a tongue as his might lay matters too 
open, if once set a-going, for you see he is not to be over-awed to 
anything. As for Ms commission, there is no loss in it ; for it was 
ordered for him before I applied, though I made him thrak it was 
obtained by your interest, to try what I could bring him to. Your 
grace may be assured that I would not have taken any promise, 
had it been otherwise ; and I was just going to tell you this, when 
his coming prevented me '. 

' It may be so ', returned she, ' but I shall be better satisfied of 
it before I give up your making good the loss '. 

The agent was relieved from further persecution for that time by 
the entrance of a messenger, who was going to Germany, and caUed 
tojknow if her grace had any commands for her friends there. 

' None but my good wishes and prayers for their deliverance '^ 
replied she, with a deep sigh, ' which are constantly offered up for 
them. I am sorry I am not able to send them any relief from 
myself ; but I have nothing in my power — ^no places, no oppor- 
tunities of getting anything. These few pieces ', taking about a 
dozen guineas from her pocket, where she had thrown the bishop's 
change of her note, ' are all, at present, in my possession. Give' them 
to my dear mother, with my duty, and tell her I wiU send the clothes 
she wrote for as soon as possible ; and assure the rest of my friends 
of my constant attention to their interest '- 

'Alludes to the Seven Years War [1756-63] during which the 
fate of Hanover, of which the Countess was a native, was at stake. 



END OF THE FIBST VOLUME 



VOLUME n 



CHAPTER I 

OHBYSAI. OHAIiraES HIS SEBYICE FOB TEAT OF A TTSVAL ATTENDANT 
trPON THE GBEAT — THE HBTOET OF THE trUFOETTTNATE GLTSTBB- 
FIFE MAKER, WHO WAS LIKE TO BE HANOED FOB DIBTYINO HIS 
FINaEBS — AN HUMBLE IMITATION OP HIGH LIFE — ANOTHEE 
dHANOB BEESraS OHETSAL INTO THE POSSESSION OF A PEESON OF 
AN BXTEAOBDINABy OHAEAOTEE — OONVEESATION BETWEEN HIM 
AND A VEEY NOTED PEESON — LET THOSE LAUGH THAT WIN 

I WAS, by this time, so sick of high life, that I was very glad of 
beiag one of the number her grace gave to the messenger, as I 
saw no prospect of pleasure in such a service. He had no sooner 
received her grace's commands, than he immediately went to the 
offlce for his dispatches, where he was sent on another errand, 
while they were getting ready. 

This was to apprehend a poor wretch i who sold glyster-pipes 
about the streets, but being unable to get bread in his profession, 
had fallen upon a scheme that he imagined might raise him to the 
notice of the world in the light of a state criminal ; and get his 
hunger well satisfied, while he should be a happy prisoner for 
offences which he imagined could not be attended with any bad 
consequences. 

Big with this project he had entered into a correspondence with 
some person abroad, of equal consequence with himself, and to 
him communicated the secret intelligence which he daily picked up 
at coffee-houses, or found in the public newspapers, which his 
great friend was to forward to some great person in the service of 
the enemy. 

He had long continued this trade unnoticed, as he thought, 
though all his letters had been opened at the post-office, but the 
stufi contained in them was thought below regard; so that he 
began to fear that this scheme would turn to no account. But 
now some miscarriages in public affairs, alarming the resentment 
of the people, making it evident that the secrets of the nation 
were betrayed, this insignificant creature was thought of, and 
ordered to be taken into custody. 

Though this was the thing which he had always proposed by 
his undertaking; to keep up the farce he counterfeited the 
strongest terrors, and put on every appearance of conscious guilt, 
so far, that he had like to have over-acted his part, and fallen a 
sacrifice to the law, which he only meant to elude ; a just judgment 

*Dr Kenzie [Davis's Olio}. Glyster or clyster- pipes were tubes 
employed for the application of clysters. Clyster-pipe was sometimes 
used as a contemptuous term for a poor sort of doctor. 



166 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

on the base depravity of the soul that could descend to so 
iniquitous a scheme, as to trifle with his sacred duty to his 
country, to support an anxious, burthensome being. For his 
counterfeited fears not only gave weight to the appearances, which 
were before so very strong against him, but also made it probable 
that he was guilty of more than he was at first suspected of ; this 
justified the prosecuting him with the utmost severity, and 
sacrificing him to the indignant rage of the people, who called 
aloud for some victim, to atone for their reproachful losses. 

The criminal soon perceived his error, and would have recanted 
all he had said ; but this was not admitted him ; his own con- 
fessions had confirmed the charge against hith, and he was given 
up to the laws : to which, on the evidence of such strong appear- 
ances, though no intelligence could be proved against him, but 
what he showed the public authority mentioned before, his life 
was declared a forfeit. i ; 

But the oontemptibility of his station and behaviour proved his 
safety, and mercy was extended to a wretch beneath vengeance, 
after he had served the turn, and amused the people for his day. 

I did not then stay in England, to see the event of this affair, 
but having learned it since my return, I thought it better to 
conclude the story in this place together, than to interrupt my 
narrative with it, at another time. 

It would be doing injustice to my master, to imagine that he 
had profited so little by his frequent intercourse with persons in 
genteel life, and particularly by her grace's late example, as to 
think it necessary to apply the money she had given him to any 
other use than his own : accordingly, when he was setting out, he 
gave me to his wife, for the support of his family in his absence. 

But this spirited lady had a politer way of thinking, than to 
obey his directions, or deny herself any of the genteel pleasures of 
life, for the sake of such a mean, domestic duty, as the care of 
a family. As soon therefore as his back was turned, she put on 
her hat and cardinal and posted away to one of her most 
intimate acquaintances, a lady who kept a chandler's shop in the 
neighbourhood, to advise with her, about settling a party at her 
house, for the next evening. 

An affair of this importance required deliberation ; accordingly, 
after tea, they retired into the bed chamber, the parloiur they sat 
in being open to the shop, so that they were liable to be overheard 
by everyone who should come in, and there, over a comfortable 
glass of right Hollands, fixed upon the company, and settled the 
ceremonial, and fare of the entertainment. This great business 
being dispatched, my mistress returned home, and getting a 
gentleman who lodged in her house, at the expense of the state, 
to write cards for her, sent them by her husband's assistant to 
the company, to invite them to play a game at cards, and spend 
the next evening with her, and then proceeded to put everything 
in order for their reception. 

Her great anxiety, and the preparation she made, raised my 
curiosity not a little, to see the vanity and vice of the higher 
ranks of life mimicked by such a set ; but I was disappointed at 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 167 

that time, being paid away to a tavern-keeper, next morning for 
■wine and brandy for the occasion. 

My new master was a striking instance of the inconsistency of 
life, and the hypocrisy of the human heart: he had for many 
years kept one of the most notorious brothel-taverns in the town ; 
but not content with this public insult to the laws, in defiance of 
every sense of shame, he at the same time professed himself a 
reformer of reUgion; and while the grossest scenes of riot and 
debauchery were carrying on openly in hie house, was chanting 
hymns in a conventicle, and groaning in spirit, for the wickedness 
of the times, with a face as meagre and mortified as the picture of 
famine. I see you wonder at such a palpable contradiction ; but 
that proceeds from ignorance of life, every view of which shows 
instances as gross as this ; the gaming devotee, the pensioned 
patriot, and the drunken priest, being equally offensive to common 
sense and reason. As for my new master, he had as powerful 
motives for his conduct as the greatest of them aU. Poverty made 
him, in his early youth, turn pander to such a house as he now 
kept, when the demure sanctity of his looks screened him so 
effectually from suspicion, that he was able to make acquaintances 
in families, and accompUsh seductions, which no other of his trade 
dared to attempt. By these means, he soon acquired a sum of 
money suflScient to set up this house for himself ; when his 
character immediately brought him into business, that in a little 
time made his fortune : but, for this success he was chiefly indebted 
to a master-stroke of superior genius ; for, having observed iu the 
mystery of his profession, that there is no private sinner like a 
public saint, as soon as he thus arose above the drudgery of 
business, and, from porter, became master of a tavern, he asso- 
ciated himself with a set of reformers, who went preaching up and 
down the town, at whose meetings he had an opportunity of 
fimding out new faces for his best customers, and making ac- 
quaintances with the leaders, who, observing his discretion, soon 
admitted him into their mystery, and made his house the scene 
of their secret meetings, to settle their business, laugh at the 
follies they lived by, and practise the vices which they preached 
against. Such success might be thought to have satisfied his 
avarice, but the habit has taken such hold of him that he cannot 
desist, and he now does from inohnation, what was at first the 
effect of necessity. 

I should not have dwelt so long upon this character, but that it 
serves to explain the ways of the world, and prove the folly of an 
opinion, generally received among men, that they can change 
their course of hfe whenever they please; and as soon as their 
end is answered, and they have heaped up a fortune, by the 
iniquity of a profession, quit it at once, and live virtuously upon 
the earnings of vice. 

The evening after I came into his possession, the high priest of 
the conventicle^ called upon him, to spend an hour in spiritual 

1 George Whitefield [1714-1787], the Methodist, who was in England 
now between his third and his final journey to America. 



168 ADVENTUBES OF A GUINEA 

conversation. After examining into his progress in grace, and the 
increase of his faith, and assurance of election (for such is the 
power of custom, and the pleasure of cheating the world, that they 
practise the art even upon each other) he to'd him that he had a 
most particular occasion for his most private i^om that evening. 
'For', said he, shaking him by the hand, 'my friend, as I have 
found by experience that the only way to foil the devil Is at his 
own weapons, I have appointed Momns, the ballad-singer ', whose 
attack upon me has made such a noise, to meet me here this 
evening, and make up the afiair over a glass of wine '. 

' In truth ', answered my master, a good deal surprised, ' your 
reverence's meekness and patience must needs be very great ; or 
you could not bear ever to mention him, in any degree of Christian 
charity and benevolence, after so outrageous and gross an attack 
as he has made upon you, without the least personal provocation ; 
for what was that to him, what you said or did to the rest of the 
world, his morals or religion were in no danger! But you were 
born to be an example to the age, and a shining light to guide the 
steps of the faithful '. 

' A truce with this canting now, my friend ', replied the doctor, 
' and let us talk a few words Uke men of the world. Your proved 
fidelity and prudence making me not scruple to reveal the whole 
mystery of the ministry to you, I will let you into the secret of 
this affair. You must know, then, that I have, for some time, 
perceived the humour of the people begin to waver greatly, and 
the fervency of their devotion to coo], in spite of all I could do to 
keep it up, by preaching, fasting, prayer, and lamentation, by 
crying up my own piety, and the wonderful effect of my spiritual 
labours; it was necessary, therefore, to have recourse to some 
expedient, to prevent their falling off entirely, and accordingly, I 
pitched upon this, which has exceeded my expectations; for, 
instead of making my people ashamed of coming to me, it has 
piqued their pride, and now they resolved to show, that they 
scorn as much to be laughed, as preached, out of their own way. 
This, my friend, is the way of the world, which, since we cannot in 
reality mend, we must only strive to make the best of. If I could 
carry on my business without his assistance, I most certainly 
would never have entered into such a confederacy, any more than 
you would keep a brothel and entertain whores and rogues, if you 
could make equal profit by any other company ' 

'I am much obliged to your reverence', returned my master, 
' for putting me in any degree of comparison with yourself ; but 
it is too great an honour ! I act in a low sphere ; but I still have 
the pleasure to think, that, even in my poor way, I contribute 
something towards your great work; as there could not be so 
many converts to resort to you for spiritual comfort, if there were 
no places of this kind to encourage vice and debauchery. You see, 
sir, that I enter into the spirit of your design, and deserve your 
confidence, by this return of mine. There are secrets in all 

' Samuel Foote, the actor and farce- writer [1720-77], satirised the 
Methodists in The Minor [1760-61]. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 169 

professions; and as you have entered into a league with your 
professed enemy, that you may be able to play into each other's 
hands, so I, notwithstanding the probity of my profession, have a 
private understanding with ail the ladies of pleasure who resort to 
this house, who, in return for their being brought into good 
company, never fail to enhance expenses, and countenance every 
imposition of false measures, false charges, and a thousand others, 
by which a prudent man turns the folly of the world to his own 
advantage. As to this confederacy between you and the ballad- 
singer, I own I never suspected the least of it ; and, indeed, I still 
am at a loss to think how you could bear the personal reflections, 
especially, which he has thrown upon you. What was the 
misfortune of your form to him, that he should call you Dr 
Hunchback ' ' ? 

' Why, that is true enough ', answered the doctor : ' in that he 
exceeded my directions ; and to call him to account for it, is part 
of the business of this appointment. Everything was settled 
between us. We have hitherto met at our friend Mrs Brimstone's \ 
who first negotiated the affair between us, and consented to take 
her share of the ridicule, to advance the commou cause. She will 
be here to-night, too, so that we shall have an agreeable set. I 
believe I hear him just come in. I directed him to inquire for 
number one ; do you show him into the private room, and when 
the coast is clear I'll join you'. 



CHAPTER n 
chbysal's masteb staets at ma own apparition — interview 

BETWEEN THE DOOTOE AND A NOTED BALLAD-SINGER — THE 
HISTORY OT A FAMOUS BALLAD — ALL TRADES ALIKE 

The person ' my master was sent to meet had something so 
uncommon in his appearance as instantly struck my attention. 
Every passion of the human heart was printed in his face so 

' Hunchback and Squintum are two nicknames of Whitefield ; the 
latter is the name he goes by in The Minor, because of the cast in Ms 
eye. 

2 Foote's Mrs Cole, in The Minor, identified with Mother Douglas, a 
noted procuress, who lived in a splenilidly furnished house in Covent 
Oarden, d. 1761. Hogarth put her into his ' March to Finohley '. 
Foote himself acted the part in The Minor, where her mixture of 
religious unction and abandoned morals is horribly comic. 
' Cf. Churchill's description of this Protean mimic : — 
By turns transform'd into all kinds of shapes, 
Constant to none, Foote laughs, cries, struts, and scrapes ; 
Now in the centre, now in van or rear. 
The Proteus shifts, bawd, parson, auctioneer. 
His strokes of humour, and his bursts of sport 
Are all contaiu'd in tliis one word, distort. 

The Eoaciad, 395-400. 



170 f;"^' '/ r'ADVENTVRES OF A GUINEA 

strongly, that he could at pleasure display it in all its force, while 
his very look and gesture turned some vice or folly into ridicule. 

' You inquire for number one, sir ? ' said my master, bowing 
with the profoundest respect. 

' I do, sir,' answered the other, returning his bow, assuming his 
look, and imitating his voice, in a manner that would have extorted 
laughter from despair, ' inquire for number one '. 

Itough my master was no stranger to his talents, which he had 
often seen him display at the expense of others, this personal 
application of them to himself threw him into such confusion, that, 
in spite of his long-practised assurance, a blush broke feebly 
through his unimpassioned, lifeless face, and he had scarce power 
to show him into the room. The ballad-singer, seeing that he had 
him at command, would not pursue his advantage any further, at 
that time, for fear of frightening him away ; but putting on the 
exact countenance, and mimicking the voice and manner of the 
doctor, ' I am come, my friend and brother in the Lord ', said he, 
'to inquire into thy spiritual estate, to give thee ghostly advice, 
and commune with thee, for a short space, for our mutual edifica- 
tion '. The surprise and manner of this address had such an effect 
upon my master, that he could not refrain bursting into laughter ; 
and immediately recovered from the confusion into which the 
ridicule of himself had thrown him. 

They were scai-ce seated, when the doctor entered, and addressing 
himself to the stranger, ' I am glad to see you, sir ', said he, taking 
him by the hand, ' and heartily congratulate you on your success. 
You see, I was not mistaken in my judgment. I knew what 
would take with the taste of the pubhc. There is nothing pleases 
them so much as a little profaneuesa, and ridicule of religion: a 
fling at the clergy never fails to raise a laugh.' 

'I acknowledge your judgment, sir', answered the other, raising 
up his shoulders, rolling his eyes and echoing every cadence of the 
doctor's voice, ' and thank you for your congratulation ; but I must 
beg leave to differ in opinion with you, as to the cause of my 
success, for I have never had the least fling at the clergy, nor been 
guilty of profaneness, or ridiculing religion, in my ballad ; the 
abuse of religion by hypocrisy, and making the profession of virtue 
a sanction for the practice of vice, were the objects of my satire ; 
and the reception it has met with from the public, shows that the 
people have a proper sense of such vices '. 

The doctor was so struck at the reflection of himself, when the 
other began to speak, that he started, in the utmost astonish- 
ment, and was unable to interrupt him till he had finished his 
discourse, which else he certainly would have done, while my 
master stood almost convulsed with laughter. But his triumph 
was not long ; for the ballad-singer turning short upon him, and 
instantaneously assuming his cadaverous appearance, and bowing 
in the same manner, ' And you, sir ', continued he, addressing him- 

• The Minor, Foote's piece ridiculing the Methodists, failed on its 
first produotion at Dublin in 1760, but was a great success next year, 
when it afi^arod in an enlarged form in London. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 171 

self to hinij 'must have had ample experience, in the course of 
your business, that the taste of the town inclines quite another 
way, the most profligate in practice being the most pious in 
profession '. i 

This sudden transition from the doctor restored him to his 
spirits, who in his turn could not avoid pointing with his finger, and 
laughing most immoderately at the silly look of my master, though 
he was not quite so much abashed as he had been before. 

As soon as the doctor could speak, ' However I may doubt your 
opinion ', said he to the ballad-singer, ' I acknowledge the irresist- 
ible force of your powers of ridicule, and beg a cessation of them 
for a moment, till we talk of our business. I will not dispute 
about the cause of yom success, but I think you need not have 
fallen upon my person. My professions and practice surely were 
enough, with your own exaggerations ! Why, then, need you give 
me the opprobrious nickname of hunchback, which has spread so, 
that I shall never get rid of it ? The very children haunt me 
with it, as I go along the streets '. 

' Good heavens ' ! answered the other, ' how subject are the 
wisest men to the weakness of vanity! I should have thought 
that you were long since proof to anything the world could say of 
you, or you would have given up yom: trade before now. As to 
my calling you this name, you must know that the whole success 
of our scheme depended upon it; for if I had not turned the 
ridicule against your person, the taste of the pubhc is so gross, 
that I might have laughed alone at your opinions. But what 
success have you had ? Do you find your flock gather upon 
this attack on their shepherd ' ? 

'AVhy, pretty well', replied the doctor, 'pretty weU. They 
seem to show a proper sense of it. As for me, I appear affected 
at it in a very extraordinary manner, that is solely upon your 
account ; and to convince them and all the world of the strength of 
my charity, I design to-morrow to offer up prayers for your conver- 
sion, as being in a dangerous state of salvation, and then, on the 
merit of that, to propose a subscription for the relief of two or 
three families, whom your example has led into ruin '. 

'Bravo, doctor', interrupted the other, 'teU me of profanenesa 
again ! But I hope I am to have a share in the subscription, 
as it is to be proposed on my account; at least, you will let 
me assist in the distribution of it ' ? 

'Take care, my friend'! returned the doctor: 'another word of 
that kind, and I declare ofi the connection. I will have nobody 
pry into my conduct, or interfere with my business. I did not 
ask any part of your gains, though you got so much in every 
company where you sung your baUad; nor did I speak a word 
in behalf of the other poor ballad-singers you picked up about 
the streets, and set to sing for you, though the wretches com- 
plained that you starved them '. 

The ballad-singer, perceiving that he had touched upon a tender 
point, thought proper to waive it, as he did not choose to break 
off so advantageous a connection. ' As to that ', said he, ' I did 
but jest. I never interfere with any man's matters. But that's 



172 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

true: I have bad news to tell you! The clerk of the parisn 
flent me word yesterday, that understanding I sung my ballad to 
a psalm-time, he let me know, that I must change my note 
directly, or he would order the beadles to whip me out of the 
parish, if ever I presumed to sing there again; and to mend 
the matter, at the same time ordered me to make use of an old 
blackguard tune, which he sent me, the vulgar stupidity of which 
blunts the edge of the ridicule, which has never turned against 
the tune itself, but solely against the prostitution of it ; which can 
never be so effectually attacked, as by repeating the maimer 
exactly in which it is sung. But where is our friend Brimstone ? 
I expected to hscve met her here '. 

Just as he said this, my master was called out, where he found 
a venerable matron, supported by two chairmen, who inquiring in 
a feeble voice for number one, he directly showed her in to the 
company. 



CHAPTER in 

A VENERABLE MATRON COMPLETES THE COMPAinr — THE CtTBTAIir 

LIPTBD UP, AND SEVERAL UNEXPECTED DISCOVEBIES MADE 

MOMUS PLAYS SUCCESSIVELY UPON DR HUNCHBACK AND MOTHEB 
BRIMSTONE — AETER VARIOUS DISASTERS, THE EVENENQ IS CON- 
CLUDED IN CHARACTER 

The matron,' whom my master was handing in to his friends, 
displayed one of those figures which lose by the most forcible 
description. Her face, though broken by debauchery and disease, 
preserved the remains of a most pleasing sweetness and beauty; 
but her body was bloated by intemperance almost out of every 
resemblance of the human form. She wore on her head a richly 
laced cap, over which half a dozen fine handkerchiefs almost con- 
cealed a piece of greasy flannel. Her gown, of the richest silk, 
flowed loosely round her, under a velvet cloak, Uned with ermine ; 
while her legs and feet, swollen out of all shape, and too tender to 
bear any ligature, were wrapped up in flannels. 

My master received this amiable creature from the chairmen: 
and stooping under as much as he was able to bear of the burthen 
of her body, assisted her to limp into the room. The contrast 
between her and the shabby skeleton of her supporter was so 
strikingly ridiculous, that the moment they appeared Momus, 
burst into an immoderate fit of laughter; and turning to the 
doctor (who was not much less affected, though practice had given 
him such a mastery over the muscles of his face, that they never 
betrayed the passions of his heart), 'Behold," said he, 'the 
blessed fruit of thy ministry, and rejoice. See how the spirit 
assisteth the flesh to struggle with the infirmities of nature '. And 
then, waddling up to her, in her own gait, ' Dear mother ', address- 

1 Mrs Brimstone, aliaa Mrs Cole, alicu Mother Douglas. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 173 

ing himself to her, 'give me your other arm; rest a little part of 
your weight, an hun(&ed or two, upon me ! Come ! Let me help 
you into that great chair ' ! 

' Oh ! oh ! oh ! my poor bones ' ! exclaimed she. ' How you pull 
me along 1 you will tear me to pieces 1 Oh I oh ' ! 

' Never fear, mother 1 never tear that ' ! answered he. ' Crazy as 
your carcass is, it will stick a little longer together. Your friends 
are not ready for you yet '. 

'Go! go 1 you're a wicked creature, a profane wretch. Dear 
doctor ! I thought I should never see you more ! I had a sad night 
of it ; a most said one indeed. But the spirit comforted me. Oh, 
if it were not for the comforts of the spirit, there would be no 
bearing the pains of this life! I was purely when you left met 
Your pious conversation had comforted my heart ; and the other 
bottle we cracked together raised my spirits, so that I forgot all my 
pains. But I was not to be so happy long ! Satan envied me, and 
threw temptation in my way I This wicked imp, and half a dozen 
of his roairing companions, came in upon me, just as you went out 
at the back-door ! Well ! to be sure they have a great deal to 
answer for ! I was just beginning to read my pious exportation you 
left me, when in they came, snatched the book out of my hand, 
and, calling for the ladies, insisted on my sitting with them ; so, as 
you know I always loved innocent mirth, I could not refuse. But, 
alas ! I paid dearly for it this morning ! My poor bones I And 
then my head ! My poor head is quite gone, quite gone I I can 
bear nothing ! Oh, what a difference there is between spending an 
evening in edifying conversation over a sober bottle, with a pious 
friend or two, and these ranting riotous scenes 1 though they 
behaved so like gentlemen, and were so good company, that there 
was no leaving them ! But it is all folly, all vanity ! I am resolved 
I will leave it off ! I will not foDow it much longer, I am resolved ! 
I'll wean myself from this world, and think of nothing but a new 
life ! I hope the baronet won't use poor Betsy iU ! I ddd not like 
his refusing to taste the ratafia ! I should be ruined if anything 
ailed her ! She is more inquired for than all the ladies in the 
house. And my lord — ^he is sweet company. But it is a pity he 
is so wicked 1 He was going to bum my book of devout exercises ; 
and then, that profane song of yours ! what need he sing that ! I 
wonder what pleasure people can find in profaneness! Where 
there is any enjoyment, it is another thing; but this is being 
wicked for wickedness' sake. It is a great pity, for he is a very 
generous fine gentleman ! He gave PoU ten guineas this morning ! 
He is very fond of PoU ; he always has her when Betsy is engaged. 
Oh I oh ! oh ! shall I ever get rid of these pains ! When shall 
I be happy in heaven ' ? — 

While she was running on thus, the doctor was busied in 
writing a letter to himself, as from a family in distress, for whom 
he intended to solicit a subscription the next day from his congre- 
gation ; and my master was laying glasses on the table, and draw- 
ing the corks out of several bottles ; so that Momus alone attended 
to her, by the significant archness of whose look it was easy to 
J>erceive, that he was laying up a fund for future entertainment. 



174 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

and would not have interruped her, had she continued her discourse 
ever so long ; but the doctor's turning to the bottle put a stop to 
her, and introduced a general conversation. 

' I am sorry, my friend,' said he, addressing himself to her, ' to 
hear you complain so : I left you in a blessed temperature of mind 
and body last night, but I much fear that the intemperance you 
mentioned must have equally disturbed both. The most pious 
man knoweth not what folly he uttereth when he is full of wine. 
A little is good, and rejoiceth the heart; but too much marreth 
the understanding and letteth loose the secrets of the wife.' 

'As for that there, dear doctor, never fear me; since the 
blessed hour of my call, I have never disclosed one secret about the 
matter: I never mentioned a word of it. But, doctor, what did 
you do with the young lady whom you would see home last night ? 
I would not refuse you, to be sure ; but I hope you have not put 
any more idle notions in her head : she is very young, and like to 
do a great deal of business, therefore her call need not come this 
great while ! It will be time enough some years hence ; I had a 
great deal of trouble to bring her to; and now, if you have 
spoiled her, I shall have all the work to do over again. Nobody 
knows the trouble and expense I am at for the service of the 
public : nobody knows ! If it was not for me, gentleman would 
be forced to take up with common servant-maids, and such low- 
lived creatures; but I provide gentlewomen for them! ladies of 
birth and education, and yet I am not regarded; nobody thanks 
me: this is poor encouragement to serve the public, very poor, 
indeed ; but virtue has its own reward, that's my comfort. I do 
the best I can ; and if I do not receive a proper return, that is 
not my fault ; let the world answer for it : I do my part ; and so 
my mind is at ease '. 

'That you do', said Momus, while she stopped to drink, 'that 
you do ; your diligence never slackens ; come, fill your glass ! Here's 
to the reformation of manners, a work that we aU labour in alike '. 

' By your leave, good sir ', interrupted the doctor, with a look 
of offended importance and tone, ' not all alike, I presume : I 
believe you will allow, that there is some difference between your 
profession and mine, at least '. 

' So then ', answered Momus, ' you are returning to the old point : 
I thought I had said enough to you on that head before ; differ- 
ence, ay; that there is indeed; but perhaps you are not sensible 
in whose favour that difference is ; I sing a song that makes 
people laugh; and put vice and folly out of countenance, by 
showing them in a ridiculous light, and this only for a trifling 
pittance of that money which they devote to mere pleasure. But 
you, by drawing horrors that never existed out of your own 
imagination, and preaching up doctrines impossible to practise, 
frighten your poor deluded followers out of every enjoyment of 
their lives, and pillage them of the money that should support 
their families and pay their debts, under pretence of imaginary 
charities ! This is the difference between us.' 

' Good lack I good lack ' ! interrupted the sage matron, ' how 
can people be such fools as to fall out thus about nothing I 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 176 

What signifies it where the diflference lies, ao you can both can do 
your business ? It is just the same thing as if my landlord here 
and I should enter into a dispute about the reputation of our 
houses. I thought I had made you both promise never to 
mention this matter any more! Come, doctor, here's prosperity 
to all our business, without any such foolish distinctions.' 

The^judgment of this mediation was too plain to admit of any 
dispute. The competitors flUed their glasses, and, shaking hancfa 
very cordially, drank their friend's toast. ' Well, now there is 
some pleasure in this,' continued she, 'things are like to go on 
well, when all parties agree; but when some people fall out — 
you know the rest of the saying — But, my friend Momus, I 
have news for you ! That story of the young lady, that you put 
in your ballad, has answered just as I said. The world thought it 
would blow me up; but I knew better; I never had a better run 
of company in my life, than to inquire into that affair ; and they 
all of the right sort — ^your secret, grave, old, rich culls, just fit to 
do business with. At first, I always deny it with the strongest 
oaths and imprecations, and rail at you for inventing such a 
scandalous story ; but afterwards, as if I am put ofi my guard by 
the hquor, I seem to place a confidence in their professions of 
secrecy and friendship, and, with many tears, own the whole ; that 
is, so far as to my having the lady in my power; and then the 
consequence is, that they all entreat me to let them see her (that 
is, singly, for such chaps always come alone) ; when, such is the 
pleasure in debauching virtue, that, besides maldng me a hand- 
some present for my kindness, they leave no temptation untried to 
prevaU upon the lady, whom they generally take to themselves 
upon a genteel settlement ; by which means I have got a pretty 
sum, and have besides had an opportunity of providing for near a 
dozen of my women, who were too well known upon the town to 
do anything in the public way ; for this kind of customers have 
too great a regard for their characters ever to mix in company 
that might undeceive them; so, you see, doctor, that I do not 
forget your instructions of doing all the good in my power ; and sure 
it is no small matter to rescue so many poor women, who were 
no longer capable of getting a genteel livehhood for themselves, 
from want and misery, and getting them a comfortable settlement 
for hfe, so that they have nothing to do now, but attend to you, 
and make their peace with heaven. Come ! here's my service to 
you, my friend Momus ; and if you can think of any other story of 
me, that can serve your turn, and get off another ballad, never 
spare me, I'll forgive you '. 

' And so will I too ', added the doctor, ' though he should call me 
a worse name than Hunchback ! Let them laugh who win. 
While our railing at each other in pubUo answers our own ends, 
we were fools to drop it ; as to the deceit in it, it is a virtue ; 
for sure it is better to live thus in friendship and charity with all 
mankind ; than to be the real enemies we seem ; and so, sir, here's 
my hearty service to you. And let us pursue our works in 
concert, without any more of these broils. So let us drink about, 
for an hour or two; for I must leave you early, being obliged to 



176 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

write an exhortation for the old duchess', which I must carry her 
early in the morning, when she designs to visit her cousin, the 
colonel, who is under sentence of dea*h in Newgate for murder; 
not that I think either that, or her preaching, will have any effect 
upon him ; but she will try ; and I do not care to disoblige her, as 
she is not only a good subscriber on all occasions, but also a credit 
to our conventicle, which would never have arisen into such 
esteem with the people, if some persons of quality had not 
brought it into fashion '. 

' Why, ay, to be sure, there is a great deal in that ', added the 
matron, ' fashion is a powerful thing. If it was not for that, I 
could never do the business I do. But, since the nobiUty have 
made it a fashion to marry their mistresses, there is no great 
difficulty in bringing a private gentleman's daughter into our way 
of life, as it gives her the only chance she can possibly have, of 
making her fortune, and becoming a lady ; for, as to the example 
of those few, who married ladies of virtue for mere love, it was 
too old-fashioned, and romantic, to have any influence. But 
that's true, doctor, I forgot to mention something to you last 
night, that has given me great concern ! How could you be so 
indiscreet as to accompany that highwayman to Tyburn the 
other day ? And then to take his hand, and kiss it, before all 
the people ? Ke ! it turns my stomach to think of it ! I do not 
know how you can expect any lady will ever let you kiss her lips 
after such a filthy action. Besides, it is a scandal to all your 
congregation, that you should appear so familiar with such low- 
lived creatures, and seems a kind of encouragement to their crimes. 
If you had heard what remarks two or three ladies, who called at 
my house yesterday evening, made upon it, I am sure you would 
never do it again '. 

' Go to, woman, go to ! ' answered the doctor, vrith a contemptu- 
ous look, 'take the beam out of thine own eye before you find 
fault with the mote in your neighbour's. What highwayman's 
crimes are equal to yours ? The greatest danger of scandal that 
I ever ran has been in condescending to keep company with you. 
In that, indeed, I may be said, with too great an appearance of 
truth, to encourage the basest crimes '. 

The matron, who, with all her prudence was of a warm temper, 
could not brook such an insult as this, even from her spiritual 
guide, but catching up her glass, in the madness of her rage, 
which had deprived her of the power of utterance, she flung it at 
his head with all her strength, and with such an unlucky aim, that it 
feUed him to the ground. ' Woman ' ! sputtered she, as soon as 
her passion permitted her to articulate a word. ' Woman 1 Call 
your women about you ! I scorn your words, you canting, hypo- 
critical, vicious wretch, who, under the appearance of sanctity and 
religion, cheat the credulous fools that mind you. You condescend 
to keep me company ! you ! a creature who would never have been 

^ Selina, Coxmtess of Himtingdon, founder of ' Lady Huntingdon's 
Connexion '. She employed Whitefield as one of her chaplains, and 
took his part against the Wesleys 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 111 

taken notice of had it not been for me ! Did not I point you out 
the persons proper for you to work upon ? Was it not I that 
introduced you to those very people of quality that now make you 
give yourself such airs ? Were they not most of them my acquaint- 
ances, and even indebted to me for the rank they now enjoy? 
I'U make you know yourself, you scoundrel, I will ! I'U expose 
you to the world, and then see who will go to your conventicle, or 
subscribe to your sham charities ! I'U make you know how to 
treat your superiors for the future '. 

While the enraged matron thus vented her fury, Momus and my 
master raised the doctor froin the ground, in a pickle not to be 
described. The glass had been thrown with such strength, that, 
had not his skull been of a comfortable thickness, his labours 
would have been at an end. However, it had made such a gash 
upon his temple, that he was in a moment in a gore of blood. 
The sight of this terrified them aU : the matron fainted (or pre- 
tended to faint away ; my master ran to get a napkin to wipe off 
the blood, while Momus supported the doctor in. his chair; but 
the first sight of the wound convincing him that it was not 
dangerous, he resolved to increase the accident to that diversion 
which was the great pursuit of his fife. 

' Good Heaven ' ! said he, in a low voice, as if speaking to 
himself, and with all the appearance of distress. ' What will 
become of us all ? We shall all be ruined by this unfortunate 
affair, even if we escape the death which inevitably awaits the 
wretched murderess '. 

' Oh, sir ', said the doctor, alarmed almost to despair, ' what do 
you think ? Am I a dead man ? Speak, I conjure you ; give me 
some hopes ' I 

' Alas, my friend ! I wish I could ; but I must not flatter a man 
in your condition : if you have any concerns in this life to settle, 
delay not a moment. This horrid fracture in your skull threatens 
immediate death. Heavens ' ! (stooping, and pretending to look 
earnestly) ' how his brain works ' ! 

' Oh, what shall I do ' ? exclaimed the terrified wretch. ' I cannot 
die ! I am not fit to die ! Oh, that I had followed some honest 
trade, and never taken to this of preaching ! I might then have 
earned honest bread as my forefathers did, and escaped this miser- 
able death, and the more horrid fate that awaits me. What shall 
I do ? What will become of me ? How can I even pray to that 
God, whom I have so often provoked by my hypocrisy and crimes ' t 

My master, by this time, had wiped the wound ; and seeing that, 
though it bled so violently, from the number of little vessels that 
are in that part, there was no fracture of the skull, and therefore 
no danger in it. 'Be comforted, sir,' said he, 'you have time 
enough to prepare yourself for death. I'll insure you from any 
danger this time ' ! 

' How, my dearest, best friend ' ! said the doctor, catching his 
hand, and kissing it in ecstacy, ' is my life safe ? Is not the 
wound mortal ' ? 

' Mortal 1 no : -nor even dangerous ; if the surgeons do not make 
it so. Give me leave to put a plaster to it, which I always have 

M 



178 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

in readiness in the house, in case of accidents, as gentlemen often 
quarrel for their women in their liquor ; and I'll engage that it 
shall give you no further trouble. Many a guinea have I got 
by it; for, when any such things happen, I immediately slip on 
a full-trimmed suit, a bag-wig, and a sword, which a surgeon 
once pawned to me for a debt of two guineas, and up I go, do 
the job, take my fee, and come away as good a surgeon as the 
best ! Never fear, sir ; I'll insure you from this scratch '. 

The consolation which this news gave the doctor is not to be 
expressed. He hugged and kissed his dear friend, till he made 
him in as bloody a condition as himself, and in the joy of his 
heart even forgave the cause of his fears, who had all this time 
counterfeited a swoon. But Momus, who saw his sport with the 
doctor thus cut short, soon brought her to herself; for, taking 
a glass of brandy, as if to hold to her nose, in the affected 
awkwardness of his hurry and confusion he spilled it all over 
her face, and then taking a bit of burnt paper, to try what 
that would do, he designedly neglected to blow it out, and so 
holding it to her nose, set the brandy he had spilled upon her 
face on fire. This instantly awoke her from her swoon. She 
shrieked out, when he, in the same affected confusion, flung the 
basin of bloody water, in which the doctor's wound had been 
washed, fuU in her face. This, indeed, quenched the flame, but 
then it put her in a condition as dirty and disagreeable as that 
of my master or the doctor; the consequence of which was, 
that the doctor could not refrain from bursting out a-laughing. 

'Well, my friend,' said he, taking her by the hand, 'it is but 
just that you should share in the effects of your own rashness. 
But let there be no more of it. We have both been in fault, 
perhaps; and so let us only be more cautious for the future. 
What I have suffered was done by design, and had like to have 
been attended with dreadful consequences ; yours is all accidental 
and trifling '. 

While the doctor was thus piously making peace, my master was 
cleaning himself, and setting the room to rights. Momus assisted 
the matron to cram half a dozen napkins down her bosom, to dry 
the water he had bathed her with, which he performed with so well 
acted an anxiety and care, that even she was deceived, and 
attributed all that had happened to her to his confusion: and 
being glad to get so well off an affair that might have ended so 
much worse, she complied with the doctor's advances to a general 
reconciliation, and so all things were restored to their former 
harmony. As to the doctor's wound, by a ready presence of mind, 
he found a way to make an advantage of it, by telling his congre- 
gation next day, that he had received it from some of Momus's 
gang, who had attempted to assassinate him, in revenge of the 
contempt in which he had brought their master. 

Matters being thus happily settled, the rest of the night was 
devoted to mirth, and concluded with a song in character by each 
of the company, of which Momus's was the most humorous, my 
master's the grossest, the matron's the loosest, and the doctor's 
the most daringly profane ; perhaps to obUterate the remembrance 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 179 

of his late religious qualms. After this, the company broke up, 
■when the doctor, having occasion for some money early in the 
morning, borrowed a couple of pieces from my master, among 
which I -was, who lent them very unwillingly, and then returned 
to bed to his barmaid; for he had too genteel notions of life 
to marry. 



CHAPTER IV 

THE DOCTOR PAYS A VISIT TO A T7SBFTJI, FRIEND — THE MYSTERY OF 
CONTBOVIiKSY — HE WAITS XJPON HER GRACE WITH A PIOXTS EX- 
HORTATION FOB HER FRIEND — CHBYSAL ENTERS INTO THE SERVICE 
OF HER GRACE — HER DISAPPOINTMENT IN HER VISIT TO THE 
PRISON — ^HBR grace's CHARACTER 

Though it was late when the company broke up, my new master >, 
who never neglected business for pleasure, did not forget the 
exhortation which he was to carry to her grace the next morning. 
Not that he was at the trouble of composing it himself ; his time 
was too precious to be employed so ; the more important cares of 
his flock, which he could not entrust to any other, as visiting his 
great proselytes, receiving and distributing charity, and his incessant 
exercise of all the sacerdotal functions, scarce allowed him time 
for the necessary refreshments of nature, and would have been 
deemed an intolerable burthen, had they been enjoined by the 
most express revelation of the divine will, though ambition, avarice, 
and the pleasure of deceit, made him undertake them voluntarily ; 
but still, to secure to himself every degree of religious merit, he 
kept a most laborious author, a degraded clergyman, in constant 
employment, whose works he passed upon the public for his own, 
when he did not immediately direct them against himseK. 

To this learned person, therefore, he went upon the present 
occasion ; and having him called from a night-cellar, where he was 
holding forth on reUgion and poUtios to a company of chairmen, 
he told him his business, and desired him to set about it directly. 

' Good God, sir ', said the author, ' this is a very un- 
seasonable time to set me upon such a work. From five this 
morning till eleven at night, have I laboured incessantly; and 
now, when I have just stepped out to take a little necessary 
refreshment ' 

' Refreshment ' ! answered my master. ' Tell me not of refresh- 
ment, or anything else ! Either do my business, or say you will 
not ! I can get enough to undertake it, and gladly too, for less 
than I give you '. 

' That is impossible ', rephed the author, ' if they are to live by 
it ! I am sure what you give me scarce keeps me from starving ' 1 

'Starving', returned my master. 'So it appears indeed; when 
you this moment have been indulging in riot and luxury, and 

1 Whitefield. 



180 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

smell so strong of spirituous liquors, that it is offensive to sobriety 
to stand near you. I wonder you are not ashamed to be guilty 
of such intemperance; it ill becomes a man of morality and 
religion '. 

' Sir, sir ' ! interrupted the author, provoked beyond his patience. 
'Have some regard to truth and reason in what you say; and 
look at home, before you accuse me of intemperance ! I laboured 
the whole day, without any other refreshment, or sustenance, 
than a mouthful of bread and cheese, and a draught of small 
beer ; and now have had only a quartern of gin in a pint of warm 
porter, to wash down half a pound of sausages, and you call thia 
intemperance. If I may judge by appearances, you have not 
spent youi evening on such fare'. 

' How I have spent my evening ', returned my master, who, in 
spite of himself, felt the justness of the reproach, ' is nothing to 
the purpose ! I am answerable for what I do ! But this manner 
of talking signifies nothing ! I must have this exhortation by eight 
in the morning. It will not take you up much time ! You are 
sufficiently practised in the style; the matter is of httle conse- 
quence. If you choose to drink a glass of wine, here is half a 
crown, which I make you a present of. I would by no means 
have you stinted of anything that is proper '. 

' Sir ', answered the author, ' I am much obliged to you ! I 
will take care that it shall be ready at the time. You are sensible 
that I never think much of any labour to serve you. I have 
finished all the pamphlets you ordered, about the ballad-singer's 
affair ' ! Here they are ! This is a letter from you to him that 
lays him flat ! I have quoted half the Fathers of the Church against 
him ! These two are letters to you, upon the subject ; one as from 
a great lord, and the other from a reverend divine, setting forth 
the great benefits of your ministry, and exposing the profaneness 
and immoraUty of his baUad. This here is a silly vindication of 
his ballad, in a letter to the author, from one of his ranting com- 
panions ; and this last is an address to the public against all those 
irreligious and profane amusements of ballads, balls, routs, etc. 
This is a masterpiece ! You see it as from myself, if you do not 
choose to own it; though I do not know but it may have more 
weight with your enemies if it appears as from another. So you 
see I have worked hard to-day; and now I believe we have done 
with Mr Momus and his ballad '. 

' Why, ay ; pretty well, I believe ', said my master. ' But hold, 
I have a thought just come into my head. You must know that the 
parson of the parish^ has sent for that reprobate, that Momus, and 
ordered him to alter the tune of his ballad, as it happened to have 
several of the same notes with the psalm tunes. Now, as this is 
known, what do you think of writing a letter to me, as from the 
parson, setting forth what he has done, and insinuating that it was 
the direction of the squire* ? This will clench the affair. After 
such an authority, no one will dare to say a word in its behalf ; 

' Whitefield's replies to, and criticisms on The Minor. 

2 The Archbishop of Canterbury. s The King. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 181 

besides, it will have a good look to be taken notice of by such 
people '. 

' That is true ', answered the author, ' it will be so, and the parson's 
notice shall not be thrown away. I'll do it to-morrow morning, as 
soon as I send you the exhortation '. 

My master then wished him a good night, and left him to return 
to his company, while he himself went directly home, to prepare 
ior the duties of the next day. 

He had scarce slept off his debauch, when he was called to chant 
his matin song, after which he did not fail to display the wound in 
his temple, the occasion of which he promised to unfold to his con- 
gregation in the evening. This he did to raise a curiosity that should 
gather his whole flock to hear so extraordinary an affair, as he 
•designed to propose a subscription, when their passions should be 
warmed by such a horrid attempt upon their pastor. 

By the time he had finished this first work of the day, the exhorta- 
tion was brought him from the author, with which he went directly 
to her grace.i He found her (unfashionably early as it was for a 
person of her rank to be even up), dressed, and waiting for him. 

' Please your grace ', said he, ' here is the exhortation your grace 
desired of me, and I pray Heaven it may prove successful. I am 
afraid I have made your grace wait, but I came the moment I had 
finished the first duties of the morning. If your grace pleases, I 
will do myself the honour to accompany your grace. Perhaps my 
personal exhortation and prayer may have more effect. My ministry 
lias often been blessed with astonishing success '. 

' I am sensible of that, doctor ', answered her grace, ' but this 
unhappy man is of such a strange temper that I apprehend he might 
be guilty of some act of rashness, that might be dangerous to your 
person, if you were to go to him without his consent, and that I 
am much afraid I shall hardly obtain. No longer ago than yesterday, 
near as the dreadful hour of his execution approaches, did I find 
him engaged at cards with his gaoler, and when I expostulated with 
him on the danger of trifling away his few remaining moments in so 
idle a manner — for I was apprehensive of exasperating him if I 
spoke with greater severity — he only smiled, and answered me with 
a passage out of some play '. 

' Yes, please your grace ', replied my master, with a Ufted eye 
and deep -fetched groan, ' cards and plays are the bane of half the 
world ; religion is quite neglected for them. The great work of 
reformation will never be completed till they are utterly abolished. 
As your grace does not think it meet that I should visit this un- 
fortunate gentleman in person, I am obedient to your grace's plea- 
sure. However, I will offer up my prayers for him, and my spirit 
shall assist your grace's pious endeavours. Not that I fear what 
man can do unto me ; the angel of the Lord watcheth over me, or 
the stroke that made this wound had given me rest from my labours '. 

He then displayed the mark of Mother Brimstone's rage, and 
told her grace so moving and circumstantial a story of his being 
waylaid, and being attacked by some of Momus's riotous companions 

' The Countess of Huntingdon. 



182 ADVENTUBES OF A GUINEA 

that she implicitly believed him, and sympathised in his sufferings. 
He then gave her the exhortation, which she was to deliver to her 
unfortunate cousin, and, seeing her uneasy at being obliged to wait 
till the Bank should be open to get money to distribute among 
the poor wretches in the prison, he accommodated her grace with 
change for a twenty -pound note, having, as he told her grace, just 
so much about him, which he was carrying to relieve a poor indus- 
trious family in great distress. 

It was a great pleasure to me that I changed my service upon tms 
occasion, as I was heartily sick of my master, though, from a view 
that I took of his heart, I saw that I had not been witness to half 
the mystery of his iniquity. 

My new mistress went directly to the prison to her cousin, wherer 
she had a sufficient opportunity for the exertion of her charity 
among his unhappy fellow -prisoners, while she waited for his rising, 
which was not till very late, as he had sat up the whole night before, 
at his beloved diversion of card-playing. When at length she got 
admittance to him, her reception was far from being worthy of the 
trouble she had taken, and of the piety of her intentions. He 
asked her if she had procured him a pardon, and when she answered 
in the negative, and assured him that all such hopes were vain, he- 
then told her that he would dispense with the continuance of her visit, 
and the repetition of any more, and in a manner forced her away, 
scarce permitting her to mention the motive of her coming, or to 
enforce the exhortation of my late master, which she, with diffio^ 
culty, persuaded him to take, though, from the manner of his re- 
ceiving it, there was little probability of his ever taking the trouble 
to read it. 

My mistress — for I had the good fortune to remain in her posses- 
sion — was so shocked at this insensibility, that she went directly 
home, and sought relief from the solid comforts of religion, pouring 
out her heart in unfeigned prayer, for the conversion of him and 
every other object of the Divine displeasure ; for though a misguided, 
fervency of devotion had made her in some measure a dupe to the 
hypocritical zeal of my late master, nothing could lead her from 
the purest paths of true piety and virtue ; nor did she suffer the 
extravagance of his pretended enthusiasm so far to blind her better 
judgment, as to make her avoid the entertainments frequented by 
persons of her sex and rank. 



CHAPTER V 

HISTORY OF A LADY OP FASHION — DBSCKIPTION OF A BOXTT — CHRYSAi. 
CHANGES HIS SERVICE FOB THAT OF A LADY OF ENTERPRISE — A 
BOLD STROKE FOB A HUSBAND 

She accordingly went that afternoon to the house of a lady of 
quality, where a great concourse of the best company usually as- 
sembled on set invitations, to spend the evening at the favourite- 
amusement of cards. The lady of the house was one of those- 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 183 

children of fortvme, who rise by the means that ruin thousands. In 
her early youth, she had sacrificed her virtue to vanity, and yielded 
to the loose desires of the nobleman she was now married to, over 
whom her humble obliging temper, and particularly her complaisant 
blindness to his other amours, gained her such an ascendency, that 
in a fit of uncommon fondness, he made her his wife. But the 
method he took to secure himself the ease and conveniences he 
enjoyed with her, directly overturned them ; for her humility and 
complaisance were all feigned, and the necessity of counterfeiting 
them being thus removed, she immediately assumed all the import- 
ance of her new character, and exerted the usual prerogatives of 
it in as high a manner as if she had never been in a meaner rank. 
The infatuated husband soon saw his error, but it was too late to 
remedy it. He therefore is forced to compound with her for the 
indulgence he desires, by submitting to let her gratify her passion 
for vain pomp and expensive ceremony, under the parade of which 
she strives to hide her obscure original, as she attempts to obhterate 
the remembrance of her fall from virtue by a most rigid profession 
of religion. Thus her routs are the most splendid, and difficult of 
access, of any in the town, no person being invited but those of.the 
first rank, nor any who are not invited being admitted, be their 
rank what it will ; and she professes herself a strict follower of my 
late master, in his most extravagant opinions, where they do not 
immediately interfere with her own vanity. 

It is impossibe to convey any notion to you of such a scene as 
this, to which my mistress carried me, it is so difierent from that 
sphere in which you have acted. Suppose you see several hundred 
people of both sexes and of every age, dressed in all the profusion 
and elegance of expense, and wearing dissipation and happiness in 
their looks, assembled together to spend the evening in mutual 
entertainment. This is the face of the picture ; but turn the re- 
verse, and you shall behold a set of people who have sacrificed their 
real interest and the peace of their minda to the gratification of this 
and such-like pleasure, and who come purely to prey upon each 
other. Accordingly, the whole is one continued scene of sharping, 
mutual distrust, envy, slander, and malevolence ; the very few 
who, like my mistress come there for mere amusement, and are 
untainted with such vices, being forced to submit in seeming 
acquiescence to the torrent they are not able to stem. 

In the course of the evening it was my fortune often to change 
my service ; but as the stay I made with my momentary possessors 
was so very short, I shall waive giving any account of them, especi- 
ally as the two most remarkable of the set, and under whom all the 
rest who launch out of the common road of life are in a great measure 
characterised, have been sufficiently described on a former occasion, 
though the histories I read in many of their hearts would afford much 
entertainment, and hasten to the lady in whose possession I left the 
company. 

My new mistress was the young widow of a person of great dis- 
tinction, who, in the decline of life, had overlooked the disparity of 
age and rank, and married her, solely to gratify his passion for her 
beauty. During the few years he lived, his care and prudence 



184 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

kept her indiscretion within bounds, but as soon as that guard was 
removed, she plunged into all the fashionable follies of the times, 
"with a keenness that courted ruin. 

But, though she eagerly followed every pursuit that bore the 
name of pleasure, vanity was the ruling passion of her heart. The 
rank into which her husband had lifted her placed her on a, level, 
in point of society, with the best company, and the fortune he left 
her was sufficient to support that rank. But still, aa there were 
many degrees above her, her heart pined for precedency, and she 
could not enjoy the honours she had, while she was obliged to give 
place to so many. 

She had formed a variety of schemes to obtain this desired object, 
but still without success. At length, the very night I came into 
her possession, an accident suggested one to her, which she immedi- 
ately put into execution, with the most sanguine hopes. There 
had been a nobleman of the first rank in the company, the weakness 
of whose reason had obliged his friends to put him under the govern- 
ment of a person to whose fidelity they thought they could entrust 
so important a charge. As private misfortunes are always an 
agreeable topic for public conversation, an elderly lady, who was 
acquainted with this nobleman's family, entertained the company 
with several melancholy instances of his weakness. My mistress 
regarded this only aa it was meant, as common chat, till some time 
after, the nobleman, happening to]fix his eye with some earnestness 
upon her, a sudden thought darted into her mind that, if she could 
any way bring about a marriage with him, all her dear views of 
ambition would be gratified at once. 

The moment this thought took possession of her head, it drove 
out every other. She lost deal, she revoked, she omitted reckoning 
her honours. In short, she was so absent that she was obliged to 
pretend a violent headache and leave the company. As soon aa 
she got home, she went to bed, where she spent the night in forming 
numberless projects for accomplishing her design. But still the 
account which the old lady had given of the vigilance of the person 
to whose care the nobleman was entrusted disconcerted them all. 
At length she resolved to attempt corrupting his fidelity, aa she 
could not expect to elude his vigilance. She had often heard that 
the greatest honesty was not proof against a proper price, and her 
knowledge of her own heart did not contradict that opinion. How- 
ever, not to be too rash, nor betray her design before she had some 
prospect of success, she resolved to sound the person before she 
applied directly to him. 

Accordingly, aa soon as she got up, she wrote him an anon3mious 
letter, letting him know that a person had a eel-tain affair to propose 
to him for his concurrence, in which he should receive immediately 
a thousand guineas, and an annuity of five hundred pounds a year, 
besides several other considerable advantages, and that what he was 
desired to do could be effected without any possible loss or danger 
to himself. This letter she sent by the penny post, and desired the 
answer might be returned in the same manner, under a feigned 
direction, to the house of a person in whom she confided. 

Such a letter necessarily surprised the gentleman to whom it 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 185 

was sent. Though the greatness of the offer convinced him that 
some extraordinary piece of viUany was designed, yet, as he knew 
himself above temptation, he resolved to humour the scheme, till 
he should discover the whole of it, for the honest revenge of punish- 
ing a base attempt to seduce him into dishonesty. Accordingly, he 
answered the letter directly in such terms as he imagined would 
tempt the writer to be more explicit, expressing his readiness to 
embrace any proposal that should be so advantageous, when he 
should be satisfied that the person who made it was able to perform 
it, and worthy of his confidence. 

This bait took as he desired. My mistress, whose eager imagina- 
tion was too full of the desired object to let her use any caution, 
thought her work done, and immediately wrote him another letter, 
to which she signed her name, and in it explained her whole scheme 
of marrjring the nobleman by his assistance, enforcing her former 
ofier, by a promise of continuing him in the agency of the estate, 
or rather, indeed, of sharing it with him, and desiring to meet him 
that evening, either at her house, or any other place he pleased, to 
confer upon proper means of bringing it into immediate execution. 

The gentleman was not a moment at a loss how to act on such 
an occasion. He immediately waited upon the nobleman, who was 
next heir to his unhappy charge, and, showing both the letters, 
desired his directions how to act. Though this nobleman was 
struck with horror at a piece of villany that did such dishonour 
to the sex, respect for the memory of the worthy man whose 
name she bore would not permit him to expose- her to public 
insult. However, to prevent her making the like attempt else- 
where, he resolved to shock her, by a personal detection. Accord- 
ingly, he made the gentleman write her word that it was improper 
for him to be seen going to her house, but that, if she pleased, he 
would meet her at eight that evening at a certain tavern, where she 
should inquire for him by the name of Mr Trueman. Such a prospect 
of immediate success made her blind to every appearance of deceit 
or danger, and, accordingly, she prepared to attend the appointment 
with the most sanguine expectation. 

But his lordship had prepared a reception for her which she 
little suspected. Shortly before the time, he went to the tavern 
with the gentleman, and fixing upon a room in wliich there was a 
closet large enough for him and another nobleman, whom he took 
with him, left word that if any lady should inquire for Mr Trueman, 
she should be told that he was above alone, and the gentleman 
called down to her. As they judged, her impatience brought her 
rather before the time, when her imagined confederate, showing 
her up into the room, and placing her so that every word she said 
might be heard in the closet, he entered into a conversation with 
her on the subject of their meeting, in which he led her to repeat 
her whole proposal, and by starting difScuIties, to enforce it with 
every iniquitous argument in her power. 

As soon as his lordship thought she had said enough, he issued 
from his concealment, and, looking her full in the face, calmly 
thanked her for the care she was taking to preserve the noble family 
of his relation, which she had whimsically given as one of the reasons 



186 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

of her desiring this marriage. It is impossible to describe her 
situation at the sight of this nobleman, whom she well knew, as 
well as his interest in defeating her design. Astonishment, shame, 
and confusion struck her motionless and dumb. She was just able 
to turn her eye to her betrayer, and then fell in a swoon upon the 
floor. Such distress naturally softened the resentment of the 
generous nobleman to whom she had designed such an injury ; he 
assisted to raise her from the ground, and, having with difficulty 
brought her to herself, instead of aggravating her distress by re- 
proaches, mildly advised her to desist from such unjustifiable 
schemes, and promised her that he would take no notice of what 
had happened, if he found that her future conduct merited such 
tenderness. 

This treatment had the wished effect. That false spirit, which 
would have borne her up against any severity, sunk before such 
unexpected delicacy and compassion. She melted into a flood of 
tears, and, unable to utter a word, fell upon her knees and kissed 
the hand of the nobleman in a rapture not to be expressed, who 
immediately raised her from the ground, and telling her that he 
imagined it must be disagreeable to her to stay there any longer, 
ordered a chair, and handed her to it himself, with the utmost 
politeness and respect. 

Her situation when she got home was truly deplorable. The 
assurance of her late hopes doubled the distress of her disappoint- 
ment, and the fear of shame made the thought of her guilt intoler- 
able. She cursed her own folly, the perfidy of her betrayer, and 
all the ways of faithless man ; and, in the agony of her grief resolved 
to leave this detested town next morning, and bury herself for ever 
from the world, in her country seat. 

This resolution she held in till next morning, when she actually 
set out for the country ; but I have reason to believe it did not hold 
very long, as I have frequently seen her since in all public places, 
as gay and unconcerned as ever. As for me, I was given to her 
coachman to pay the farrier who took care of her horses ; but he 
thought it more necessary to give me in payment of a debt of his 
own to a man who kept a beer -house, who gave me to an attorney, 
to defend him against a prosecution for entertaining a gang of 
street-robbers, and buying their booty. By the attorney I was 
given, in the course of business, to a knight of the post, whose 
evidence was to acquit the publican. BVom this conscientious 
person, as he was on his way to a coimtry assizes, where the lives 
of many depended on his good nature, I was taken by a highway- 
man, who lost me that evening to a nobleman at a horse-race. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 187 



CHAPTER VI 

OHBYSAL, BY A NATURiLL PEOGBESSION, COMBS INTO THE POSSESSION 
OT A KNIGHT Off INDT7STBY, WHO BMNQS HEM TO A HOESB-RAOB, 
■WHERE HE HAS AN OPPOBTinNITY Ol" SEEING A NOBLE JOCKEY 
PRACTISE PART 01" THE MYSTERIOUS SCIENCE OF THE TURE, WITH 
OTHER COMMON OOOTJBRENOES 

In the three or four last changes of my seryioe there was nothing 
remarkable. The progression was natural, and the events common ; 
but I must own I was a good deal surprised at several occurrences 
in my present station, which were, in the proper course of things, 
80 strange and unaccountable, that the most whimsical devil could 
never have thought of them without information. 

The gentleman who had acquired me so easily on the road, and 
brought me to the meeting, was a native of a neighbouring nation,, 
who, on the credit of his skill in the mysterious science of chance, 
supported by a good stock of assurance and personal courage, had 
come over to make ids fortune, in which design he had really so 
far succeeded, that he had lived for several years ia the highest life, 
and maintaiued the appearance of the estate he talked of in his own 
country, by the sole force of his genius, the fertility of which was 
not confined to one resource ; but, when fortune frowned upon his 
labours at play, was always ready to redress the effects of her 
malice by the method iu which I came into his possession. 

The roads had been bad that morning, which kept bim a little 
later than usual, so that the company were at the post when he 
joined them. By their noise and appearance aa we rode up to 
them, I took them for a crowd of their own servants ; their dress 
being exactly the undress uniform of that parti -coloured tribe ; 
and every voice being exerted with the same vehemence, and in 
the like style of oaths and imprecations with which those gentry 
receive them at the door of a play-house or palace ; so that I scarce 
knew how to believe my senses when I recognised the faces of 
several persons of the most elevated station, and, particularly, 
most of those among whom I had spent the evening I described 
to you at the club on my first coming to this part of the world. 

As soon as the bets were made, and the noise began to subside 
a little, my master pressed through the mob of pickpockets, bubbles, 
lords, and jockeys, and came up to the post just as they were pre- 
paring to start, when calling to one of the grooms, ' Well, my lord ', 
said he. 

' Well, Jack ', replied the other, ' where have you been all day ' ? 
This was all the (Uscourse they had time for, the horses going off 
that moment ; but on the strength of this my master backed hia 
lordship deeply. 

It is impossible to describe to you who have never seen anything 
of the kind, a scene of such oooEusion as the field was during the 
running, the whole mob, high and low, riding headlong from place 
to place, and driving against each other, without any respect to 
rank, or regard to safety, and roaring out their bets, and shouting 



188 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

for joy at every vicissitude in the running. At length the heat was 
ended, but so contrary to my master's expectation, that he lost to 
a noble duke who was in the secret, not only all the fruits of his 
morning's campaign, but a large sum besides, more than he was able 
to pay him. 

This was a severe stroke. He rode directly up to the post, and, 
addressing the same groom, just as he came out of the scales,' 'Sblood, 
my lord ', said he, ' how could you fling me so ? I am quite broke 
up. His grace has touched me for five hundred ; and the devil 
of the thing is, that I have been so torn down by a bad run of late 
that I am quite out of cash, and have not a shilling to pay him '. 

' How could this be ' 1 replied the groom ; ' did not I give you 
the word ? But you are such a careless son of a bitch '. 

' The word with a vengeance ', answered my master, ' you re- 
turned my well, but I have found it very ill '- 

' Ay, I guessed it was so ', added the groom, ' you were ignorant 
that we were smoked, and found it necessary to change the layi 
Where the devil were you all this morning ? Taking a ride, I sup- 
pose. You will never leave off till these rides bring you aride in a cart 
to Tyburn. But keep out of his grace's way till the horses start, 
and we will bring you home, I will engage. He thinks he has all 
the secret, but he is mistaken this bout, and shall pay for his entrance 
before we admit him to be one of us '. 

This discourse passed as they were walking together to a booth, 
where the groom was to rub, and settle the next heat. 

You are surprised at this familiarity between my master and the 
groom. When he first addressed him by the the title of ' my lord', 
I own I thought it no more than a cant, which in the freedom of this 
intercourse, where lords and lackeys are upon a level, is common ; 
but what was my astonishment at a nearer view to see that he really 
was the thing he was called, and that a laudable ambition of ex- 
celling in every, the meanest art, had induced him, and many others 
of his rank, who were riding against him, to take the place of their 
servants in this fatiguing and dangerous employment ; ennobling, 
by this condescension, the most abject and vile offices with the 
honours earned by the merit and virtues of their ancestors. Strange 
ambition, at a time when the interest and glory of their country 
called for their assistance ! 

As soon as the noble groom and my master were alone : ' Now, 
Jack, what think you of my little stun-'orse ' ? says his lordship. 
' You must know that I have measured the foot of them all in this 
heat, and find that I have the heels by a distance at least ; but the 
weights are above my trim. However, we have a remedy for that j 
look at this cap ' — taking one out of a chest, in which his running dress 
had been brought to the ground — ' this is a leaden skull, and weighs 
above two stun ; put this on your head, the thickness of your own 
skull will prevent its giving you the headache. Ay, it fits you very well. 
Now, I will wear this to the post, and, just before we start, complain 
that my cap is too wide, and borrow yours to ride in ; and then, 
when I alight at the scales, after the heat is over, I will pull off youra 
as if to wipe my face, and give it you to hold, who can return me this 
to weigh in ; and as I wear the same trusses, stuffed with handker» 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 18» 

chiefs, in which I carried the weight last heat, they will never sus- 
pect us. Ha, Jack, what say you to this 7 Match me this among 
all your Hibernian tricks, if you can. Go your way ; double with 
his grace, and lay all you can, I'll go with you ; but be sure to meet 
me at the post before, and at the scales after the heat, and not to 
blow the business by being in too great a hurry '. 

I see you wonder how his lordship should put such confidence ia 
my master as he seemed to know him so well ; but the truth was, 
my master's character for courage was so well established, that 
it bore him through things every day of his life, unconvicted at 
least, if not unsuspected, for which a more timorous villain would, 
have been pilloried. And this made the other think him the safest 
person to entrust with the execution of such a scheme, as no one 
would dare to attempt examining the cap, or prevent his reaching 
it to his lordship. The finesse succeeded ; his lordship beat every 
tail hollow ; and my master not only cleared with his grace, but 
also won considerably for himself, and his confederate besides. 
Things were carried on in the same genteel manner for the remainder 
of the meeting, at which there was a vast concourse of the best com- 
pany, the weather being very favourable, the turf in choice order, and 
the sport very fine, and so fair that the knowing ones were all taken 
in ; and to make the pleasure complete though the crowd was so great, 
there was no unlucky accident happened, except to two of the noble 
grooms, one of whom was borne down in the crossing by the superior 
strength of a servant, who rode against him and slipped his shoulder ; 
and the other broke his neck, by his horse's falling in the running. 

It was on a sporting bet, on one of the bye matches, that I was 
lost that evening to a nobleman, in whose possession I happened to- 
remain to the end of the meeting. 



CHAPTER VII 

ohrysal's master bnqages in a oentbel amoite, a delicate way 

OF EEFINING PLEAStTRE — HIS MISTRESS PEBSTTADES HIM THAT SHE 
HAS POISONED HIM AND HERSELF — HIS SITUATION ON HEARING 
THIS — STRIKING PROOFS OF MEDICAL SKILL, WITH THE ADVANTAGE 
OF A REGULAR COURSE OF PRACTICE — AN EXEMPLARY INSTANCE 
OF CHARITY AND FORGIVENESS DIVERTS THE DOCTOR'S ATTENTION 
TO THE MUEDEBESS 

As it was late in the evening when my new master amvea in 
London, he resolved to indulge himself for that night, in the 
embraces of a tender-hearted female, whom he picked up in the 
street (for he was no way nice in his amours), as he walked from 
the inn where he aUghted to his own house, in order to stretch 
his legs. 

Nothing more than common occurences passed upon this 
occasion. When his lordship had made his mistress nobly drunk 
by way of refining his pleasure, the delicate pair went lovingly to 
bed together, where, awaking about midnight, he was surprised to 



190 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

find her cold and lifeless in his arms. After some fruitless efforts 
to move her, he started out of bed in a fright, and called up all 
his servants who, perceiving that she was not actually dead, took such 
pains to recover her, that she at length opened her eyes, and staring 
wildly around her for some moments, ' Where am I ' ! said she, ' are 
these the regions of the damned ? For thither only can such self- 
murdering wretches as I am go '. — ^Then seeing his lordship, whose 
curiosity had brought him to the bed-side, ' and are you dead too ' ? 
continued she, wringing her hands, and weeping most passionately. 
' Oh ! why did I not confine my rage to myself ? Why did I add 
your murder to my own, to plunge my soul still deeper in 
perdition ' ? 

This surprised all present. The servants, who were indifferent 
whether it was true or false, imagined she only raved, and doubled 
their efforts to bring her to herself, soothing her with expressions 
of tenderness, and telling her she was not dead, but would soon be 
very well: but my master was too nearly concerned to think so 
coolly on the matter. — ' What is that you say ' ? said he, trembling 
in horror. ' What is it you say about murder ? There is no one 
murdered here'. 

' How ' ? answered she, fixing her eyes eagerly upon him. ' Is it 
possible that I am still alive ? And that you also live ? It cannot 
be ! The poison which I swallowed this night, and in which you 
shared too largely, cannot have missed of its effect. But, soft ! its 
■operation now begins ! that pang ! — oh ! — that pang bespeaks the near 
approach of death ! — Oh, mercy ! — Cry out for mercy on your sins ' ! 

' What poison ' ? interrupted he, terrified almost to distraction. 
' What poison have I shared in ? Speak ! tell me directly, or ' 

' Spare your threats, my lord ', said she, with a composure in her 
looks and manner, that persuaded everyone present she was in 
her senses, ' spare your threats to a wretch, whom death wiU soon 
deKver from your power ; and forgive a crime that proceeded from 
despair. Wearied of the miseries of this life, I this night resolved 
to put an end to it, and for that purpose, though on another 
pretence, procured a dose of poison from a chemist's apprentice, 
who, on giving it to me, said it was sufficient to kiU twenty of the 
strongest men aUve : and this poison did I take an opportunity to 
put into the last bottle of wine, when you went out of the room, 
determined to sacrifice one man to my revenge for the injuries I 
had received from the sex : though, after I had done it, my heart 
relented ; but you insisted on my drinking, and fear of your 
resentment prevented me from making a discovery that would 
have saved us both from this unhappy ' — At these words she fell 
into convulsions, so strong, that everyone who saw her thought she 
was really in the agonies of death. 

The situation of my master, at this sight, may be easily 
conceived. He instantly felt every pain the poison could produce; 
and, falUng on the floor, roared aloud in anguish of mind and body, 
lamenting his untimely fate, and confessing all the sins of his life 
to the servants who stood around him. As soon as they had 
raised him up, and carried him into another room, a dawn of hope 
arose at his finding he did not immediately die. ' What ', exclaimed 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 191 

he, ' is everyone combined against me ? Am I to perish for want 
of assistance ? Will nobody even call me a physician ? Perhaps 
I might yet be saved, were proper means applied! Will nobody 
call me a physician ' ? On his saying this, everyone was running 
to obey him, the sight of which threw him into new distress. ' Oh, 
wretch that I am ', exclaimed he, ' and so I am to be left alone I 
to^ perish even for want of a drop of water 7 It is not enough for 
some of you to go; and not all to desert me in this base, this 
barbarous manner ' ? 

This seemed to restore them to their senses ; and accordingly, 
while some went to call the doctors, the rest stayed to take care 
of him. 

Where the carrion is, the crows wiU soon be gathered together. 
He was immediately surrounded by half the meagre faces of the 
faculty (for, as he had not named anyone in particular, his servants, 
to show their care, had summoned all they knew of), who, taking the 
account he gave them of his being poisoned for truth, proceeded 
instantly to practise upon him every method they had ever heard 
of being used in such a case, in hopes that some one of them might 
take effect. He was cupped, bled, and blistered; vomited, 
clystered, and purged, in the space of two hours ; the doctors 
sagaciously discovering new symptoms of the poison, every new 
remedy they tried. When they found that, beyond their expecta- 
tions, he had strength enough to outUve all this, they put him 
into bed, and covering him up warm, to take a sweat, comforting 
him with hopes of his recovery, in consequence of their skill and 
care. While they waited patiently for this important crisis, some 
one of them happened to think of the poor murderess, who had 
been neglected all this time, and now lay in a swoon, the convul- 
sions having gone off, as her strength failed. On hearing her name 
mentioned, his lordship, to show his Christian charity, and prove 
the sincerity of the repentance and amendment which he vowed in 
case his life should be mercifully spared, desired that they would 
do something for the unhappy creature, if she was still alive. This 
was sufficient to attach their compassion and care. They answered 
with one voice, that it was a pity to let her perish without even 
attempting to save her, and praising his lordship's goodness, 
prepared to try some experiments upon her also, if only to do 
something for their fee. 



CHAPTER VIII 

THE KBOOVEBY OV THE MTTBDEEESS OPENS A NEW SCENE — SHE 
OLEAES UP THE MYSTERY, LESS TO THE SATISFACTION OT THE 
DOCTORS THAN OT THEIR NOBLE PATIENT, WHO REWARDS HER 
LIBERALLY FOB HER GOOD NEWS, AND SENDS THEM OFF WITHOUT 
THEIR ERRAND — REFLECTIONS ON SOME GENTEEL MATTERS — 
OHRYSAL CHANGES HIS SERVICE 

Their practice upon this new subject, however, was out short by 
a success more speedy than they desired, their first operation of 
bleeding bringing her directly to herself. ; 



192 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

As soon as she perceived what had been done, and recovered 
strength to speak, ' Good God ', said she, ' what is the meaning of 
this ? Who can have been so inhuman as to bleed me, when it is 
linown to be ruin in my disorder ' ? 

' In your disorder ' ? said one of the doctors, with a contemptuous 
frown. ' What disorder ? Have you not poisoned yourself ? and, 
what is still worse, his lordship also, who now lies in the same 
desperate condition with you, and has, from-his unmerited good- 
ness, directed us to take this care of you ; though, if we can save 
you from this death, it must be to suffer one more ignominious '. 

' I poison myself ' ? interrupted she, raising herself up in the bed. 
' I poison his lordship ? What can you mean by this ? I under- 
stand you not, and am innocent, even in thought, of any such 
crimes. Explain yourself, therefore, and do not sport with the 
misery of a wretched creature who has more real distresses than 
she is able to bear, without the addition of imaginary guilt '. 

This amazed them all. They stood looking at each other for 
some moments, wrapped in reflections not the most pleasing, on 
the consequence which might attend their precipitation in treating^ 
his lordship in the manner they had done, in case what she said 
should prove true. At length, on her repeating her entreaties, 
one of them condescended to inform her of everything that had 
passed, dwelling particularly on the desperate condition hia lordship 
had been in, and the various methods they had used to relieve him. 

Weak and dispirited as you must suppose her to have been, she 
was scarce able to refrain from laughter at this account. 

' A desperate condition he must be in now, indeed ', said she, 
' whatever he was in before ; but, if you will give me leave to slip 
on my gown, and go to him, I'll soon complete his cure '. 

This was a step so contrary to all rules of practice, that they 
could not permit it. On the contrary, one of them, observing the 
impropriety of listening to the ravings of a person whose head must 
certainly be distracted by the effects of the poison, they all took the 
hint, and were actually going to hold her down by force, in order 
to proceed in their experiments upon her, which you may think 
would not have been the more merciful for what she had just said. 

But she was delivered from this discipline by the appearance of 
his lordship, who, on one of his servants carrying him the pleasing- 
news of what she said, had foimd strength enough to run to 
her, and throwing himself on the bed, ' Oh, my dearest girl ' ! ex- 
claimed he, clasping his arms around her neck, ' am I not then a 
dead man ? Tell me, tell me the truth directly, am I not a dead 
man ' ? 

His haggard looks, and the bandages and flannels in which he 
was wrapped all over, convinced her of the truth of what the doctors 
had told her he had suffered. Shocked at the thought, she held up 
her hands in a supplicating posture, and imploring his pardon for 
what she had been the involuntary cause of, informed liim that she 
was subject to fits, which attacked her with double violence when- 
ever she drank to any excess, as his lordship had compelled her to 
do that night, much, he must have been sensible, against her in- 
clination, had she dared to refuse him ; and that when she was in 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 193 

those fits, which lasted till the efiects of the liquor went off, she was 
apt to rave, and speak every extravagance and incoosistency that 
could come into a disordered head. The manner in which she 
spoke, left not the least room for doubt. All his fears were in- 
stantly removed, his joy at which obliterated the remembrance 
of everything he had suffered in mind and body, and he not only 
forgave her, but also made her a handsome present, in recompense 
for her happy news. But his doctors met with a very different 
treatment. He reviled them in the severest terms for their ignorance 
and presumption in putting him to such torture, and tearing his 
constitution by such violent means, before they were certain of his 
ailment ; and without permitting them to allege in their vindica- 
tion his assertions of what he felt, and entreaties not to leave any- 
thing unattempted that they thought might possibly relieve liim, 
ordered them to be turned out of doors, without paying them a 
farthing for all their trouble. 

I have seen that you were surprised at his lordship's indelicacy 
and disregard to his health, in having an amour with a creature in 
so low a state of infamy and wretchedness as to walk the streets 
to offer herself to casual prostitution, as well as at her expressing 
herself in a manner so much above her appearance and circum- 
stances. But the least acquaintance with the world would easily 
account for both. 

When once a woman falls from chastity, the characteristic virtue 
of her sex, the descent to this lowest degree of human misery is 
natural, and seldom, very seldom, fails to come of course. The 
kept mistress, who this day shines in brocade and jewels, and 
rattles about in her chariot, will, in a few months, spend the night 
in the streets for want of a habitation to hide her head, and without 
clothes to shelter her from the inclemencies of the weather, when 
the novelty that first recommended her is worn off ; for no pros- 
perity that is not established on virtue can last. Theirs, indeed, 
is of all the most fleeting ; the vice which is their support affecting 
their own conduct by example, and making them lavish profusely 
what they get from profusion. 

Such had been the case of this female. She had been entitled, 
by birth and education, to better hopes, but vice had blasted all, 
and left her only the reflection of what she might have been, to 
aggravate her present wretchedness. As to him, his health possibly 
was in a state not worthy of regard ; and for his delicacy, the in- 
discriminate, vague intercourse of the sexes effectually destroys 
that, as well as the sentimental attachment, which refines the desire 
of rational beings, and distinguishes it from the gross appetite of 
brute animals ; so that in general, nothing further than the gratifi- 
cation of that appetite is now sought ; and as that can be effected 
by any one object, as well as another, whether it is found in a palace 
or a brothel, makes no difference with those who profess themselves 
men of pleasure. The sex is all they seek, without regard to anv 
qualifications ; and consequently, when their appetites are gratified, 
they desert the objects of them with the same indifference as they 
took them. 

But to retiim to my master. It was some time, as you may 

N 



194 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

imagine, before he recovered the effects of this affair ; but I re- 
mained not with him so long. The doctors, in revenge for the treat- 
ment they had met with, blazed it abroad, with the addition of 
every ridiculous circumstance they could invent. This brought all 
his acquaintances to have a laugh at him upon the occasion, to 
one of whom he lost me that afternoon on a bet, at a race between 
two of the maggots which they found in the nuta they cracked after 
dinner. 



CHAPTER IX 

chbysal's master pays his coitbt to a qreat pbeson, who seems 
not much to kelish his eumoub, and expbesses some ttn- 
fashionable sentiments concebninq poute pleasttees — in 
the coubse of a beoulae cibcuiiation, cheysal comes into 
the possession oe a minister of state, who befttsbs a friendly 
offbe for very odd reasons— his steangb notions of some 

AFFAIRS 

Some public occasion had brought a concourse more than usual in 
those retirements, to pay their duty to the prince ' that morning. 
As my master was one of the last who came, as soon as his devoirs 
were ended, some of the company accidentally asked what had kept 
him so late, on which with an air of pleasantry, he answered aloud 
that ' he had been detained by a very whimsical affair. A certain 
nobleman ', said he, ' went into company last night so immensely 
drunk, that having set in to play, and lost five thousand pounds, 
he quite forgot it this morning, and refused to pay the money, till 
some person of honour, who was unconcerned in the matter, should 
vouch his having lost it fairly, on which it was referred to me, and 
sorry I am that I was qualified to give it against him '. 

' How, my lord, by being a person of honour ' ? says the gentleman 
he spoke to. 

' No ', replied my master, with a significant smile, ' not so neither, 
but by being unconcerned in winning it '. And then, turning short to 
another, ' But have you heard the news, my lord ' ? said he. ' Mr 

caught his wife yesterday taking a serious walk in Kensington 

Gardens with the gentleman whom we all know he forbade her 
keeping company with some time ago '. 

A smile of general approbation encouraged him so much that he 
concluded with saying he wished he had himself been the happy 
delinquent so taken, as he doubted not but the gravest bishop on 
the bench would, were he to speak his mind honestly. 

The prince had heard him without interruption ; but as soon as he 
had ended, turning to a nobleman who stood near him — ' There can 
be no greater insult ', said he, with a determined look and solemn 
accent, ' to a person who is appointed to put the laws of a country 
in execution, than for any one to boast of a breach of those in his 
presence. For my part, if I am ever called by Providence to that 

' The Prince of Wales (George IH) 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 196 

station, it is my iavariable resolution that no man, how exalted 
soever in rank, who Uves in open violation of any law, human or 
divine, shall ever hold employment under me, or receive countenance 
from me '. 

This rebuke damped my master's spirits, as it struck a reverential 
awe into all present. He hung down his head, and in a few moments 
withdrew, quite abashed. But he soon recovered ; and to silence 
the jests of his companions, and show that he was not to be brow- 
beat out of his own way, he made one with them to spend the 
evening at a brothel-tavern, where he gave me to a pimp, who gave 
me to a whore, who gave me to a bully, who gave me to a pawn- 
broker, who gave me to a beau, who gave me to a tavern-keeper, 
who paid me into the bank, from whence I was sent, in the change 
of a note, to the first minister of state. ^ 

The notion I had hitherto entertained of human politics made 
me enter into this service with reluctance ; but my prejudice waa 
soon removed. My new master was just coming from his closet, 
when I was delivered to him ; he stopped to count the money, 
then putting it into his purse, and turning to a clerk, who followed 
him with a huge bag of papers in his hand — ' I must have all these 
finished against morning ', said he, ' that I may be able to read 
them over before they are signed. I know there are a great many, 
but the business requires dispatch, and diligence and method over- 
come the greatest difficulties '. 

Saying this, he went into his drawing-room, which was filled 
with several of the most eminent members of the community, 
who came, some to consult, some to advise (for he refused not the 
advice of the meanest), and all to congratulate him on the success 
of his measures. When the business and formality of this scene 
were over, the company withdrew, all but one gentleman, who 
desired some private conversation with my master. As soon as 
they were alone — ' I have done myself the honour to wait upon 
you this morning ', said the gentleman, ' to inform you that there 
is a vacancy in my borough, and to know who you would have me 
return ; for, as I see that all your measures are evidently cal- 
culated for the good of your country, I am determined to support 
you'. 

' I am much obliged to your good opinion ', answered my master ; 
' but I am resolved never to interfere in matters of this nature, 
nor to attempt influenciag the election or vote of any person by 
any other means than reason. All, therefore, that I have to ask 
is, that you will return an honest man ; while he approves of my 
conduct he will certainly support me, and no longer do I wish to be 
supported '. 

' What, sir ', repUed the gentleman in astonishment, ' not desire 
to have your friends returned ? Why, sir, is it possible that you 
can be a stranger to the intrigiies that are forming against you, 
by a faction, who, when they had reduced the state to a mere 
wreck, like a cowardly, mutinous crew, flew in the face of their 

1 William Pitt, afterwards Earl of Chatham. J? Prime Minister and 
Secretary of State (for the second time), 1757-61. 



196 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

master, took the boat, and made their escape to shore, and now, 
when you have not only brought her safe into harbour, but also 
fitted her out for another voyage, with every prospect of success, 
are caballing to undermine, and turn you away from the helm ; 
not that they even pretend to arraign your conduct or skill, but 
just that they may have the pillaging the fruits of your labours. 
As this, sir is notoriously the case, you must excuse the warmth 
of my honest zeal, when I tell you that I think you must be guilty 
of very strange, very blamable remissness, if you neglect any 
possible method of disappointing their pernicious designs '. 

' My friend ', returned my master, ' I am too sensible of the truth 
of all you say, but hope there is no necessity for my having recourse 
tb methods which my soul disapproves. Without the assistance of 
any such did I — to pursue your mode of speech — ^first point out to 
our master, and the rest of the ship's company, the errors in their 
steering, the rooks they were ready to run upon, and the way to 
avoid them. Without any such did I take the helm in that danger- 
ous time, when they fled from the wreck, and worked her out of 
the breakers they left her among ; and without any such, will I 
support my place at the helm, or resign it, for, in my opinion, no 
end can justify improper means. 

' Shall I own to you, my friend, that your offer gives me pain ? 
Do not mistake me ; I am sincerely obliged to you for that good 
opinion which dictated it to your honest heart ; but the truth is, 
that any member of the community's having the power of making such 
an offer, proves such a degeneracy in our constitution, as threatens 
its overthrow in the end. A parliament should be a representation 
of the people ; but how can it be said to be that, if the people are 
not at liberty to choose whom they please to represent them ? 
Besides, such a maimer of nominating disappoints the end, as well 
a.8 it destroys the essence of a parliament, as it is too probable 
that the nominator shall stipulate conditions with his member, 
that may not only take away the power of his voting according to 
the dictates of his judgment and conscience, but also enjoin such 
as may be directly opposite to both, and injurious, if not destruc- 
tive, to that country, which he thus nominally represents. A 
parliament, therefore, to be free, should be freely chosen, no man 
having it in his power to do more than give his own vot«, and such a 
parlianlent, to keep up the excellence of its nature in its first in- 
stitution, should not continue longer than one session, but a new 
one be called as often as the occasions of the state should require 
it, on6e in every year, at least, for so often does the interest of a 
nation demand that its guardians should meet. Such a parliament, 
sensible of the shortness of its duration, and nature of the tenure 
of their power, would take care never to act against the interest of 
their constituents ; or, if human frailty should err, their time 
would be too short to establish the evil, and, as it would be impos- 
sible for them to be chosen again, the next parliament would remedy 
the mischief. Such should a British parliament be ; such I hope 
it will be. It is every honest Briton's duty to hope so, and not 
only that, but to endeavour to make it so. Nor shall any act of 
mine ever seem to eoimtenatide a practice that contradicts thia 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 197 

principle. By speaking and acting in strict conformity to the 
dictates of my judgment and conscience, have I hitherto succeeded, 
contrary to the apprehensions of many, beyond the expectations of 
all, and the same means, and none other, will I ever pursue '. 

' Heaven bless your pious intentions ',' said the gentlema.n, taking 
his hand and kissing it in a rapture, tears of joy running down his 
face. ' Heaven will bless them. Happy sovereign in such a ser- 
vant ; happy Britain in such a guardian '. 

Saying this, he took his leave of my master, who went directly to 
wait upon his. 



CHAPTER X 
chbysal's sentimbnts of his master's masteb, who gives a 

BBMAEKABLB EEASOlif TOB HIS APPBOBATIOU OF HIS MTNISTBB'S 
MBASUBES AND MANNEE 01' DOING BUSINESS — THE MINISTER'S 
CHABGE TO A OENEBAL ON APPOINTING HIM TO A COMMAND — 
CHRYSAL ENTERS INTO THE SERVICE OE THE GENERAL — CONELIOT 
BETWEEN MATERNAL TENDERNESS AND GLORY, IN VPHICH THE 
LATTER IS TRIUMPHANT — STRANGE ADVICE BBOM A MOTHER TO 
HER SON 

The first view of this august person' struck me with a reverence 
which I had never felt for man before. Man may be deceived in 
the looks of man, but we see through all disguise, and read the real 
character in the heart. Honest, benevolent, and humane, the social 
virtues brightened in his royal breast. 

' Sire ', said my master, addressing him with the most respectful 
sincerity, ' here are the dispatches which you ordered me to draw 
up yesterday. Since I had the honour of your commands then, 
I have received some further intelligence that confirms the justice' 
of your resolutions. Disappointed, but not deterred by the re- 
pulse which they justly met with from you, those people have the 
confidence to make a new attempt, and think to obtain by menaces 
what was refused to their entreaties ; but the event will convince 
them that it is more difficult to a generous mind to deny the sup- 
pliant, than repulse the insolent. Strong in the natural strength 
of your dominions, and stronger in the love of your people, you are 
able to assert your own cause against all the powers of the world, 
on that element which nature has pointed out for the scene of your 
triumphs ; nor will you permit any other to interfere with you on 
it. Ail you require is a neutrality, where you are entitled to assist- 
ance. This shows your confidence in your own strength, and your 
contempt of them. But even this contempt will not overlook any 
disrespect to yourself, any partiality to your enemies. Let them 
behave themselves as friends, or profess themselves foes ; this choice 
is indifferent to you. As to their complaints, their own unjust 
actions are the cause of them, and, when this is removed, they will 

'George II 



198 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

cease, of course. Till then, to seek a remission of the punishment, 
and still persist in the crime, is an insult upon justice and mercy ; 
and for their menaces, they are beneath the notice of an answer '. 

' Be it so ', replied the reverend monarch, the indignation of his 
honest heart flashing from his eyes, ' be it so ; you speak the senti- 
ments of my soul '. — Then, turning to a favoured subject, who 
stood near him — ' It is a pleasure to me to transact business with 
this man ', continued he ; 'he makes me understand him, and 
does not perplex my soul with a vain maze of timorous wiles, but 
speaks and acta with open honesty and boldness ' 

The honour of this testimony warmed the heart of my master 
"with a joy that overpaid his labours, and added new fire to the 
assiduity of his soul. As soon as he went home, he found a person' 
waiting for him, whom he had appointed to meet him, on an afiair 
of the greatest importance. 

' I have sent for you, my friend ', said my master, ' on an occasion 
which, I am sensible, will give joy to your heart. You are to com- 
mand a separate body of the troops, which have been sent to prose- 
cute this necessary and just war in America. I need not put myself 
nor you to the pain of repeating the causes of the shameful inac- 
tivity, to give it no severer name, by which this war has been drawn 
into such a length ; you know, and will avoid them. You will 
not wear out opportunity in making unnecessary preparations for 
improbable occasions ; you will not damp the ardour of your 
soldiers by delay, nor prolong a burthensome war, to enrich yourself 
with the spoils of your country. You are young, active, and brave ; 
such a commander only do British soldiers want to lead them to 
victory. You have no senior, no superior here, to restrain the 
efforts of your spirit by timid caution, at the same time that your 
judgment will supply the place of experience, and prevent your 
falling into the misfortunes which sefl-sufSoient, brutal rashiiess 
has made so fatal to others. Your instructions are comprised in a 
few words. Make the best use your judgment shall direct you of 
the forces entrusted to your command, to defend the property, and 
avenge the wrongs of your fellow-subjects, and to vindicate the 
honour of this abused nation. I know whom I speak to, and there- 
fore I say no more. Proceed, my friend, my soldier, answer my 
expectations, and you will fulfil the wishes of your country '. 

Saying this, he embraced him tenderly, and as he went wSh. him 
to the door, happening to look into the street, he saw a number of 
disabled soldiers, who had placed themselves before his window, 
to solicit reUef for their miseries. ' Oh, my friend ', continued he, 
grasping his hand, ' behold those victims of the unjust ambition of 
that enemy against whom you go, and let the sight add the wings of 
an eagle to your haste, to tear down a power which has been thus 
fatal to so many of your brave countr3rmen, to prevent any more 
from suffering the like evils from the same cause. The man who 
does not use, to the beat advantage, the means entrusted to him 

1 General Wolfe, whom Pitt singled out to take command of the 
forces sent in 1759 against Quebec. On 13th September 1759, the 
battle of Quebec was fought, and Wolfe fell ia the hour of victory. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 199 

by his country to destroy its enemies, is guilty of all the evils which 
those enemies may afterwards do to his country. Shall I beg a 
favour of my friend ? Distribute this money ' — giving him a 
handful of guineas — ' among those men, as from yourself. If it 
is not enough to give each a guinea, I will be your debtor for what is 
wanting ; if it is more, keep the residue in your hands to apply to 
the same use on the first occasion you meet. This much will relieve 
their real wants, and more might only tempt them to excess. The 
invidiousness of my station makes it improper for me to do even 
an act of virtue, which may be mistaken for ostentation. Adieu, 
my friend. Heaven guard you in the day of battle, and guide your 
sword to victory '. 

I here quitted the service of this great man ; the instances of 
whose conduct, which I have given, make any further character of 
him unnecessary. 

The regard with which the minister had addressed himself to my 
present master raised my curiosity to take aa immediate view of 
his heart, as I knew not but that I might leave his possession directly. 
But my fears were agreeably disappointed, for the number of guineas 
given to him by my master exceeding that of the objects to whom 
we were to be distributed, it fell to my lot to remain a little longer 
with him. 

The honour of his new command, and the confidence with which it 
was entrusted to him, warmed his heart with the most exalted joy. 
He executed his charitable commission, and then went directly home, 
where, bending his knee to his beloved mother, and kissing her hand 
in rapture — ' Oh, madam ', said he, ' congratulate your happy son. 
My prayers at length are heard, and I am blessed with an oppor- 
tunity of proving to the world my attachment to the service, my 
ardour for the glory of my country. I am honoured with the 
separate command in America, where Heaven fires my soul with an 
assurance that I shall have the happiness of crushing the injurious 
power of our enemies in the very place where it first attacked my 
country, where it has too long triumphed in its wrongs '. 

' Heaven bless my son ', replied the matron, as soon as a gush of 
tears of joy and tenderness permitted her to speak. ' Heaven guard 
my son, and bless his pious hopes. Let me only live to see him 
return with the honour of having done his duty, and I shall die 
contented. But why do I say this, as if my heart felt a doubt for 
him ? My son will never fail to do his duty ; he will never fall 
from the paths of honour, however dangerous, nor seek to colour 
over with specious arguments the loss of his honour. He will not 
make his mother ashamed of having borne him, nor bring her grey 
hairs with disgrace and sorrow to the grave. I know the instruc- 
tions which have formed his youth ; I know the principles of his 
heart ; I know my own blood better. But oh, my son ! remember 
also that prudence distinguishes true courage from rashness, 
that your country has now a peculiar interest in your life, and that 
you betray its trust, if you lose it by any unnecessary boldness. 
Remember your aged mother, who hangs weeping over her grave 
till you return. Remember your ' 

' Oh, my mother, no more ! Recall not ideas winch my present 



200 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

situation requires me to forget. Fear not, your son Tvill not be a 
disgrace to the honest race from which he has sprung. He will do 
his duty as a soldier, a British soldier, and as a man sensible of the 
obligations of reason and religion. Whether I shall ever have the 
happiness of kissing this hand again, is only known to Heaven ; 
but it is in my power to promise that the name of your son shall 
never raise a blush in the face of his mother, nor his actions require 
the palliation of excuse from his friends. If life is to be short, 
let it be well filled ; one day of glory is better than an age of idle- 
ness or dishonour. Adieu, my mother ; your blessing is a shield 
to the head, a support to the soul of your son ; one tender parting 
more, and then my heart must be resigned to other cares ' 

' Heaven bless, Heaven guard my son ' ! and then, as he went 
from her, ' O glory, what a tribute dost thou expect from wretched 
mortals ' ! 

My master paused a moment to wipe away the pious tear which 
filial duty owed to such a parting, and then hasted to another scene 
of equal tenderness. 

Mutual merit had improved the instinctive liking of youth between 
my master and a young lady,i whose elevated rank and large fortune 
were her least recommendations, into the strongest attachment of 
real love. As reason could make no objection on either side, parental 
approbation gave its sanction to their happy choice, and had en- 
couraged virgin timidity to appoint the day that was to seal their 
bUss. Hard task upon a favoured lover to communicate to the 
chosen of his soul the order which was to damp rising expectation 
by this delay, and tear him from the instant hope of that happiness 
which he had so long been suing for. But honour and the service 
of his country demanded this fiery trial, to prepare him for that 
height of glory to which his soul aspired. 



CHAPTER XI 

ANOTHEE SCESTB OF TENDEENESS — LOVE AND HONOtm DT THE OLD- 
FASHIONED, ROMANTIC STYLE — CHEYSAL QUITS THE SERVICE OP 
THE GENERAL, AND, AETER SOME FEW COMMON CHANGES, ENTERS 
INTO THAT OF HONEST AMINADAB — CONCLUSION OF AMTNADAB's 
AGENCY FOR HER GRACE 

As soon as he had recovered from the softness into which his mother's 
tenderness had melted him, he went directly to his mistress. She 
received him with the freedom proper in their present situation, but 
soon perceived an alteration in his countenance, that showed her 
his heart was not at ease. This alarmed her tender fears. ' What ', 
said she, looking earnestly at him, ' can make a troubled gloom 

iMisa Lowther, afterwards Duchess of Bolton. Before the battle 
of Quebec, Wolfe gave her miniature to his old schoolfellow and comrade- 
in-arms, John Jervis, afterwards Lord St Vincent, having a presenti- 
ment that he would die. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 201 

overcast that face, where hopes and happiness have, for some time, 
brightened every smile ? Can anything have happened to disturb 
the prospect so pleasing to us ? Can you feel a grief that you think 
me unworthy or unable to share with you ? It must be so ; that 
faint, that laboured smile betrays the sickness of your heart '. 

' Oh, dearest wish of that heart ', replied he, taking her hand 
and kissing it in ecstacy, ' how shall I merit such perfection ? It 
is impossible ; I am unworthy ; but let my soul thank Heaven for 
blessing it with this opportunity of rising nearer to a level with 
your virtues — a hope that will soften the severity of absence, and 
make the delay of happiness seem shorter '. 

' What canst thou mean ' ? said she, a jealous doubt alarming 
her delicacy. ' Delay ! I understand thee not ! I urge not '. 

' Mistake not, O my love, the inconsistencies which anguish 
extorts from my bleeding heart. How can I say it 1 Our happiness 
is delayed — delayed but to be more exalted. Honour, the service 
of my country, call '- 
' And am I to be left ' ? 

' But for a time, a Uttle time, the pain of which shall be overpaid 
by the joy of meeting, never to part again. Oh, spare my heart, 
restrain those tears ; I am not worthy, I am not proof to such a 
trial. The interest, the glory of my country demand my service, 
and my gracious master has honoured me with a station, in which 
my endeavours maybe effectual, to accomplish his commands — nay 
must be effectual — ^where love urges duty, where you are the 
inestimable reward '. 

' If that reward is all you seek, why do you fly from it ? My 
fortune is amply sufficient. Quit, then, the dangerous paths of 
ambition, and let us retire and seek true happiness in content '. 

'Oh, spare my struggling heart! What can, what shall I do ? The 
trial is too great for human fortitude. Assist me, glory ! help, my 
country, support me through this conflict, and I shall triumph over 
every other (fifficulty and danger ! I go, my love, but to deserve thee' . 
' Go ! go ! and Heaven guide and guard your steps ' — waving 
her hand, and turning from him to hide her tears. ' I shall no 
longer struggle with the sacred impulse that leads you on to glory '. 
Then turning to him, ' But remember how you leave me ; think 

what I feel till you return. What must I be, should ' 

The horror of this thought made her unable to say more. He 
flew into her arms, and mingling his tears with her's, as her head 
reclined upon his bosom, in the tenderness of a chaste embrace — 
' This is too much ', said he, ' this is too much. I never can repay 
tliis excess of goodness '. Then breaking from her arms in a kind of 
•enthusiasm — ' Heaven gives my soul ', continued he, ' this fore- 
taste of happiness, as an earnest of success. I go to certain victory ; 
the prayers of angels must prevail ' 

Saying these words, he rushed out of the room, leaving her half 
dead with grief. Nor was he iu a much happier state ; the thought 
of parting from her damping the ardour that had enabled him to 
give that proof of his resolution, and obliging nature to pay the 
tribute of a flood of tears to such a sacrifice. 
But glory aad the interest of his country soon dissipated this 



202 ADVENTURES OP A GUINEA 

cloud, and his mind, freed from the dread of such painful scenes of 
tenderness, resumed its wonted vigour, and entered upon the cares 
of his great undertaking with the most indefatigable assiduity. 
But I continued not in his possession to see the effects of these cares ; 
such objects as I was designed for occurred too frequently to the 
first of whom it fell to my lot to be given. I told you that I took 
a view of his heart. Never was honour more firmly established on 
the principles of virtue than there. To select any one instance 
would be injustice to the rest. All was uniformly great and good. 

My next master was one of the pillars of military glory, who had 
contributed a leg, an arm, and the scalp of his head to raise the 
trophies of the IVench in America. Though he was destitute of 
almost every comfort which nature really stands in need of, his 
first care, on the acquisition of such a treasure as I was to him, 
was to gratify the artificial wants of luxury. He went directly to 
a gin-shop, where he changed me for a quartern of that liquid fire, 
the taste of which was too pleasing to his palate, and the warmth 
too comfortable to his heart for him to be satisfied with so little. 
Quartern followed quartern, till every sense was intoxicated, and 
he fell dead drunk on the floor, when his good-natured host had 
him kindly laid, to sleep off his debauch, on the next dunghill, 
first taking care to prevent his fellow -inhabitants of the streets from 
robbing him of the rest of his treasure, by picking his pocket of it 
himself. The scenes I saw in this service were all of the same kind, 
but I was soon relieved from the pain of them, my master giving 
me as a present to an officer of the custom that very night. By 
this faithful steward of the public, I was next morning given to the 
factor of a gang of smugglers, to be laid out for him in lace in Flan- 
ders, whither he was just going on the affairs of his profession. 
With this industrious trader I went as far as Harwich, where, while 
they waited for the tide, he lost me at a game of cribbage, to a 
person who was going over with him. 

My new master was honest Aminadab, her grace's^ agent, whom 
I have mentioned to you before. As soon as they had done play- 
ing, my master took a walk upon the beach with a person who 
strongly resembled him, and whom I found to be his son. 

' I wish ', said the father, ' that we were safe at our journey's 
end, for, though I have planned matters so well that I think there 
can be no danger, the immense consequence at stake must make 
me anxious ' 

' I do not understand you ', replied the son ; ' I thought this was 
but such a journey as I have often known you take, and that you 
were going no farther than Holland, on some business of her grace's '. 

' She thinks so, indeed ', returned the father, ' nor would I have 
her think otherwise as yet ; but I do not design ever to see her face 
more. I am now, my son, arrived at the height of my wishes, 
being possessed of wealth beyond my most sanguine hopes. For 
you must know, that having gained the confidence of this woman 
by many services, I at length suggested it to her that the best way 
for her to make the most profit of the great wealth she had amassed, 

' The Countess of Yarmouth. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 203 

would be to send it to Holland by some trusty person, who should 
bring it over again from thence, to save appearances, and subscribe 
it here, in some fictitious name, to the supplies given for the defence 
of Germany, now that her's, and the intrigues of some other great 
persona, had baffled the schemes of economy which the managers 
had attempted in vain to establish, and obliged them to come into 
our own terms. She took the hint, for it was a most plausible one, 
and immediately insisted that I should negotiate the affair for 
her, giving me one hundred thousand pounds for that purpose. ^ 
This was what I wanted, and had been always scheming for, 
having ever remitted my money, as fast as I could make any, into 
Holland, that I might be able to seize such a happy opportunity 
as this, at a moment's warning '. 

' But you cannot think, father, of stajdng in Holland ? You 
will be immediately pursued thither '. 

' In Holland, fool ? no, nor in the smoke of Europe at all. I 
design to set out for Africa without a moment's loss, and hope to be 
far enough out of her reach, or that of any Christian power, before 
she can suspect anything of my flight. And it will heighten the 
pleasure of my success to think, that while I am sailing to a land of 
circumcision, she will sit in anxious expectation of my return '. 

' But, father, is it not injustice to deceive her confidence and rob 
her of so great a sum of money ' ? 

' Injustice, fool ! injustice to a Christian ? Say such another 
word, and I discard you, disclaim you for ever ! Thy converse with 
these Gentiles has debauched thy faith. For what do we mix with 
them, for what do we serve them, for what bear their abominations 
and their insults, but to turn them to our own advantage ? Pools  
vain presumptuous fools ! to imagine that any benefits, any grati- 
tude can bind us to them, or change the innate hatred of our souls 
to a sect that has been the cause of our dispersion and ruin. But, 
to silence thy weak scruples about iujustice with a word, have I 
not the authority of our Holy Scripture, the example of our great 
prophet Moses himself, for what I do, who borrowed the wealth of 
the Egjrptians, without a design of ever returning it, to pay the 
children of Israel for the labour they had been put to by their 
oppressors, and enrich them when they should arrive at the land 
of promise ? And is this not my case ? Have I not laboured 
hourly for this Gentile woman without payment ? Did she not 
join to defraud our people of a greater sum than this, to which my 
mite was added too, under the pretence of procuring us a settle- 
ment. And did she not refuse to retmn it when the attempt failed 
of success ? What, then, is this but a just retaliation ? a fulfilling 
of our law that says, " An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth " ? 
And do I not want her wealth to make my settlement happy, in 
the land of my forefathers ' ? 

1 One method by which Ministers and those in confidential positioug 
enriched themselves was subscribing Government loans at par and then 
throwing them on the public at a high premium, e.g., the- shares on one loan 
of three millions rose to a premium of 1 1 per cent, forthwith, and the country 
lost £385,000 by the transaction. — Hunt's Political History of England, x. 



•204 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

The son had too high a reverence for the judgment of his father 
to offer any reply, but yielded to the conviction of arguments bo 
conclusive. By this time the wind and tide served for us ; we 
arrived in Holland without anything remarkable. I should, how- 
ever, mention to you the sordid hypocrisy of my master, who, not 
to violate the custom of his race, made a pretence of poverty, to 
get his passage without expense. 



CHAPTER Xn 

THEY ABBIVB AT THE HAGTTE — POUTICAL CONVEESATION BETWEEN 
A DUTCHMAN AND A JEW — THEY DUTBB IN OPINION — AMTNADAB 
LEAVES HIS FEIBND, VAN HOGAN, IN GBEAT DISTBESS 

As soon as he arrived at the Hague, my master set his son to 
prepare for their immediate departure, while he went himself for a 
moment to speak to one of the principal members of the States. 

There was little ceremony between a Dutchman and a Jew, but 
entering directly upon business — ' My friend Aminadab ', said his 
mightiness, ' I am glad to see you. I hope you have brought us 
good news, and that there is a stop put to the insolence of those 
English pirates, who, in a manner, block up our ports, and have 
almost ruined our trade '. 

' Really, my friend Van Hogan ', replied my master, ' I am sorry 
that I cannot give you any satisfactory account of that affair ; 
for such is the perverseness of people in power there at present, 
that they will not listen to any arguments '. 

' Will they not take money ' ? 

' No, indeed ; nor does the boldest of us all know how to offer 
it with safety, it was rejected with such indignant rage the last time, 
though, indeed, the offer was a tempting one. I have seen the day, 
and that not very long since, when half the sum would have done 
twice as much. But matters are most strangely altered of late. 
They have got a manager,^ who neither drinks nor games, keeps 
running horses nor whores, nor lives above his private fortune, 
and therefore has not such pressing demands for money as used to 
make our negotiators go on so smoothly with others formerly '. 

' Death ! what shall we do ? Is the whole court corrupted 
by this example ? Are they all infected with such a strange 
madness ' ? 

' No, it is not gone so far as that yet, and it is to be hoped that 
the example of a few will not be able to do so much, and that, 
when the novelty of this humour wears off a little, it will go out of 
fashion insensibly, and things return to their old course. This is 
supposing the worst, that the engines now at work to overturn this 
new set should miscarry ' 

' But -what must we do in the meantime ? We shall be ruined 

' William Pitt, whose unfashionable disinterestedness and incorrupti- 
bility were one secret of his popularity. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 20& 

before that may happen. We must declare war, and do ourselves 
justice '. 

' But may not the remedy there be worse than the disease ? 
Are your affairs in such a condition as to entitle you to take such a 
step ? Consider what a mighty naval force they have at this time. 
Consider how you will be able to resist it '. 

' That is the thing, the only thing, that has kept us quiet so 
long. But something must be done ; another Amboyna' affair, 
or some such stroke, must bring us satisfaction and revenge 
too '. 

' Take care, my friend, be cautious what you do ; this is no time 
for such strokes, nor are the present governors such people as those 
who suffered them so tamely ; they will be apt to return the stroke 
in a manner that may be attended with consequences too 
dreadful to be hazarded. I hate those haughty islanders as much 
as you, except some few particulars. The sense of the whole nation 
has ever been against us ; nor would they suffer us among them 
now, but that we have availed ourselves so well of the favour of 
those few, as to -get the command of almost all the money in the 
kingdom into our own hands, so that now they dare not provoke 
us too far, though I own I do suspect that the design of the present 
rulers is to get out of our power as soon as this war is over, if our 
old friends do not counteract their dfsigns '. 

' But all this time this talking signifies nothing to our affairs ; 
what do they say to them ? What reasons do they give for en- 
couraging these outrages, in breach of treaties and contempt of 
justice ' ? 

' In truth, my friend, a great many, that are more just than 
agreeable, more easily exclaimed against than refuted. In answer 
to your alleging the faith of treaties, they insist that they strictly 
observe the sense and spirit of them, while you only cavil about 
the words, it being absurd to think that any nation should bind 
up its own hands in the manner you pretend ; or, even if that was 
the meaning of the treaty at the time when it was made, that your 
abuse of the indulgence given by it makes it necessary to retract 
it now, and they express the most indignant surprise at your in- 
sisting so strongly upon one article, which, at best, is but doubtful, 
and would be in itself absurd, in the sense you wrest it to, while you 
break through so many, the meaning of which you do not even 
pretend to dispute '. 

' Then we will dispute no longer about them ; we wiU enforce 
their observation by the same methods that originally obtaiued 
them '- 

' Ay, if that could be ; but, my friend, I cannot flatter you ; I 
am afraid those means are out of your power. You were then really- 
mighty states, respectable for your power, and dreadful for your 
valour ; but the case is now altered, I need not say how ' 

' Ungrateful English, to forget how we rescued them from popery 

1 Alludes to the Amboyna massacre of 1623, when the Dutch tortured 
many English traders to death. In 1654 they were compelled to pay 
£300,000 compensation to the children of the victims. 



206 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

and slavery but the other day. Had it not been for us, they would, 
at best, have been but slaves to EVance '. 

' The very charge they make against you, who, they say, could 
never have resisted the power of Spain, or established your liberties, 
if their Queen Elizabeth had not hearkened to the cries of your poor 
distressed states. As for the affair you mention, though they do 
not deny the benefit, they take off from the obligation by attribut- 
ing it to self-interested motives, as, they say, you were convinced 
that if anything happened to them, you must sink, of course ; besides, 
that you have been amply paid for this, by the immense expense of 
blood and treasure with which they established your barrier in the 
late wars, which they evidently entered into on your account, to 
the neglect of their own interest. In a word, my friend, there is 
so much truth in what they say that I would not advise you to 
insist upon these points any more '. 

' Confound the points, and the memories that rip them up so. 
What shall we do ? I myself lost a ship last week, worth fifty 
thousand ducats ; though all the precautions possible were taken, 
as sending her papers by another ship, supplying her with false 
bills of lading, false clearances, false consignments — in short, every- 
thing that human art could devise. And I know she was as well 
sworn for, to prevent her being condemned, as human conscience 
could swear ; but nothing could elude the captors, or deceive or 
influence the judges '. 

' But was she not insured ' ? 

' Not a ducat ; there is nothing to be got by insuring, except the 
ships are to be cast away. Oh, my ship, my ship ! I will have 
war '. 

' And then all your ships go at once ' 
' I am distracted. What shall we do ' ? 

' My friend, the best, the only advice I can give you is to put a 
stop to this trade, and open your eyes to your true interest. I 
hate the English as much as you possibly can ; but that should not 
make me ruin myself to be revenged on them. They are your only 
natural allies. They first delivered, they still sustain you, nor can 
you support the very name of an independent state without them. 
Provoke them not, therefore, too far. I wonder how they have 
borne so much already. Preserve a fair neutrality ; they despise 
your assistance, and desire no more ; nor, by your avarice, force 
them to measures that must end in your ruin. If you break with 
them, to whom will you apply ? The French have given you many 
proofs that they only wait for an opportunity to enslave you. Spain 
has at length learned its own interest, and will not break with the 
only power whose friendship can be of real service to it,' and this 
very war gives a sufficient demonstration of Austrian faith and 
gratitude. 

' This is the obvious situation of things, and must strike a person 
at the first view ; but a moment's thought will show them even 
in a, stronger light. For, to grant that France and Austria both 

1 Alludes to the family compact entered into secretly by the Bourbon 
houses of Spain and France. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 207 

may be sincere in their professions to you, does not reason show 
you the imprudence of trusting to promises, which it is more than 
probable they will not be able to perform ? For, it you would but 
divest yourself of passion and prejudice for a moment, you would 
see that the measures entered upon, and the means used to carry 
them on by the English, at this time must, in all human appearance, 
disappoint the schemes of their enemies, and retort, upon their own 
heads, the ruin they meditated for others. Indeed, the prospect is 
such, that it is impossible to say where things will end. Every 
interior fund is exhausted, every external resource cut off. Their 
own trade is absolutely ruined ; the treasures of Spain, which sup- 
plied them in their last wars, are no longer at their command, so 
that I can foresee nothing less than their becoming bankrupts, 
not only to themselves, but also to every foreign state and individual, 
whose avarice of present gain has made them supply their wants. 

' Nor is this distress the effect of chance, or of an unfortunate 
campaign, which the success of another, or some lucky hit, may re- 
store. It is the natural consequence of a system of measures, 
planned with judgment, and prosecuted with vigour, by a minister 
who win not fail to improve it to the most solid advantage, and 
this, I say, not solely from my own opinion. You know I have had 
connections with persons able to give me the best information, 
by the assistance of which I have traced the progress of these affairs 
with astonishment ; and therefore, as England has thus at length 
shown a superiority in council, the usual resource of patching up 
a good peace at the end of an unsuccessful war seems also to be 
precluded from them. As for the house of Austria, it has ever 
been a dead weight upon its friends, though its infatuated ingrati- 
tude to England, which has been in a manner its sole support for 
near a century, will, probably, prevent any other state from under- 
taking such a burthen, so that it must sink back into its original 
obscurity and barbarism. Thus you see, my friend, that depending 
upon France is leaning on a broken reed, and trusting to Austria, 
going for shelter under a falling wall. What, then, can you do, if 
the English should take offence at your behaviour, and exert that 
power which is in their hands, to pimish your avaricious partiality 
to their enemies ? 

' Your power is, in every instance, contemptible ; your navy is 
gone absolutely to decay ; your land forces are filled with old men 
and children ; jovn ofiScers, who might have served you, have been 
obliged to enter into other services for bread, to make room for 
ignorant, indolent, pusillanimous burghers, who barter their votes 
for such a share of the spoils of the public. Your finances are in 
the lowest state of embarrassment ; your public spirit, your valour, 
your virtue, all swallowed up by selfishness and sordid love of gain, 
ever5rthing in the situation that seems to invite ruin, if it is not 
speedily prevented, and that can possibly be done no other way 
than as I have mentioned ; for, as I have said, and must agaih repeat, 
things are now on a footing there that you do not seem to be properly 
aware of. The people are sensible of their own strength ; governors 
exert it properly, and there is a mutual confidence between them, 
that in a manner ensiures success to their attempts. Consider this 



208 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

fair, this friendly representation of real facts, and you will soon see 
the improbability of their bearing with you any longer, or suffering 
you to defeat the ends of their military efforts, by carrying on the 
trade of their enemies, and so enabling them to continue the war '. 

' Is it come to this ? Are the friends on whom we depended 
most turned against us ? Are you an advocate for our enemies, 
and would persuade us to give up the most advantageous branch 
of trade we have ' 1 

' Why will you let your passion blind you thus ? I have told you 
before, and I repeat it again, that of all Christians, I hate the English 
most, because they resemble us least ; as I love the Dutch most, 
as you come nearest to ourselves, both in practice and profession. 
But my passions never blind me, and therefore I speak the dictates 
of reason. I plead not for them, nor will I flatter you '. 

' Notwithstanding all thgir boasted power, we have one stroke 
left to humble them, and we will make it directly ; we will draw 
all our money out of their funds '. 

" Will you so, at a third part loss ? Oh, Moses ! what fools are 
those Christians ? Do you not see that even this stroke, as you 
call it, is guarded against ; that, apprehensive of such an attempt, 
they have lowered the particular fvmds, in which your money 
chiefly lies, so far, that the loss of selling out now would be in- 
tolerable. And whose is this money which you would draw out ? 
The property of private people ? Absurd thought. If it was the 
money of the public, it would not be strange to see it sacrificed to 
private interest, but there is no instance in all your story of private 
property being given up voUintarily for the redress of public wrongs. 
BViend Hogan, I am in haste ; my affairs call me elsewhere. 
When I shall see you again is uncertain ; but my regard would not 
permit me to miss this opportunity of giving you my advice, which 
I know to be of importance to you. I can no longer undertake 
your affairs in London ; nor would I have another amuse you with 
hopes that must deceive you in the end. While it was in my 
power to serve you, I did ; I abused their confidence, I betrayed 
their secrets to you ; but I can do it no longer, nor can any other, 
to effect. Measures, as well as men, are changed. Adieu '. 

With these words, my master went to seek his son, leaving his 
friend, Van Hogan, in the highest distraction, between the opposite 
impulses of the strongest passions that could agitate his soul, 
avarice and fear. 



CHAPTER XIII 

AiONADAB BIDS ADIHU TO HBB GBACB, AND SAILS WITH HIS SON FOR 
ATEIOA — CHRYSAL REMAINS WITH A DTTTCH BANKER — THE PRIN- 
CTPLBS AND CONSCIENCE 01' A GOOD DUTCHMAN — CHRYSAL IS SENT 
INTO GERMANY — HIS OPINION OF THE DUTCH 

The young Israelite met his father punctually, and gave him such 
all account of his preparations for their flight, that Aminadab 
blessed the God of his fathers ; and to complete the fulness of his 
harvest with whatever gleanings he could pick up, he went directly 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 2.Q» 

among his Dutch friends, and, in pious imitation of the example 
he had quoted before, borrowed, if not jewels of gold and jewels^ 
of silver, as much coined gold and silver as he could, and then, 
going with his son to the seaside, they embarked for their nativo 
country, in all the erultation of successful villany. 

But I went not with them, my British shape being of more value 
in Europe than where he was going. My master left me with hia 
banker, in exchange for the more fashionable coin of Spain, which 
neighbourhood made better known there. My Hebrew master had 
scarce left the banker, into whose hands he had given me, when in. 
came his Belgic friend. Van Hogan, all aghast at the news he had 
received from him, and something else, which had come to his 
knowledge since. 

' Oh, Mynheer ', said he, ' we are all blown up and undone. The 
flood is pouring in upon us '. 

' What is the matter now, Mjmheer ', replied the banker, ' that 
throws you into this strange consternation ? The worms have not 
destroyed the dams, nor an earthquake swallowed up the Spice 
Islands ' ? 

' Worse, worse, if possible, than even these. Those ^ stubborn, 
proud, self-sufficient English have refused to release our ships that 
were taken, carrying ammimition and provision to their enemies, 
80 that we are like not only to lose those ships, but also the advan* 
tage of the trade for the future. What can be done to avert this 
blow ' ? 

' Eeally, Mjmheer, I cannot tell ; the case is bad enough, to be 
sure ; but it is no more than was to be expected. It was not to 
be thought that they would always remain such passive fools as 
tamely to look on, while we supplied their enemies with necessaries 
to carry on the war against them, without endeavouring to put a 
stop to us '. 

' Death ! I am almost mad to hear you talk thus ; but say what 
you will, my province shall never bear it. Why, I have received 
advice this minute that all our ships, which were freighted for their 
enemies, will be condemned, and that they are as little moved at 
our menaces, as they were at our entreaties. If this continues, 
we shall not have a ship left in the Texel '. 

' Nay, mine shall escape, I am resolved '- 

' What will you do to save them ' ? 

' Not run them into the danger, Mjmheer '. 

' How, give up the trade ' ? 

' Most certainly, since it cannot be carried on with safety any 
longer, and glad that I have come ofi so well ' 

' I do not understand you '. 

• You are too warm. Mynheer, too sanguine in the pursuit of your 
projects. While the surprise or fright of the late managers in 
England gave me reason to think that they would not venture to 

' These dealings of the Dutch with the enemies of Britain, and the 
consequent assertion of a right of search, were a sore point throughout 
the long wars with France, Spain, and America, and eventually led to 
our declaring war against Holland in 1778. 

o 



210 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

Interrupt us, I carried on aa large a trade in this way as any other, 
but, as soon as I saw the people recover their senses, and the reins 
put into other hands, I made a timely retreat with what I had 
acquired '. 

' And what do you intend to do now ' ? 

' Keep fair with those whom I can get nothing by breaking with, 
and throw my business into another channel, by which management 
I have already succeeded so far that I have got the British remit- 
tances to the parties engaged in the present war '. 

' Why, there may be something in this, and, if one scheme fails, 
I believe I will even follow your example '. 

' And pray, what is that, Mynheer ' ? 

' No more than the old cry of piracy ; but this is so laid, that it 
can hardly fail of success. We have bribed the captain of an 
English privateer to rifle a ship that we prepare properly for the 
purpose, and then to come into the way of one of our men-of-war, 
which is to take him and bring him in, where he is to insult the 
government, and vindicate his outrages on the pretence of 
authority.' 

' And pray, Mynheer, what can you propose from all this, beside 
having the foolish villain hanged ' ? 

' Why, the English, in detestation of such villany, will give up the 
point of searching our ships when they see their authority abused 
in such a manner, and so we shall gain our end that way ; or, if 
they do not, our own people will be so enraged at the insult and 
injustice (as they will believe) of their proceeding, that they will 
immediately declare war against them ; and so we shall obtain it 
the other. The pirate, when he has served our turn, we are to let 
«3cape, and it will be no great loss to the world if half a score of his 
crew are hanged '. 

' A very just and public-spirited scheme indeed, to hang wretches 
for a crime you hire them to commit, and engage your country in 
a war that must be its ruin, to support your pretensions to an 
unjustifiable trade '. 

' Mynheer Van Hogan, I am a Dutchman as well as you, and 
attached to my interest, as every Dutchman is ; but that is, 
when my interest is not destructive of itself in the end, as I must 
tell you I think your present scheme is, in which I will be no 
further concerned, than to try to prevent the evil consequences 
of it to the state, the rest may lie upon your own head. 
Anything in the way of trade my conscience complies with with- 
out scruple ; I can take every oath that every officer of the 
customs can impose, and not think myself bound by any of them, 
further than they agree with my interest. I can supply the enemies 
of my country with arms to fight against ourselves, provided they 
pay a price extraordinary, that will defray my taxes towards the 
support of the war. I can receive circumcision, stroke down 
my beard, and swear by Mahomet to avoid a tax at Smyrna. I 
can trample upon the Cross, deny Christ, and call myself a 
Dutchman, to obtain leave to trade in Japan, but I will 
not cut the dykes to drown a rat at home. I am not 
at leisure to say more on this subject, as I am this 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 211 

minute going to remit a subsidy to one of the German princes,' 
whom England keeps in pay, to fight for their own preservation, 
from the same principles that it has long fought our battles, and 
would again, if we did not provoke it too far. And when this is 
done, I am to meet the French ambassador, to settle terms with 
him, for remitting the money that is to pay the army which fights 
against the allies of England. So that you see I am engaged, as 
you may be, if your warmth, unnatural to the cool temper of yoxir 
country, will let you open your eyes to your true interest '. 

Mynheer Van Hogan departed rather silenced than satisfied with 
the reasoning of my master, who sat down to negotiate the hire of 
a priacipality with as much unconcern as he would that of a turnip- 
field ; and bought and sold the inhabitants with as great indiffer- 
ence as he would have bargained for a cask of herrings, in which 
service it fell to my lot to be employed. 

Greatly as I must have edified by the examples and principles, 
mercantile, moral, civil, and religious, of my late master, I must 
own there was something so grossly reprobate to every sense of 
real virtue, even in him, that I was pleased to leave him, and. in- 
deed, to be candid, the country in general, where every profession 
of virtue was despised, their only pretension to it being the absence 
of one, hypocrisy, which they rejected as an unnecessary incum- 
brance, and acted their grossest enormities without reserve, or 
appearance of shame. 

I now entered on the great theatre of the world, where the 
sovereign actor gave a dignity to the scenes, and the concerns of 
individuals were overwhelmed and lost in the confusion of nations. 



CHAPTER XIV 

CHRYSAl's remarks on military glory in her journey — TWO 
STRANGE PASSENGERS TAKEN INTO THE BOAT — NATIONAL PREJU- 
DICE AND PRIDE BREAK OTTT IN PERSONS NOT LIKELY TO BE 
SirSPBCTBD OF SUCH PASSIONS 

While I was travelling to my destined master, I had frequent 
opportunities of seeing the fruits of military glory in the misery of 
the people, and desolation of the countries through which I went. 
Such scenes as these cannot be made known by description to an 
inhabitant of this happy island, whose situation defends it from the 
sudden inroads of foreign enemies, as its natural naval strength does 
from the more deliberate devastations of regular invasion, and the 
excellency of its laws, from the yet severer outrages of arbitrary 
power. But, amid all this unhappiness, such is the insatiate in- 
gratitude of the human heart that, not content with these blessings, 
you are ever complaining, ever grasping at more, till, in the end, 
you lose the enjoyment of what you possess, insensible that your 

' Frederick of Prussia was reueiving an annual subsidy of £670,000 
and the Landgrave of Hesse one of £340,000 for the hire of troops 



212 ADVENTUBES OF A GUINEA 

ABTerest wants would be abundance to millions, who dare not even 
utter a complaint. 

It has been said that there is a certain degree of madness requisite 
to make a great man ; that is, to enable humanity to conquer its 
first principle of self-preservation, to slight the most terrifying 
dangers, and to seek the most severe evils that interrupt its pursuit of 
an imaginary good. The lust of power and the intoxication of 
glory may seem to animate the great to this contradiction of nature, 
but madness alone can support the mass of mankind through it 
who are insensible to these fantastic motives, or, at least, cannot 
delude themselves with the fairest hope of ever obtaining them. 
Of this I saw many instances in my journey through the countries 
that were the scene of the present war ; but one more particularly 
that happened in one of the Dutch travelling boats, early in our 
journey, made the strongest impression on me, and deserves relation 
most. There had been an obstinate battle fought some time before 
between the parties then at war, in which the loss was so severe, 
and so equal on both sides, that, as soon as night covered their 
retreat, each withdrew, concluding itself vanquished, though next 
morning, when they came to a better knowledge of each other's 
situation, they both claimed the victory, while neither thought 
proper to return to the charge to assert that claim ^. 

This uncertainty aggravated the misery of the unhappy wretches, 
who were left wounded on the field of battle, as it prevented their 
receiving relief either from friend or enemy. However, as thi& 
dreadful scene was acted in the neighbourhood of a neutral city, 
as soon as the iirst terrors of it were a little cooled, the common 
feelings of humanity moved some of the inhabitants to go and try 
to relieve as many of the deserted sufferers as had not perished for 
want of more timely assistance, without distinction or respect to 
any party. 

Two of those victims of ambition, who had been enemies 
in the day of battle, but had since founded a friendship on 
their common calamity having been supported by the same 
charity, and cured of their wounds in the same bed, were now 
striving to get the mangled remains of their mutilated carcasses 
carried, like other worn-out instruments of the war, to their re- 
spective countries. In their journey they happened to be brought 
to the waterside, where we had just taken boat, where they begged 
in the most moving terms to be admitted, but were absolutely 
refused, till one of the passengers, an English gentleman, took 
compassion on their distress, and paid their fare. 

We were all seated in the equality usual in such vehicles, in which, 
as in a grave, all conditions are thrown promiscuously together, 
when, the conversation happening to turn upon the war, whicli 
then reigned in most parts of Europe, and every one speaking 
variously, as prejudice or opinion dictated, the Englishman chanced 

1 At Lobositz, the victorious Prussians were said to have lost more 
in killed and wounded than the enemy ; and at Prague Frederick left 
18,000 men on the field. Several battles in the Seven Years' War 
were very evenly contested. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 213 

to say that he thought such a combination of the greatest powers 
of Europe, as at that time laboured to oppress the Kmg of Bulgaria,' 
was, to divest it of the intricacies of ambition, and bring politics 
to the rule of reason and justice, the most injurious and even base 
abuse of power that could be instanced in the Christian history ; 
and he hoped, and indeed doubted not, but that glorious prince, 
and the bravery and attachment of his subjects to his cause, that ia, 
really to their own cause, would rise superior to all the attempts 
of his enemies, and retort upon them the stroke which they had 
perfidiously aimed at his ruin, to their dishonour and confusion. 

The rage into which this reflection, so injurious to the glory of the 
Grand Monarque, threw one of the passengers, who thought it levelled 
particularly at him, though no names had been mentioned, was so 
great, that he could not suppress it till the gentleman should con- 
clude ; but interrupting him, without the least respect to his personal 
obligation (for he was one of the two whom I mentioned to have 
been admitted into the boat on his charity) — ' What do you mean, 
sir ' ? said he, ' by saying that this war will end in the dishonour 
of the King of Erance ? Was not his motive for entering into it 
the most disinterested and glorious ? To support the right of 
sovereignty, and bring vassals to a proper sense of duty and obedi- 
ence ? And has not the success been answerable to the greatness 
of his designs ? Have not his forces been everywhere victorious 
by land and sea ' ? 

The tone of voice with which these words were spoken, drew the 
eyes of all present upon the speaker, a little, old, withered creature, 
who wanted both his legs, and scarce seemed to have skin enough, 
not to say flesh, to cover the remainder of his shattered bones, and 
keep them together. But his spirit supplied all these disadvantages 
and enabled him to raise himself upon Ms stumps, and cast a look 
of the most ferocious rage around him, as if he meant to destroy 
whoever dared to dispute his words. 

But his triumph was not long ; his fellow-traveller immediately 
taking him up with equal fury. ' How ', said he, ' the army of 
France ever victorious over Bulgaria ^ ? What assurance can dic- 
tate such a falsehood ? Where have they obtained one victory ? 
Where have they escaped defeat, except when the superiority of 
their numbers have exceeded all proportion, and even then, their 
slain have generally equalled the whole amount of the forces whom 
they fought with. What armies have they lost already ; how few 
of those which remain will ever return to their native home, even 
in the vpretched condition that you do ' ? 

These last words raised a general laugh at the person who spoke 
them, he being, if possible, in a more maimed and helpless condition 
than the one to whom they were addressed, having lost both his 
arms, and one of his eyes. He perceived the motive of their mirth, 
and submitting to the rebuke with a manly fortitude of mind — 
' I see, gentlemen ', said he, ' that you laugh at my mentioning the 
wretchedness of any other living creature with contempt, who am 
such a sufferer myself ; but what absurdities will not passion hurry 

' Frederick the Great, the King of FruBBia. ' Prussia. 



214 ADVENTUBES OF A GUINEA 

men into 1 and how could human patience bear to hear this French- 
man boast of the victories of his monarch, whose forces I myself 
have assisted to rout at every place where I have ever met them '. 

' You rout the forces of my master ' ? replied the other. ' My 
master's forces would eat up all your master's subjects for a break- 
fast '. 

' I do not deny their number nor their appetites ', returned the 
Bulgarian ; ' they leave sufficient evidence of both wherever they 
go ; cruelty and rapine lead forth their armies, famine and desola- 
tion mark their marches. Shake not your head at me, nor lift up 
your hand, as you regard your life, else, loth as I am to make misery 
ridiculous by a quarrel between two such wretches as we are, though 
I have not a hand to strike, with my foot will I spurn out your life, 
and trample on your carcass '. 

' Morblieu ! compare the mighty monarch of France with a little 
German king ' ! 

' Yon mistake me greatly ; I never meant to compare them. 
The greatness of your monarch I do not deny, were it not abused 
to purposes that make it a dishonour to him, and a misfortune to 
his subjects ; whereas, our sovereign is the father of his people, 
and never exerts his power but to their advantage. 

' Gentlemen, you must forgive my warmth ; anything against 
myself I can despise, but my king, my father, I cannot, I will not, 
hear spoken of with disrespect, while I have even a voice left to 
assert his cause. I have fought for him, I have fought with him ; 
for he does not sit rioting in the debaucheries of a court while his 
subjects are encountering hardships and dangers to gratify his 
vanity or revenge. His quarrels are the quarrels of his people, 
and he fights their battles with them ; and the only regret I feel 
for the loss of my limbs is, that I can employ them no longer in 
his service, for which I would lay down my Ufe this minute with 
joy, could it gain him the least advantage, or was it necessary to 
prove my attachment to him. 

' But since I can no longer have the happiness of being of service 
to him, all I have now to do is to retire to my native country, where 
his paternal care has made such a provision for my wants, that I 
shall wear out my days in content, without ever having my prayers 
for his welfare and success disturbed by one repining wish, one just 
complaint. But ask this vainglorious knight-errant if he can say 
60 ? Did he fight for the preservation of his family, his coimtry, 
*nd his religion, as I did ? Did he fight under the conduct of his 
jovereign, who personally provided for the necessities, the comfort 
»f his men, as I did ? Is he sure of a peaceful retreat at home, safe 
from the additional distress of want, as I am ? 

' Not at all. He fought for he knew not what, he knew not 
whom, at a distance from his Idng, who was insensible of his dangers, 
and revelled in delicacies, while subjects, the victims of his ambition, 
were destitute of the common, indispensable necessaries of nature. 
Nor has he any other hope of prolonging his miserable days whea 
he gets home, but the wretch's last resource of begging, in a country 
BO exhausted by the vain tyranny of his master, that charity is 
almost an ineffectual virtue, for want of means for its exertion '. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 215 

All present were struck -tdth the force with which the soldier 
delivered his sentiments, nor did his antagonist attempt any reply [ 
but opening their common wallet, in which the Bulgarian carried 
all their wealth, he took out what belonged to himself, saying, with 
a sneer, that since his feet were bo good, he might hereafter use- 
them instead of hands, for he would feed him no longer. 

This poor-spirited sarcasm was received by the person to whom it 
was applied with a smile of disdain, though it raised the idle laughter 
of the greater part present. But the Englishman received it in 
another manner, for, drawing out his purse, he took twenty ducats, 
and putting himself into the pockets of the Bulgarian — ' Accept of 
these, my brother soldier ', said he, ' to make your journey into 
your native country more convenient, where you cannot meet more 
tender regard from your sovereign and country than your sensible 
attachment to them merits. As far as I shall go your way I will 
take care of you myself, and that will defray the expense of the 
rest of your journey with comfort '. 



CHAPTER XV 

THB HISTORY OP THE BTJLGABIAN SOLDIEK — CHBYSAL IS CABBIBD TO 
HIS DESTINED MASTER 

The Bulgarian was unable to express his gratitude for this charity, 
the manner of presenting which doubled the obligation of it. But 
the big tear that stole in silence down his manly cheek as he bowed 
his head to his benefactor, spoke it with a more affecting eloquence 
than any words could do, and influenced every person present so 
much in his favour, as to make them vie in offering him their assist- 
ance. As soon as he recovered utterance — ' Such ', said he, ' is the 
noble benevolence that distinguishes the sons of liberty ; such the 
generosity of heart that always extends the ready hand of a Briton, 
with relief to the distressed. May Heaven preserve to your happy 
nation the blessings which enable it to exert its virtues, to make 
them a blessing to all who want their assistance. And though envy 
may malign, and ingratitude return benefits with evil, beneficence 
finds its reward in its own exertion, in the certainty of a retribution 
from those treasures which never fail '. 

The turn of this soldier's discourse, and particularly the last part 
of it, seemed so much above his present appearance, that it raised 
a curiosity in his benefactor to ask him if he had been bred to arms, 
or how long he had professed the military life, and in what station. 

* Oh, sir ', replied he, with a sigh that seemed to tear his heart, 
' your question recalls to my memory scenes that I would willingly 
forget for ever, and obliges me to relate such things as would draw 
tears from Tartars, Pandours, or the crueller soldiers of the King of 
France. I was not bred to arms, nor have I followed the military 
profession long, or in any other rank than that which rage and 
despair first placed me in, when I ofiered myself to my sovereign 
to repel the invaders, and revenge the desolation of my bleeding 



216 ADVENTURES OP A GUINEA 

country. My unhappy story is no more than this. — I am a native 
of Bulgaria, the son of a minister of the Gospel, who, obserYing a 
desire of knowledge in my youth, encouraged and improved it by 
his own precepts and example, and led my studious mind through 
the sublimest paths of science. 

' As soon as he saw my resolutions sufficiently established to be 
proof against the levity of youth and temptations of sense, he 
yielded to my entreaties, and I was admitted into the sacred order 
of which he was a member, and made the perfection of human 
wisdom, the practice of piety and virtue under the direction of the 
divine word, the business of my happy life. Happy, then, indeed ! 
but now the recollection of that happiness aggravates my present 
misery m. the irrecoverable loss of it, almost to despair. Aa the 
religion of the benign Eedeemer of mankind does not enjoin im- 
possibilities by requiring us to eradicate passions which are the 
essence of our nature, and whose indulgence, under the direction of 
reason and virtue, is the end of our creation and the basis of our 
being, and fulfils the first divine command, by continuing our 
species, and increasing the number of His adorers, I obeyed the 
impulse of virtuous love, and married the daughter of a neigh- 
bouring divine, who completed to me, as I vainly thought, the sum of 
human happiness by a numerous offspring, which grew upon the knee 
of their aged grandsire, my father, now become too feeble for the 
active duties, while my labours supplied the necessaries of life to 
my contented family, in which I thus stood the happy centre of 
filial and paternal love. 

' In this blissful state did I advance toward heaven, when envy 
of his glory and fear of his virtues brought this destructive war 
upon the dominions of our sovereign. Oh, my father ! my chil- 
dren ! my wife ! in one day did I lose you all. These eyes beheld 
my habitation reduced to ashes, my children massacred in the 
wantonness of cruelty, in despite of the prayers of my aged father, 
whose snow-white hairs, whose whole appearance would have 
struck the ruthless hearts of the ancient heathen Gauls with rever- 
ence ; in despite of the cries of my beauteous wife, who both begged 
to draw their fury on themselves, from the defenceless innocents ; 
but all in vain. The murderers, deaf to their cries and entreaties, 
insensible to the beauty of the babes, who stood smiling at the 
swords that hung over their heads, first butchered them as in sport, 
then abused the person of my wife to death, and mangled my 
father's breathless body, whose tender heart the grief of such a 
sight had burst, while I, unhappier far than any, stood looking on, 
bound to a tree, with my jaws distended with the head of a spear, 
and my cheeks cut open thus from ear to ear, a Bible being placed 
before me, and a ftench priest standing by, encouraging their 
cruelty as meritorious against heretics, and insultingly bidding me 
preach now to my congregation, at the same time refusing me the 
release of death, which I besoight by all the signs despair could 
suggest, and making them leave me naked and whipped till my body 
was all one wound, to perish by famine and grief. 

' But Heaven had ordained otherwise for me. Some of my 
neighbours, who had escaped their fury, came, as soon as night 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA SI? 

favoured their fears, to learn our fate, and offered any assiatance in 
their power. They unbound me ; they buried the remains of my 
slaughtered family, and forced me from the grave to their retreat 
in the woods, where they healed my wounds, and strove to comfort 
my distress. But all their arguments would have been too weak 
to make me suffer life, had not a desire of revenge taken possession 
of my soul, and silenced every other thought. 

' As soon as I had recovered strength, I hastened to the army of 
iny sovereign, where I threw myself at his feet, and told him all my 
■distress. He heard me with pity ; he shed tears at my sad story, 
and raising me with his own hand — " Be comforted, my brother ", 
said the mighty monarch to his meanest subject, " be comforted, 
the losses of the just will be repaid in heaven ; there thy happy 
family expect thine arrival ; there thy virtues will be rewarded, 
thy joys complete, when the evils of this world, which endure but 
for a moment, shall be at an end. The horrors of war agree not 
with the innocence of your past life, or the humane tenderness of 
your disposition, and would but aggravate your griefs by the un- 
happy, unavoidable repetition of like scenes of ruin. Retire, there- 
fore, to my capital, where all the comforts of life shall be provided 
for you, to alleviate your distress, while your prayers assist us in 
the day of battle ". 

' I heard hia words with reverence, but his virtue was too sublime 
for my imitation. I fell again at his feet, and wringing my hands — 
" Oh, sir ", said I, " this goodness is too great for man. Alas, I 
am unable to obey its dictates ; my soul languishes for vengeance. 
Oh, bear with human infirmity, and permit me to fight under thy 
command. Heaven heard not my prayers, or it would have pre- 
vented my ruin. Let me, then, have recourse to other methods 
for redress ; let me contribute my poor help to thy victories, to 
the deliverance of my country ; I die this moment if my prayer is 
refused ". 

' " Be thou my companion in this just war ", said my sovereign, 
raising me up again, " and, since thy sacred function must not be 
disgraced with any other rank, fight by my side, and lead me to 
success "- 

' Prom that day have I followed his steps in the field of battle at 
an awful distance, and been witness to all the wonders of his conduct 
and valour ; till in the late action a, cannon shot took off both my 
arms, as I had the honour of holding my own horse for him to mount, 
his having been killed under him as I fought by his side. He ex- 
pressed concern at my misfortune, and commanded me to retire to 
his own tent ; but an Austrian Hussar, the moment after, cut me 
down with his sabre, though in the unpremeditated instinct of self- 
preservation I had held up both my bleeding stumps to ward the 
blow. Here I lay among my fellow-sharers in the common calamity, 
in submissive expectation of the stroke of fate, from the horse's 
feet or the pillagers of the field. But Heaven had otherwise or- 
dained, and, after two days' weltering in my blood, I was relieved, 
and recovered by charity to the condition in which you see me, 
and am now striving to go and avail myself of my master's humane 
■offer, which your benevolence enables me to do with comfort* 



218 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

This fellow-sufferer, -whose arrogance first prompted me to speak, 
has been a sharer with me also in the charity which relieved us, 
where our common calamity created a kind of friendship between 
ua, and our necessities suggested it to us to combine the remains 
of our limbs for mutual assistance, he preparing our victuals and 
feeding me, while I have carried, not only our poor baggage, but 
him also, upon my back. But that alliance is at an end, not be- 
cause the relief which you so generously have bestowed upon me 
may seem to free me from the necessity of his assistance, for I must 
beg your leave to divide it with him, as half is sufficient for me, but 
that my soul abhors the principle which first led him into this dis- 
tress, and which even such suffering cannot show the impious 
absurdity of, and disclaims connection with the enemy of my gracious 
sovereign, who would thus malign his glory, when he cannot deny 
nor longer resist the virtues that have raised it '. 

By this time we arrived at the place where I was to be delivered 
to the minister of my destined master, who immediately carried me 
to him. 



CHAPTEB XVI 

HOW CHBYSAIi FOTTND HIS MASTER EMPLOYED — THE SBANDBUB AND 
HAPPINESS OF ABSOLrTE POWER — HIS CABES FOR THE AUGMENTA- 
TION AND SUPPORT OP HIS REVENUES — HIS RAGE AT THE INSOLENCE 
OP LIBERTY, PUNCTUALITY TO HIS ENGAGEMENTS, AND RESOLU- 
TION TO MAINTAIN THE CONSEQUENCE OP HIS BANK 

Wb found him' busied in reviewing some new levies, which he had 
just raised, to hire out to the best bidder of the parties then engaged 
in war, without ever examining the justice of the cause, or consider- 
ing any other motive or consequence than just the immediate price 
he was to receive, out of which he bounteously allowed them a 
pittance to support the lives so useful to him. 

As soon as the men were ordered to their quarters, his highness 
retired with his minister, who, presenting the bag in which we were, 
with a bent knee — ' The subsidy, may it please your most serene 
highness, from England ', said he. 

' It is well ', replied the sovereign, ' but upon what terms ' ? 

' The same your highness had last year '. 

' No more 7 They shall not have my men. I can have more 
elsewhere. Prance offers better '- 

' Then I must return this money, please your highness '. 

• Eetum it ? No ; for what ' 1 

' If your highness does not like the terms, you will not keep the 
money, I presume '. 

' The Landgrave of Hesse, who was in receipt of a British subsidy, 
may be intended by this caricature. The subsidy system had been 
denounced by Pitt, and was very unpopular in England. Chrysal, it is 
noteworthy, does not object to the huge subsidy paid to Frederick of 
Prussia. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 219 

' Fool ! but I will. Such laws may bind you subject wretches, 
but sovereign princes are above them ; laws are not made for us '. 

' I humbly implore your highness's pardon for my ignorance. 
Then you will give those troops to Prance ' ? 

' Yes, when France pays me for them '. 

' But in the meantime, as England has already paid your highness, 
they will depend upon them, and consequently sufEer by the dis- 
appointment '. 

' Then let them prize my friendship properly another time ; I 
am not obliged to support kings upon their thrones for nothing ; 
I may invade, as well as guard against invasion. They shall know 
whom they dare ofiend '. 

' Something has provoked your highness's wrath, which I am 
afraid my ignorance would aggravate '. 

' I will teach the respect that's due to sovereignty. I am not 
king of England, curbed in my will, and limited in power ; my sub- 
jects are my slaves ; they dare not think of any other law besides 
my pleasure. Death ! can you think it ? My minister at the 
court of England writes me word that a base plebeian merchant 
has had the assurance to demand payment for the goods he sent me 
last year, for the support and splendour of my court, and, on its 
not being deducted from the subsidy, to refuse supplying me this 
year, and even to threaten complaining to their parliament. Now, 
judge you if a sovereign prince, whose forces are their security in 
time of danger, can brook such insolence. And, to conclude the 
whole, what did the English minister say when my minister remon- 
strated with him upon this affair, but that, by the laws of England, 
no man could be compelled to part with his property against his 
will, or hindered to complain, if he thought himself aggrieved, and 
that the laws were sacred, and must not be infringed. Think, now, 
if I can with honour keep an alliance with such people, till I have 
received satisfaction ; I, whose subjects have no property nor laws 
but my will, to be treated in such a manner by a vile trader ! It is 
not to be borne.' 

' I am very sorry to hear of this affair, and particularly at this 
time, because, if your highness should break with the English now, 
when they think they want your men, they may be provoked never 
to deal with yoiu: highness for them another time, when they have 
no other occasion for them, only to do your highness a service '- 

' Why, there may be something in that ; and, therefore, if they 
will send me the merchandise I want, and raise the subsidy, perhaps 
I may not refuse them the succours they desire '. 

' How much does your highness require to have the subsidy 
raised ' ? 

' I have not thought of that yet. But surely they cannot be so 
unreasonable as to expect my men at the same rate, now in time of 
danger, as they had them in peace, when there was nothing at all 
for thsm to do ; but they could work at their trades at home, and 
maintain themselves, without wearing out their uniform, or any 
other expense to me '. 

• That is very true, if your highness was not to consider at the 
name time that even then they paid you as much as if it was a 



220 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

time of war, and indeed, more than any other nation will, or can, 
pay you now ; for, as to the promises of Prance, they are not to b« 
depended on at all, whereas England always pays weU '. 

' I do not care. What I have gotten here, I will keep, by way of 
reprisal for the insult offered to my honour, and, if they will have 
my troops, they shall pay me over again for them ; so, say no more 
on that head '. 

' I submit ; but how will your highness subsist them at home in 
the meantime ? There must be an immediate remittance made of 
some of this money to Holland to buy provisions, for your maga- 
zines are quite exhausted, and the constant demand for men, to 
supply the troops you have agreed for, and recruit the losses they 
have sustained in battle, have not left sufficient to cultivate the 
land '. 

' Then let them starve ! I shall not expend a penny to support 
them. Could not the women and children work ? I wonder you 
should dare to mention such a thing. If I lay out this money, what 
is to support the splendour of my court, since this Englishman has 
refused to supply me ' ? 

' I humbly beg your highness's pardon. But what answer am I 
to send to the English, who have demanded that the troops should 
march directly ' ? 

' Why, that I am so enraged at the insult offered to me by that 
merchant that I will not let a man of them stir till I have satisfac- 
tion and a new subsidy ; and that I keep this one in the meantime, 
to make up the deficiencies in former years '. 

' Deficiencies ? I do not understand your highness ; the sub- 
sidies have been always regularly paid '. 

' Obey my commands ! I say there have been deficiencies, 
which I am not at leisure to explain in this emergency, but I suppose 
my word will be taken for it '. 

' I fear your highness does not attend to the change which has 
lately been in England. The people who might have taken such 
an answer, are now out of power, and their successors are the very 
men who have always been against dealing with your highness, 
and may now take the advantage of this breach of faith, for such I 
well know they will call it, to throw off your alliance for ever ; for 
the people begin to see their own strength, and their governors 
to exert it properly, and show them that they want no foreign 
assistance. And, as a proof of this, at this very time when their 
enemies not only talk of invading them more confidently than ever, 
but also have gone so far aa to make preparations for such an at- 
tempt, 80 far from being diffident of their own strength, or intimid- 
ated to call for help, they have actually sent a powerful body of 
their troops abroad, and are carrying on the war with vigour and 
success in every quarter of the world, satisfied that the inhabitants 
who remain at home are able to defend their country, and repel 
every attempt that may be made against it. And this change in 
their measures should give a caution how the persons who effected 
it are provoked '. 

' I care not ; I will make the experiment. But do you draw up 
your dispatches in such a maimer that we may have it in our power 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 221 

to explain them to whatever sense shall suit us best. In the mean- 
time, we must keep up our appearance of treating with France, to 
give a weight to our designs '. 

The minister was prevented from replying, by the entrance 
of the muster -master, who had been just maHng a survey, and 
taking an account of every man able to bear arms in his highness's 
territories. 

' Well ', said his highness, ' how do your musters answer ? Shall 
I be able to enlarge the number of my troops this year ' ? 

' May it please your most serene highness ', replied the ofBcer, 
' here is the return, in which I have taken down every man from 
twelve to seventy, according to youi commands '. 

' And how do they answer ? Better than last year, I hope ; 
there must be a great many boys have grown up since '. 

' The list, indeed, looks almost as full as usual ; but the late 
battles have so drained us of men to fill up the troops, that there 
are scarce any but boys left at home, and those have been so badly 
fed of late, that their size does not answer their years, and they look 
wretchedly, besides. So that, upon the whole, I fear your highness 
will find it very difficult to complete the forces already established, 
much more to raise any new '. 

' I must, I will raise them. Tell me not of difficulties. What I 
command shall be performed. If there are not men, the women 
shall put on the men's clothes and go. I will not be shortened of 
my revenue ; they shall fight themselves, since they have not bred 
soldiers for me '- 

' This, please your highness, is a list of the disabled men, who are 
not able to support themselves by any kind of work, having lost 
their limbs in the wars '. 

' Disabled men ? I thought I ordered you not to exchange them. 
They might have remained in the hands of the enemy, such of them, 
I mean, as are not able to breed soldiers for me, and cultivate the 
lands ; or, such as were not prisoners might have been let perish 
of their wounds ; it would have been a mercy to them to shorten 
their misery '- 

' May it please your highness, I observed your orders, and left a 
number of such wretches unexchanged ; but the enemy saw into 
my design, and sent them home, to be rid of the trouble of them ; 
and now they are crying for subsistence, and demand the arrears of 
their pay, which was stopped while they were prisoners. The 
others our surgeons took proper care of '. 

' Insolent slaves ! Demand pay, when they are no longer able 
to earn it ! And subsistence, too ! They learned this impudence 
from their conversation with those English. It is much they did 
not demand roast beef and pudding too. Hang up half of them the 
next word of the kind they dare to utter, to terrify the other half 
to starve in quiet. And at your peril, let me hear no more of 
them. As for the musters, I will have them completed ; man, 
woman, and child shall go. I will make my dominions a desert 
before I lessen my consequence among the sovereign powers of 
Europe '. 



222 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 



CHAPTER XVII 

MOBE CABES OP SOVEREIGNTY, AND CONSEQUENCES OP GRANDEUB — 
CHBYSAL IS SENT TO MARKET, WHERE HE IS GIVEN TO A JEW POB 
BACON 

His highness had just declared this magnanimous resolution, when 
the steward of his household entered to let him know that the 
butchers and bakers of the next Hans-town,' from whence his table 
was supplied, had refused to send him any more provisions till their 
bills were paid, as they had heard that he was to receive no more 
subsidies from England ; and there was scarce enough to make out 
dinner for that day, for the court was very numerous and brilliant, 
all the princes and princesses of the various branches of his high- 
ness's most illustrious house having come to pay him a visit of 
congratulation upon the birth of the most serene prince, his son 
and heir ; and that his purveyors had been able to find nothing in 
his own dominions fit for his table but bear's flesh and venison, nor 
even a sufficient quantity of these, the misery of his people having 
made them venture to break through his laws and hunt in his forests, 
to save themselves and their families from perishing by famine. 
His highness had hearkened to him without any emotion, or even 
concern, till he mentioned this outrageous insult upon his sovereign 
authority and pleasure. But then, bursting into a rage — ' Hunt 
in my forests ' ? said he, ' Audacious slaves ! Dearly shall they 
pay for their presumption. Order my troops to march that way 
directly ; I'll lay the country waste '. 

' Please your highness ', replied the steward, ' that will cost you the 

trouble of marching your troops ; the country is a desert already '. 

' Who told you that they have been guilty of this insolence ? 

You should have seized the author of the report for not apprehending 

the criminals '- 

' May it please your highness, they took one wretch in the very 
fact, and have brought him here, to receive the sentence of your 
pleasure, and the stag with him alive, which he found in a pit, and 
borrowed a gun to shoot. He pleaded hunger and the cries of a 
starving family of grand-children, for he is an old man, and his 
three sons have been killed in the wars ; but, though I own he 
moved me, I did not presume to let him go '. 

' It is well you did not, or you should have suffered in his stead. 
Go, strip him naked, bind him on that stag, and then let him loose 
with him upon his back into the woods, proclaiming that no one, 
upon pain of death, presume to give him the least relief. He shall 
have hunting enough '. 

' But what will your highness have me to do about provisions for 
the entertainment of the princes ? I believe they design a long 
visit, for they have brought all the young princes and princesses of 
their illustrious families with them '. 

> A town belonging to the German Bansc or Hanseatio League. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 223 

' I care not. I am not to be disturbed on such trifles now, when the 
fate of nations depends on my resolutions. Let them go home again '. 

' Not fasting, I presume, for they have already signified, some of 
them, that they have come without their breakfasts, by calling for 
refreshment the moment they arrived ; and, indeed, I fear the 
principal motive of this visit of their highnesses was want of any- 
thing to eat at home '. 

' Confusion ! What can I do ? Here, take this money, and send 
for victuals for them '. 

The sight of a handful of guineas was an agreeable surprise to the 
steward, who had not heard of the arrival of the subsidy from 
England. He received them with evident pleasure, and I felt no 
less in being delivered from this scene of sovereignty, of which I 
was sincerely sick, though, by the change, I fell from being the 
price of armies to the domestic office of going to market for a morsel 
of bread ; from the glory of causing the slaughter of thousands to 
the virtue of supporting the lives of a few. The steward, as soon 
as he withdrew from the presence of his highness, called the other 
officers of the household together, and told them, with joy in his 
countenance, that there was no foundation for the report of their 
master's breaking with England, so that they might look famine in 
the face for another year, and confirmed the glad tidings by show- 
ing them the gold. The pleasing sight raised universal joy ; they 
licked their lips, feasted in imagination, and prepared things for 
getting dinner ready, with all the alacrity of willing minds and keen 
appetites, while the steward, not caring to trust a commission of 
that importance to any inferior officer, waited only to wash down a 
mouldy crust with a draught of sour wine, and then went to market 
for them himself. 

The appearance of things changed as soon as I left the hereditary 
dominions of his highness, and entered into the little territories of 
a free state. Plenty was the reward of industry, and content sup- 
plied well the place of grandeur. As his higbness's minister had 
pressing motives to accelerate his negotiations, he went directly 
to the several dealers in provisions, and, ordering a comfortable 
supply on the credit of our appearance, returned with the greatest 
dispatch to the discharge of the offices of his high employment, in 
the ceremonials of the court. 

In the course of these transactions, it fell to my lot to be paid to 
a Jew for bacon and sausages, the butchers of his religion being 
held to make the best of the latter, as they never cut out the nice 
bits to eat themselves. 



CHAPTER XVIII 

OOMPABISON BETWEEN TWO DEALBES IN FLESH — THE CELEBKATION 
OF THE PASSOVEE IN THE TRADITIONAL WAY, AND THE METHOD 
OF PROOTJEING (HTJMAN) LAMBS EXPLAINED 

I NOW entered into a service, the most diametrically opposite of 
any in nature to my last, my present master den3?ing himself the 



224 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

very necessaries of life to hide his riches under the appearance of 
poverty, as my last lived in the most vain ostentation of splendour, 
to conceal his poverty under the appearance of riches. It is diffi- 
cult to say which hypocrisy was most absurd, and contradictory 
to the immutable laws of moral justice, the former basely stealing, 
as I may say, from the public, that wealth which was ordained to 
be of advantage to it, and whose value arises only from its being 
used, by thus secreting it in his coffers, and the latter, in gratifica- 
tion of a vanity as unjustifiable as that of avarice, committing 
every kind of actual violence to supply the want of it. 

I here was soon initiated into all the mysteries of that lower species 
of trade called peddling, which is in a maimer engrossed by those 
people. Palse weights and measures, adulteration of wares, lying, 
perjury ; in a word, every species of deceit that can impose upon 
ignorance and credulity were here reduced into a science, taught 
by precept, and enforced by example, from the earliest exertion of 
reason, to wear off every hesitation of conscience, and make the 
practice natural and expert. The beauty of my appearance, for I 
had hitherto escaped mutilation, made my master, who was an 
adept in that art, think it improper to throw me among his dimin- 
ished heap, as I should but make their loss the more remarkable. 
He therefore put me into his purse, to make a show with upon 
occasions, and appear as a proof of his innocence of that practice, 
of which he was too strongly suspected. 

The evening after I came into his possession happened to be on© 
of their most solemn festivals. My master, therefore, who was one 
of the tribe of Levi, retired from business early to purify and pre- 
pare himself for the celebration of the most secret and mysterious 
ceremony of their religion. This was the sacrifice of the Passover, 
which, by a secret tradition, never committed to writing for fear 
of being betrayed, was changed from the typical offering of a lamb 
to the real immolation of human blood, for which purpose the most 
beautiful children were purchased at any expense, and under any 
pretext, from the ignorance of necessitous parents, or the perfidious 
avarice of servants, if they could not be obtained by stealth, and 
brought from all parts of Europe to these ceremonies, it being a 
long received opinion that the original sacrifice of a lamb was 
designed only for that one occasion, to conciliate the favour of Heaven 
to the escape of their forefathers out of Egypt ; but that to render 
it propitious to their restoration to their country, and to the con- 
summation of their promised happiness and glory, the type must be 
changed for the thing typified, and human blood, in the purest 
state of infant innocence, be offered instead of the ineffectual blood 
of a brute. But, as some traces of natural affection might remain, 
even in hearts divested of the feelings of common humanity, to 
remove every obstacle to this practice, and stimulate superstition 
by hatred and revenge, the children of Christians were appointed 
for this sacrifice, and those especially of the superior ranks of Ufe, 
whose pride might be too apt to make them treat the people of the 
Jews with severity and contempt. As to other points, the rules 
laid down in the institution of the Passover were literally observed 
in respect to the victim, who was to be without blemish, a male of 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 225 

the first year, that is, the first-bom of his mother, and to be kept 
fourteen days before he was sacrificed, during which time they fed 
him with the richest food, to raise him to the highest perfection of 
his nature. 

The place chosen for the celebration of this ceremony was a 
summer-house in a garden, belonging to one of the rulers of their 
synagogue, where they all met at the appointed time. As soon as 
they were placed in order, one of the elders stood up, and in a long 
speech, declared the occasion of their meeting, and read the original 
institution of the Passover, and then recited the tradition, which 
changed the sacrifice to be offered, as I said before, concluding with 
an oath of secrecy, which all present joined in, and confirmed with 
the most dreadful imprecations, and which was to be sealed by the 
participation of this horrid mystery. 

When he had ended, the victims of that night were produced, 
their bodies examined for fear of blemish, and their primogeniture 
proved by those who had provided them, and who were reimbursed 
their expenses before the sacrifices began, by the general contribu- 
tion of all present. This method was used that every person might 
have an equal share in the merit of the sacrifice, as it would be 
dangerous and too expensive to provide a lamb for every head of a 
family in the congregation. 



CHAPTER XIX 

THE RITES AKE INTERBTJPTED, AND THE VICTIMS CHANGED — THIS 
CLBAEED T7P WITHOUT A MIEACLE — THE FEW SUEVIVOES OF THE 
riRST PDEY BEOUGHT TO PUBLIC JUSTICE 

I SEE your astonishment how so absurd an opinion could ever talie 
possession of a rational mind, as that the Deity can be pleased 
vsdth the breach of His most strict command, and rendered propitious 
by an action against which His severest vengeance is denounced ; 
yet such are the errors which the least deviation from the straight 
paths of reason lead to, when ceremony is made the essence of re- 
ligion, and human inventions substituted in the place of immutable, 
eternal virtue. 

The devil, whoever is meant by that most comprehensive name, 
has long been charged with being the author of this and every other 
vice and folly, which men are ashamed of owning themselves, his 
temptation being a convenient and comfortable excuse. But, if 
man would consider a little, he must blush at so unfair and ridiculous 
a charge, and give the poor devil his due, who, among all his failings, 
has never been suspected of being a fool, and nothing else could have 
devised such gross enormities, such contradictions to the plainest 
rules of common reason. 

But of this strange institution of human sacrifices we need search 
for the original no farther than in the heart of man, who, observing 
that to inculcate the duty of gratitude, the first of moral virtues, 
the Divine Will had directed returns of its blessings to be made, in 



226 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

the way of oblation or sacrifice, soon perverted the original purity 
of the institution to his own depravity, and measuring the divine 
beneficence by his capricious avarice, concluded that the richer 
the oblation, or the dearer to the offerer, the greater would the merit 
of it be, and thus he arose from a lamb to a hecatomb, from brute 
to human blood. His eagerness to obtain the end, for which he 
thus strove to bribe the favour of Heaven, prevented his seeing the 
absurdity of the means he used. 

All thintrs being prepared, the victims were brought to the altar, 
naked and bound, the instruments for slaying, and the fires for 
roasting them (for, horror to human thought ! they were to have 
feasted on their flesh) in readiness, and the butchers, of whom my 
master was one, just going to begin their work, when the doors of 
the house were burst open, with an outcry that heightened the 
terrors of the guilty wretches, and a band of soldiers rushed in and 
seized them, as they stood stupefied with the fright. The horror of 
the sight gave a respite to their fate, striking the very hearts of the 
soldiers, though hardened by all the cruelties of war, with an aston- 
ishment that deprived them of power to stir for some moments. 

But this was only a short calm, that, as it were, gave time to the 
storm to gather, for, as they stood thus gazing at each other, one 
of the children cried out — ' Oh, father, father, come and untie my 
hands ; these ugly cords hurt me ' ! 

The voice no sooner struck the ear of the of&cer who commanded 
the party, than, starting in a, frenzy, he ran to the child, whom he 
had not distinguished before, as he lay naked on the ground, and 
snatching him up in his arms — ' Oh, my child ', said he, in an ecstasy, 
' have I found you ; have I rescued you in the very moment when 
you were going to be sacrificed by these wretches ? Oh, my child ! 
my child ' ! 

These words awoke the fury of the soldiers, which burst upon the 
wretched Jews with a violence not to be restrained. The house 
was in a moment a scene of horror beyond description. Most of 
them fell instant sacrifices to this resistless rage. Happier far in 
having so speedily an end put to their sufferings, than the few 
survivors, who saved their lives for that moment, by throwing 
themselves among the dead, or taking hold of the children whom, 
even in this hurricane of passion, the soldiers took all care not to 
hurt. 

The little respite which this caution gave, the officers improved to 
pacify the soldiers, who would not be persuaded to spare the rest 
by any other argument but a positive assurance of having them 
put to the most severe and infamous public death. 

When the storm was a little calmed by these means, and the 
living separated from the dead, the pillage of the scene was given 
up to the men, who rifled all, living and dead, with the most un- 
relenting severity, and retaliated their wicked intentions with 
exemplary justice on the miserable criminals, stripping them quite 
naked, and binding them with the very cords which they took off 
their destined victims, who were unbound with the tenderest care, 
and carried away till their parents should be discovered, or, in case 
that could not be, to be educated at the public expense, as the 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 227 

children of the state, while their intended murderers were thrown 
into prison, till a punishment should be appointed severe enough 
for their guilt. In the confusion of this affair, I fell into the hands 
of the officer who had found his child, whose passions were raised 
so high by the recovery of him, that, as soon as the plunder was 
oyer, he left his charge to another, and retired to share his joy with 
his disconsolate wife. The tenderness of this meeting was a just 
reverse of the former part of the last scene, where the helpless infants 
were led forth to be slaughtered. 

As the Jews were some of the wealthiest of the inhabitants, and 
carried on a great part of the trade of the city, the magistrates, to 
prevent the imputation of injustice, and to set the whole affair in 
a proper light to the world, convened the people early the next 
morning, where the rescued infants were produced on one side, and 
the few that remained alive of their intended butchers on the other, 
when my new master, who bore a considerable office in the state, 
besides his military command, unfolded the whole affair in a short 
but moving speech. He told them that, having lost his only 
child, the infant there present, about a month before, and having 
been informed, when he served in Poland in his youth, that the 
Jews had a custom of stealing and sacrificing or murdering infants 
on the night when they celebrated their Passover, he made no search 
for him, but seemed to believe a story which he had invented him- 
self to appease the distraction of his wife, that he had been killed 
and devoured by a tame wolf that was kept in the garden of his 
country-house, from whence he was stolen, watching, in the mean- 
time, every motion of the Jews with such exactness that he had 
punctual information of their meeting at the place where he had 
seized them the evening before, where it was to be lamented that 
the just resentment of the soldiers had anticipated the severer hand 
of justice,, and saved them from the laws, the judgment of which he 
now demanded against the remaining few for himself, and for the 
unknown parents of the innocent victims, whom they saw before them. 

A roar of universal indignation pursued his words, which had in- 
flamed the rage and detestation of the people so high, that they 
were with difficulty restrained from tearing the wretches instantly 
to pieces by the same arguments which had saved them from the 
soldiers before. Nor were the Jews admitted to say a word in 
their own defence, for, though none of the infants had been actually 
murdered that night, yet the intention was beyond controversy, 
and, besides, many of the people who had formerly lost their 
children, now charged them with their murder, with the strongest 
appearance of justice. 

They were therefore dragged back to prison, where they lay, 
loaded with chains till the day of their execution, when they were 
all publicly burned aUve on the very spot where they were to have 
perpetrated their guilt, the house being raised to the ground for 
that purpose, and all the effects of such as were taken in this fact 
confiscated to the use of the state. 



228 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 



CHAPTER XX 

A BUEAOH OF NBTTTBALITY PBOPBELY EBSENTBD BBINGS CHEYSAL 
INTO A SBEVICB WHICH HE HAD LONG BEEN AMBITIOTTS OB — HOW 
HE BOUND HIS NEW MASTEE EMPLOYED — THE KING OB BITLOAEIa'S 
EECEPTION OF THE HUMBLED MAGISTRATES — HIS APPEOPEIATION 
OB MONEY TO HIS OWN USE — HIS EEFLECTIONS ON THE SIGHT OF 
CHEYSAL 

This affair was scarce ended, when I changed my master again. 
The city in which I was had professed a neutrality in the present 
war. but whether yielding to inclination, or biased by private 
interest, the magistrates had, on many occasions, shown the strongest 
partiality to the enemies of the King of Bulgaria.^ 

Of this that heroic prince overlooked many instances, in com- 
passion to their folly ; but, instead of inspiring them with proper 
sentiments of gratitude, this moderation only raised their injudicious 
pride so high, that, attributing it to fear, they at length proceeded 
so far as to refuse him those good offices, which, by the universal 
laws of mankind, he had a right to demand, and treated his mes- 
sengers with disrespect. 

This drew on them a resentment that was never raised in vain. 
The king, without deigning to waste time in complaints, sent a 
body of forces directly to their gates, and obliged them to buy their 
safety with contributions, and deprecate his vengeance with sub- 
missions, which humbled their pride, and terrified their neighbours 
from being guilty of the like folly. 

As these contributions were too large to be immediately discharged 
by the state, they were obliged to be levied on the subjects, by 
which means I came into the service of this monarch, to whose 
treasurer I was paid, by the humbled magistrates of the city, on 
their knees. The many great things which I had heard of this 
prince had long made me wish for such an opportunity of seeing 
him, and of having a knowledge of his heart, that I might be able 
to judge whether he really was the great man he appeared to the 
world, by all his actions, to be. How my expectations were an- 
swered, cannot be explained justly without a particular account 
of everything I saw while I was with him, but, as that would be too 
much for my time, which begins to grow short, I shall only give 
you a few of the most remarkable particulars, by which you may 
form a judgment of the rest. The king was walking in his camp 
before the entrance of his tent, after having finished the business- 
of the morning, conversing with the most engaging affability with 
his officers, and even the private sentinels of his guard, redressing 
their complaints, and relieving their wants, when the magistrates 
of the city I had just left arrived to pay their contributions, and 
make submihsion for their misbehaviour ; for, to humble them the 
more effectually, he had ordered that they should attend himself. 
As soon as they approached him, they fell on their knees, and 

1 King of Prussia. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 229 

delivering the money to his treasurer, implored his pardon in the 
abject terms of submission. 

' Arise ', said the monarch, ' and cease your supplications ; the 
posture and address are both improper to be offered to a man ; 
but the passions of ths foolish are ever in extremes, and your fear 
sinks you now as low as your vain insolence raised you high before. 
Depart in peace and safety, and let this teach you not to mistake 
moderation for fear another time. But, beware that you offend 
not so again. Mercy, that is amiable in the first instance, degener- 
ates to folly, if extended to a second.' 

The magistrates, unable to speak before him, retired in confusion 
from his presence, when, turning to his treasurer — ' Take ', said he, 
' so much of that money as will repair the losses sustained by the 
innocent inhabitants of the country around their city, and see that 
it is given to sufferers, to be applied to that use, and none other, 
for I war not with the poor, nor would I have my steps marked by 
desolation, when it can possibly be avoided. And of the remainder, 
leave the usual sum upon my table for my private occasions '. 

Then addressing himself to the ofBcers around him in general — 
' How abject ', said he, ' is the submission of the proud ! How 
does guilt humble the conscious heart ! These unhappy men, who 
dared not now meet our eyes, but hasted with downcast looks from the 
flash of just indignation, when last we saw them, looked us in the 
face with the assurance of friendly respect, and seemed happy in 
the marks of our regard. Let this teach us to preserve the ada- 
mantine shield of a clear conscience, and terror can never strike a 
dart through it to our hearts '. 

When the treasurer went to divide the money, among which I 
lay, according to his master's orders, I was greatly alarmed for fear 
I should be torn so soon from the presence of this prince ; but my 
anxiety was relieved when he took that bag in which I was and 
gave it to one of his master's s to lay upon his table. 

The many things I had heard of this prince's greatness had, I 
own, deceived me into expectations of pomp and grandeur in his 
court, and particularly about his person. This made me surprised 
to find everything in a plainness far greater than what I had in 
many instances observed in private life. But I iostantly perceived 
my error — that his greatness was his own, established on the virtues 
of his soul, and independent of, and superior to, every adventitious 
circumstance. 

I had not long lain upon his table when he entered alone, and, 
walking a meditated turn or two across the tent, kneeled down 
and offered up his soul in the most ardent devotion to Heaven. 
He then arose with a serenely cheerful countenance, and coming 
to the table poured out the money, and viewing it earnestly for a 
moment — ' thou source of every evil which distracts this wretched 
world ', said he, ' let me not be infected by thy poison. Let not my 
heart conceive a fondness for thee, further than what the native 
value of enabling it to do good justly entitles thee to. I am yet 
free from thy infatuation, nor have ever suffered avarice to tempt 
me to desire thee, by improper means nor vain luxury or pride, 
to abuse thee by profusion. This pittance only do T call my own, 



230 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

which I devote to the Divine Author of all the benefits and mercies 
of my Ufe, in grateful return, by supplying -with it the necessities 
of my distressed fellow-creatures '. 

Then, taking a handful of it to put into his pocket, and happen- 
ing to observe my shape, he took me up, and, looking attentively 
at me — ' la there no comer of the earth ', said he, ' where the wealth 
of Britain is not dispersed ? If its commerce collects the produce 
of every climate under heaven, its mimificence does also diffuse its 
riches as far. Great and happy nation ! wert thou but sensible of 
the blessings of thy condition ; but the time is come when thou 
openest thine eyes to thine own interest, and feelest the mightiness 
of thy strength. How great is the power of true wisdom ! how 
happy the people who have a good man for their guide '. 

Saying this, he put us into his pocket, and, as soon as it was dark, 
wrapped himself in a cloak, and went out privately to take a view 
of his camp, in a disguise that secured him from misinformation or 
deceit. 



CHAPTER XXI 

THE KING TAKES A VIEW OF HIS CAMP IN DISGUISE — THE EXALTED 
PLBASTJBB HE RECEIVES IN THE VARIOUS OCCURRENCES OF HIS 
WALK — HE GAINS A VICTORY — HIS CONDUCT IN AND AFTER THE 
BATTLE 

The notion I had formed of a camp, from the effects which I had 
seen of war, made me expect a scene of tumult and confusion. But 
how was I surprised here to find everything as regular and tranquil 
as in the best governed city in the midst of peace. 

My master had not walked far, when some conversation, 
that seemed to be carried on with warmth in one of the tents, 
catching his ear, he stopped to listen what might be the subject 
of it. 

' I imagine ', said a voice within, ' that we shall have a battle 
soon. The cheerfulness of the king's looks, and the more than 
common spirits he has been in for these few days, are certain signs 
that he has some great things in view. I always observe him so 
before a battle '. 

' The sooner it comes the better ', replied another. ' I only wish 
that our forces were not so overmatched in numbers ; not that I 
fear success when he is with us, but that we may be able to give 
them a total defeat at once, and so prevent their making head 
again. For such is the inequality at present, that wliile we are 
killing half of them, the other half escape, and, though what 
we destroy exceeds the number of our own army, yet another army 
of the runaways still remains to give us more trouble. But, 
however, we must only do our duty, and kill them all, one after 
another '. 

' And so we will, brother ', continued the other, ' if it please God 
to preserve our king to us ; for while we have him, we can fear 
nothing. The number of our enemies only increases the glory of 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 231 

vanquishing them. Indeed, I wonder how they can stand befora 
us even as they do, wretches that are dragged to the war against 
their inclination, who have no interest in the event, no attachment 
to their leaders. But what attachment should they have to such 
leaders, who show no regard to their distresses, nor make any 
provision for their wants, but just drive them to battle, like oxen 
to the slaughter, and, when it is over, take no farther care about 
them, but let them perish by famine, if they cannot relieve them- 
selves by plundering the unhappy countries, friends or enemies 
alike, through which they go '. 

' Well, brother ', returned a third voice, ' thank God that it is 
not our case ; we follow a leader who is a father to his soldiers, and 
provides for all their occasions. We fight for ourselves and our 
families, for our laws and religion, and are sure tha^t he will support 
us in the enjoyment of them, when he has disappointed the designs 
of his enemies, and restored peace to his people. But if we are to 
fight to-morrow, we had better take our rest to-night, to make us 
fresh and strong for the battle. God bless and preserve our king, 
whilst his care watches over us ; we can sleep in safety in the midst 
of our enemies ' 

This genuine tribute of praise melted the heart of the king with 
the sublimest delight, and drew the tear of tenderness from his 
eye. 

' O my God ', said he, when the voices ceased, ' enable me to 
protect this people, and to bring this just war to a happy end, that 
they may enjoy the fruit of their virtues '. 

He then continued his progress, in which he met many such 
occasions of conscious pleasure. When he saw that all things were 
in proper order in the camp, his next care was to visit the quarters 
of the wounded and sick, for he would not trust them to any person, 
where he could possibly attend to them himself. The manner in 
which all things were ordered here, for the relief and comfort of the 
evils inseparable from war, were alone sufficient to raise the highest 
idea of the tenderness and humane care which directed and supported 
it. No riot or disorder, no negligence or abuse among the attend- 
ants, no misapplication or embezzlement of the provisions made for 
the patients ; all was order and harmony between them. How 
unlike to other scenes of the same nature which I had seen before ! 
If he was delighted with the spirited attachment of his soldiers in 
health, his delight was almost raised to ecstasy by the behaviour 
of these victims of the madness of the great. The thought of having 
suffered in his cause the extremest anguish of pain, not even the 
agonies of death ever making them utter a syllable to his disadvan- 
tage, or forget him in their prayers, in which his preservation was 
always joined with their own relief, and his happiness recommended 
with their souls to Heaven. 

This was too moving to be long borne ; he joined in the general 
prayer, and hastened from the tender scene as soon as he had ful- 
filled the motive of his going, by taking a strict view of everything 
in which his orders might be disobeyed, and these his particular 
family, as he called them, suffered by neglect. 

His tour was now finished, and he returned to his tent to take his 



232 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

necessary rest, having distributed, on the various occasions that 
had occurred in his vi^alk, all the money he had taken with him, 
except me, who happened to stick in the comer of his pocket. Tem- 
perance, exercise, and serenity of conscience insured his repose ; 
he fell asleep the moment his head touched the pillow, nor awoke 
till his usual early time of rising next morning, when he returned 
to the fatigue and perplexity of such a multiplicity of affairs, with 
a clear head and undismayed heart, and soon reduced the conlEusion 
of them into such order as made their execution easy. 

As the soldier had judged, the hour of battle was at hand. The 
king had scarce finished the business of the morning, when an officer 
brought him an account that the forces of the enemy were in motion. 

' I expected it ', said the king, coolly. ' I knew they could not 
remain long in the situation they were in. But let us observe their 
motions, that we may regulate ours by them '. 

Then, ordering some of his generals to follow him, he went to the 
top of a neighbouring house, from whence he could view them 
distinctly, where, having observed them attentively for some con- 
siderable time — ' It is done, my friends ', said he, with a smile of 
joy that enlightened all hie face, ' it is done. That last motion is 
what we wanted. Let us haste, and embrace the opportunity 
which Heaven has put into our hands '. 

Then, descending with an alacrity that inspired every beholder, 
he made his dispositions for the battle, and, putting himself at the 
head of his forces, marched directly against the enemy. 

Descriptions of battles' are never satisfactory ; the confusion is 
too great, and the business of the scene too complex to be brought 
into the regularity of any one design. I shall, therefore, only say 
that my master was completely victorious, and, to raise his own 
glory the higher, the victory was entirely gained by that part of 
his forces which he commanded in person, the excellent disposition 
he had made of the rest rendering it unnecesary for them to do 
more than stand spectators of the action from the situation in which 
he placed them, while they prevented him from being surrounded 
by the enemy. 

This victory was not gained vrithout resistance. The field was 
long and obstinately disputed, and my master often obliged to lead 
his men to the charge. But numbers were at length forced to sub- 
mit to superior valour, and the evening sun saw his baimers wave 
in triumph, where those of his enemies had menaced his destruction 
in the morning. If the intrepidity vsdth which he flew from rank 
to rank, and exposed himself to every shape of death in the action, 
had struck me vidth astonishment, I was not less affected by his 
conduct after it was over, when, cooling instantly from that enthu- 
siasm of courage, he gave his orders for securing the glorious advan- 
tages he had gained, for taking immediate care of the unhappy 
sufferers, both friends and enemies, without distinction, and for 
refreshing his own laboured soldiers, with all the serenity of peace. 

' Davis's Olio says the battle of Minden is here referred to ; but 
Frederick was not present at that engagement. Victories of Rosshach 
or Leuthen, 1757J? 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 233 



CHAPTER XXII 

THE HAPPY FEUITS 01' VIOTOKY — CHEYSAL FINDS NEW REASON TO 
ADMIBE HIS MASTER — A STKANOEE THROWS HIMSELF AT HIS FEET 
TO IMPLORE JUSTICE — THE STORY OF THE STEANGES 

The transactions succeeding this event were but the common 
occurrences on such occasions, in which there is always something 
so cruel in the triumphs of the victors, and so severe in the suflEerings 
of the vanquished, that, to a being free from the contradictory 
frenzies of mankind, the very thought is painful. His majesty's 
next care, after returning public thanks to Heaven on the very spot 
where its favour had been so signal, was to reward the behaviour of 
the soldiers. He praised, he promoted, he gave money to them, 
according to their different ranks and dispositions. Nor was his 
justice more bounteous in the reward of merit, than severe in the 
punishment of the want of it. 

Under such a leader, what forces could withstand his soldiers ? 
Under the discerning eye of such a prince, who was not actuated 
with ambition to distinguish himself in the execution of his duty, 
to obtain his favour ? Who dared to be guilty of disobedience or 
neglect, to incur his wrath ? From the field of battle the victorious 
army was directly marched away to a siege, their success in which 
was to open them an opportunity of attacking another army of the 
enemy with advantage. Such a round of carnage was so shocking, 
that the virtues of my master were not a balance to the horrors of 
his service, and I began to wish for a release from such a scene of 
glory, when an unexpected occasion showed me his character in 
a light that raised my admiration of him still higher. 

As he was riding along the lines of his camp the morning after the 
battle, reviewing a body of forces which he was detaching on a 
particular expedition, a man, in the habit of a private soldier, 
threw himself prostrate across his way, crying, ' Mercy, great 
king ! Have mercy on the sufferings of a wretch in despair, and 
show yourself the substitute of Heaven, by impartial justice '. 

The guards and attendants on the king would have spurned the 
suppliant out of the way, but his majesty, struck with the strange- 
ness of the address, and imagining it must proceed from some 
extraordinary cause, interposed, and bidding him arise — ' What is 
the grievance you complain of ' ? said he, with a placid look and 
encouraging accent, ' or against whom do you solemnly implore 
justice ' ? 

' Oh, great and good king ', replied the stranger, with an air that 
bespoke something above his present appearance, ' my griefs are 
too many to be told so concisely as your present situation demands, 
and the justice I implore will require time to divest nature of its 
strongest passions '- 

' What can this mean ' ? said the monarch in surprise. ' Meet me 
directly at my tent, and expect that justice which the simplicity of 
truth shall be entitled to, without these laboured exclamations '. 

The business which his mind was intent upon prevented the 



234 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

king's thinking any more of this affair, till he saw the man at his 
return to his tent, when, calling to him — ' Now ', said he, ' speak 
your griefs with the boldness, but also with the guard of truth, and 
doubt not the redress of justice '. 

Encouraged by these words, the stranger, bowing his head, and 
pausing a moment, as if to support his grief, began thus : — ' So 
may the ear of Heaven be ever open to thy petitions, O gracious 
king, as thou hast readily vouchsafed to hear my cries ! So may 
its justice redress thy wrongs, as thou shalt deal with mine. Thou 
seeat before thee the most wretched of mankind, whom despair has 
reduced to the necessity of flying from the defence of his country, 
and imploring justice for his private wrongs, from the declared foe 
of my sovereign. But let me not waste your time with fruitless 
complaints. My name, though spoken with some respect in my 
native country, is too obscure to have reached your ears, as my 
ancestors wisely confined their virtues to private life, nor ever 
laboured to emblazon their names with titles, that too often mar 
the happiness of their owners. In their steps I trod, tUl the wrath 
of Heaven kindled the ambition of princes, and my country became 
the theatre of their contention. I then thought it my duty to arise 
in its defence, and the justice of my motive drew success on my 
attempts. But, while I vainly indulged the hope of being instru- 
mental in delivering my country from the horrors of war, a foe 
broke into my house, thus destitute of its defender, and rifled all 
the treasure of my soul. Oh, my unhappy wife ! my newly -wedded, 
beauteous wife ! In vain didst thou call upon me in the hour of 
thy distress, when the hand of the ravisher was twisted in thine 
hair, and the horrors of immediate ruin took possession of thy soul. 
Thy protector was away, busied in the defence of others, whale the 
wolf was ravaging his deserted fold — But whither does my distrac- 
tion hurry me ? Oh, pardon, gracious monarch, the inconsistencies 
of despair. I will be brief ; I will not trespass on thy precious 
time '. 

He paused then a moment, till a flood of tears eased the fulness 
of his heart, and then proceeded thus : — 

' In the irruption of thy troops into Bohemia, about six months 
ago, my unhappy fortune led a party of them to my house, where 
the industry of my ancestors, for ages of peace, fell a sacrifice to 
the wantonness of unrestrained devastation in one moment. But 
I complain not of this ; it was my share of the indiscriminate 
calamity. Alas ! my woes are of another nature. 

' The beauty of my wife struck the very hardened hearts of the 
soldiers with such reverence that, in the fury of their outrage, they 
dared not to lay a sacrilegious hand on her ; but this safeguard 
that protected her from rapine only raised the more audacious rage 
of lust against her. The oflBcer who commanded the party no 
sooner saw her than, inflamed with brutal desire, he hurried her 
away with him to the camp, where imagination sinks in horror 
from the thought of what she may have suffered. The news of my 
misfortune soon reached me. No restraints of military duty were 
of force to hold me a moment. I flew to the scene of my ruin, 
where, having learned what I have already related to you, the 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 236 

greatness of my grief stupefied me for a time, till the thought of my 
■wife's being still alive, and in the possession of her ravisher, roused 
me to a resolution of labouring for her relief. I therefore immedi- 
ately entered in disguise into those very troops which had perpe- 
trated my ruin, as I despaired of eluding the vigilance of thy officers 
by any other means. My stratagem had success. I soon learned 
that the officer who had brought my wife from my house had been 
obliged to give her up to his general, who had demanded her as 
soon as she had been brought to the camp. 

' A dawn of hope broke in upon me, though I could not gain any 
account of her after this. I thought that a man, honoured with 
your particular esteem, must be possessed of virtue, and this, I 
knew, must be her protection. 

' Big vrith this hope, I found means to rejoin my own corps, 
where my absence was easily excused to a general who was my 
friend, and who readily yielded to my request of sending a trumpet, 
with a letter, to inquire for such a lady, and to desire that she might 
be treated vrith the tenderness and respect due to her sex and 
beauty, till she should be restored to her friends. But all my fond 
hopes fell to the ground when an answer was returned that the 
general knew not of such a person. Despair now stared me in the 
face ; I saw all the horrors of my condition, and would that instant 
have returned in my disguise and stabbed the ravisher at the head 
of his forces, had I not reflected that my Theodora might be only 
exposed by such an action to new insults, and her life, perhaps, 
sacrificed in torture and ignominy to revenge. 

' While I fluctuated in this distress, Heaven inspired me with the 
thought of having recourse to your justice. Though he is the 
enemy of my sovereign, said I, he is a man who feels the tender 
impulse of humanity ; he is a king who delights in justice. I 
therefore reassumed my disguise, and entered into your camp as 
a deserter the night before this battle, in which instinctive abhor- 
rence of cowardice urged me to do the duty of a soldier ; and I 
happened to fight near your person, where, though I was sensible 
of my crime in assisting the enemy of my sovereign, I had this 
palliative consolation that the forces I engaged were not my fellow- 
subjects, but those of a perfidious ally, who entered into the war 
only to take his own advantage, when a proper opportunity should 
ofEer. 

' This, gracious king, is my unhappy story. This is the griev- 
ance for which I implore thy justice, for which I fought against the 
allies of my sovereign yesterday, for which I threw myself before 
your horse's feet this morning, for which I now call upon you by 
that Power Who has placed you as His substitute on earth, and will 
require an account of thy stewardship. Oh, justice ! justice ! 
justice ' ! 



236 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 



CHAPTER XXIII 

THE KING SENDS FOE THE GENERAL, AND OEDEES THE STEANGEB TO 
BE CONFINED TILL HIS ABRIVAL — CONTINUATION OF THE STOEY OF 
THE STEANGEB — A NEW TEIAL OF THE KING's POETITTTDE AND 
ACTrVITY OF SOUL 

The king heard out the stranger's story without interruption, 
and then, addressing himself to his officers and attendants round 
him — ' How unhappy ', said he, ' is the condition of princes, who 
must be answerable for the crimes of their servants, as if every 
man's own were not more than he can bear ! 

' I thought this man as upright as I knew him brave ; I thought 
justice and mercy attempered valour in his breast. But perhaps 
he is wronged ; let us not judge too hastily. Go ! ' — turning to one 
of his officers — ' bid him come to me directly, nor tell him a word 
of the occasion. If he is guilty, he has forfeited my esteem for 
ever ; but if this complaint is only a calumny devised to exasperate 
me against one of my best friends, severely shall the author of it 
feel that justice which he so solemnly implores. Let him, therefore, 
be taken into custody till the event decides the doubt ; but let him 
be treated with that humanity which his apparent distress stands 
in need of ; nor let any hardship or indignity give justice the 
appearance of prejudice, or seem to intimidate his resolution '. 

He then retired to enjoy those few moments of his Ufe, which 
privacy enabled him to call his own. His majesty's commands 
were so punctually obeyed, that the general arrived at the camp 
the next day, where he immediately waited on his master, who 
received him with his usual familiarity ; and having conferred with 
him for some time, on the situation of the affairs under his care, 
he led him to the door of his tent, where he had ordered the stranger 
to be brought to confront him, and then spoke thus, as if in con- 
tinuation of his former discourse : — 

' It has ever been my strongest wish, my most positive command, 
that the calamities of this necessary war should fall as light as 
possible on the innocent subjects of those powers who have pro- 
voked it ; particularly, I have always enjoined the strictest care 
to avoid every unnecessary devastation of private property, every 
appearance of cruelty or ill-treatment to the defenceless weakness 
of the aged, of women, and children. What, then, must be my 
grief to find these orders disobeyed ? to find that the ruins of the 
poor mark the marches of my armies, and the cries of private anguish 
arise to Heaven against me ? But these enormities shall not lie 
on my head for neglect of punishing them, nor be persisted in on 
the hope of impunity. Were my right hand guilty of such crimes, 
I would cut it off with my left, rather than it should infect my 
mind'. 

The solemnity with which the king spoke these words struck all 
present with terror for the accused, who alone was ignorant of their 
design. The king saw the general concern, and, to let the impression 
sink the deeper, he paused some moments before he proceeded ; 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 237 

then, turning short upon the general with a determined look and 
awful voice — ' TeU me ', said he, ' where is the woman whom thou 
hadst from the officer who brought her to the camp, when the 
forces under thy command entered into Bohemia ? the woman 
whom the Bohemian generally sent to inquire after in vain, and 
whom, I fear, thou didst deny, and still detainest for purposes too 
base to mention ' ? 

The unexpectedness of this charge deprived the unhappy criminal 
of all presence of mind ; he stood abashed, and the confusion of his 
looks too plainly betrayed his guilt. The king saw his distress 
with the greatest concern ; but, superior to every private regard 
that could interfere with his sublimer character — ' Tell me, where 
she is this instant ' ? said he, ' nor aggravate, by falsehood, crimes 
already too flagrant ; for I will know the whole of tliis black affair '. 

' Oh, sir ', replied the general, throwing himself at his feet, ' I 
acknowledge my crime ; but I cannot bear thy wrath. Let me 
die this moment ; let that punishment expiate my guilt, but afflict 
me no longer with thy displeasure, which is heavier than I can 
bear '. 

' Where is the woman ? Speak '. 

' Safe and inviolate in my tent. My entreaties have not been 
able to prevail on her virtue ; and my passion was too delicate to 
seek gratification by force '. 

' This moment let her be sent for ! and let the cause of her coming 
be concealed from her. I will learn the truth of this strange affair 
from herself. In the meantime, let her husband be treated with 
tenderness and respect. His misfortunes deserve compassion '. J; 

The king had scarce said this, when an express arrived from 
another of his armies, which guarded his own dominions from the 
calamities of war, to inform him that they had been repulsed 
with great loss in an attack upon the army of the enemy, which 
was now in full march to his capital. 

' Thy will be done, God ', said the king. ' Thy will be done ' ! 
And then, without any appearance of surprise or alteration in his 
looks, he instantly gave orders for a strong detachment of the army 
imder his own command to march to the re-inforcement of that 
which had suffered this loss, and retired to consider of the altera- 
tions which this event must necessarily occasion in the operations 
of the campaign, and write his several orders accordingly, for he 
was his own secretary. But, though his looks were thus easy, his 
heart severely felt this misfortune. 

' God ', said he, as soon as he was alone, ' when will Thy 
wrath be appeased ? When shall this people have rest ? If I 
am the unhappy object of it, oh, let it fall on my head alone, but 
spare them. There is nothing certain in this life, nothing worth 
a wise man's care or regard. The victory with which it pleased 
Thee to bless our arms so lately, raised my hopes to a prospect of 
peace. But the scene is now changed ; and this advantage will 
raise the pride and malice of our enemies still higher, and make 
new deluges of blood necessary to bring them to a sense of reason 
and justice. Thy will be done, O Lord ! But, as it is not yet 
declared, it is our duty to make use of the means which Thou hast 



238 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

put into OUT power to accomplish that end which appears to us 
most just and advantageous. The horrors of the war are ready to 
burst upon my country, after all my endeavours to save it, and 
divert them elsewhere. But they shall not be unopposed ; I myself 
will stand in the breach, and defend my native country '. 

The serenity in the looks of the king had deceived the fears of 
the army, and every one prepared to obey him with the greatest 
alacrity ; and, though this affair put the whole camp in motion, 
it occasioned neither disorder nor confusion. Active as light, the 
king was everywhere, ordered everything, saw everything prepared, 
as well for the conveniences of his soldiers as for the greatest possible 
expedition of their march. His armies might be vanquished, for 
they were but men, but to deject or disorder his mind was not in 
the power of any event. 



CHAPTER XXIV 

CONCLTJSIOSr OF THE STORY OF THE STRAU"GEE — HIS VSTLPB ABEIVBS 
ASS ACQUITS THE OBITBRAL — THE KINO's SPEECH TO HIM, AST) 
GENEBOSITY TO THE STRANQEKS — CHBYSAL CHANGES HIS SEEVICB, 
AND GOBS VPITH THEM — SOME GENERAL REMARKS ON THE OHAB- 
ACTEB OF THF KING OF BTTLGABIA, AND THE PROBABLE CONSB- 
QtJENCES OF THE WAR 

By this time the Bohemian lady arrived, whom the king ordered 
to be brought directly to his tent. The first sight of this woman 
raised emotions in his heart which it had long been a stranger to. 
A beauty that exceeded imagination, and a sweetness and expression 
in her looks beyond description, soon made him sensible that all 
his heroism could not eradicate the passions of nature, and raised 
his pity, both for the xinfortunate general and for her husband. 

He stood some moments gazing at her in silent astonishment ; 
but recollecting himself, he addressed her thus, with the highest 
complacency and respect in his look and accent : — ' I have sent 
for you, madam, to this improper place for the delicacy of your sex, 
to learn from yourself the manner of your having been brought away 
from Bohemia, and the cause of your being since detained by the 
general of my army. Speak, madam ! Have you suffered any 
violence, any usage improper for your sex and merit ? Speak with 
the assurance of truth, and expect justice and redress '. 

' Oh, mighty king ', said the lady, prostrating herself at his feet, 
* oft have I heard of thy wondrous virtues ; but never till this 
moment could I think that you could stoop so low as to take notice 
of my wretchedness. My sad story is no more than this : I was 
torn from my house by an officer of your army ; I was hurried away 
to the camp by him and there insulted by the base offers of his 
love ; but Heaven delivered me from him. Your general heard 
of my distress, and rescued me from his power, since which time I 
have had no personal cause of complaint, besides the indiscriminate 
calamities of the wars, which have robbed me of my husband, and 
left me a friendless widow in the hands of my enemies '. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 239 

A flood of tears here stopped her utterance. The king, raising 
her from the ground, proceeded thus : ' A widow, madam, did 
you say ? How long since have you lost your husband, and by 
what means did you hear of his death ' ? 

' Oh, sire ', replied she, ' as soon as I was freed from the horrors 
of brutal violence by the general I wrote to my husband, with his 
permission, but received no answer to many, very many letters. 
This suspense was worse than death, and almost drove me to despair, 
till the general at length, in compassion to my misery, wrote himself 
to the commander of the army in which my husband had served, 
who returned him for answer that he had been killed about the 
time I was taken prisoner. Oh, happy had been my lot had I 
shared his fate ' ! 

' I hope, madam ', said the king, ' you have received no injuries 
that make you weary of life ; I hope my general has not misbehaved 
himself to you '. 

' Oh, sire ', replied she, ' I have received no injuries besides the 
irreparable loss of my husband, after which I can have no desire to 
live. As for the general, he has always treated me with the greatest 
compassion and tenderness. But now, will your majesty hear the 
voice of aiBiction ? will you grant the only wish of a heart in des- 
pair ? Let me be conveyed to some religious house, where I may 
devote the sad remnant of my days to the service of Heaven, far 
from the knowledge of the general and every other person who has 
ever heard of my name. I am sensible of the presumption of troub- 
ling you with this request ; but to whom should we fly in the moment 
of distress, except to Heaven or its vicegerents, especially those 
whose virtues give its seal to their authority '. 

' You may depend ', returned the king, ' upon every endeavour 
in my power to make you happy. But, madam, what meant the 
particular mention of the general in your desire of being retired 
from the knowledge of the world ? Pray be ingenuous ; I hope he 
has not transgressed the limits of his own virtue and my command '. 

' Oh, sire ', replied she, ' mistake not the incoherencies of dis- 
traction ; the general has always treated me with respect and 
tenderness ; tenderness in excess — for nothing can be hid from you — 
was the only thing my soul could disapprove of his behaviour. He 
offered me honourable love, but, alas ! my husband, my dead 
husband, has possession of this heart ; there he is buried, nor ever 
shall another love disturb his dear remembrance '. 

' Madam, be comforted ', returned the king, ' such virtue aa 
yours is the peculiar care of Heaven ; you may be happy yet ; 
your husband may still be alive. In the disorders of these unhappy 
times, many strange things happen ; many who are thought to be 
alive are long since dead ; many who have been long thought dead 
are found to be alive '. 

' Oh, sire, what can your words import ? You would not jest 
with misery ; you cannot speak in vain 7 Oh, am I yet to hope 
after so long despair ' ? 

' Hope, always hope ; but I shall send a proper person to explain 
my words '. Saying this, the king went to the door of his tent, 
and, seeing her husband bursting with anxiety and impatience — 



240 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

' Go ', said the monarch, ' in there, and see what blessings Heaven 
reserves for virtue. Go in alone ; such meltings of the soul as must 
attend your meeting are too delicate to be exposed to other 



Then, turning to the general — ' You have behaved nobly, my 
friend ', said he, ' in such temptation, which was almost too great 
for human virtue. Had you injured such excellence, dear as you 
are to my heart, your life should have expiated the crime. But 
you have behaved nobly. In such a trial, it is virtue to refrain 
from vice ; the errors you have fallen into are but the weaknesses 
of nature ; for to have been insensible of her beauty and perfections 
would have argued a deficiency in humanity. But beware, my 
friend, of indulging those passions ; they enervate the heart, and 
wean the soul insensibly from virtue ; the example is before thine 
eyes. See how the violence of love has been able to urge the noble 
heart of this woman's husband to desert his charge, to enter into 
the service of his enemies, to fight against the dictates of his own 
conscience ; think of this, and be more cautious for the future ; 
the heart of a soldier has not room for love '. 

The general, unable to reply, threw himself at his feet, and em- 
braced his knees. 

' I understand you ', said the king, smiling, " your passion is not 
quite cured ; but you shall have employment to wear off this rust of 
idleness. Return to your command this moment, and expect my 
further orders '. 

The general obeyed, and the king, addressing those around him — 
' To be without fault ', said he, ' were not to be a man ; he is the 
best who has the smallest ; and allowance is to be made for human 
frailty, where the temptation is too great for human virtue '. 

As the king said this the stranger and liis wife came out together, 
and, throwing themselves at his feet, bedewed them with tears of 
grateful ecstacy. 

' Arise ', said the monarch, ' and be happy in each other. — I have 
restored you to yoiir wife ', said he to the husband, ' and am ready 
to do you every further instance of justice which you can demand '. 

' My soul is satisfied, gracious king ; my soul is satisfied ', 
replied he. ' I ask no more of Heaven but to reward your goodness, 
your justice, and compassion '. 

' But there is one thing more to be considered ', said the king ; 
' your estates were wasted ; your house burned by my soldiers. 
I do not know the loss you may have suffered. Take this ' (giving 
him a. large purse of gold) ; ' if that is not sufficient to repair it, 
when Heaven, in mercy to mankind, shall bid the calamities of 
war to cease, if my life is spared, come to me, and I will remove 
every cause of your complaint. I do not ask you to enter into 
my service this war, but if your honour, your conscience, oppose it 
not, you may expect every encouragement due to your merit '. 

' Oh, sire, it is too much ; your goodness overwhelms me. I 
will retire from the seat of war ; I will implore Heaven for your 
happiness and safety, and though I cannot, may not, fight for you, 
my arm shall never more be raised against you '. 

His wife and he then withdrew to prepare for their departure. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 241 

leaving the king no less happy in being the author of their happiness, 
than his goodness and bounty had made them. 

I here quitted the service of this great piinoe, being in the purse 
which he gave to the stranger. The happiness which this pair 
experienced in being thus unexpectedly restored to each other is 
not to be expressed, the delicacy of their love being as much too 
sublime for description, as the sensuality of other scenes is beneath 
it. In a word, they wanted, they wished for nothing more, and, 
to secure the possession of what they enjoyed, they resolved to go 
and live privately with his brother, an ecclesiastic in Vienna, till 
the war should be at an end, and they might with safety return into- 
their own country. This resolution was soon taken ; they applied 
for passports that evening, and left the camp the next morning. 

Sick as I was of such a scene of blood, I own I could not leave 
this prince without reluctance. I see you are desirous that I should 
give you a character of him, but I must not gratify your curiosity. 
What I have told you of his actions, may convince you that he is 
the greatest of men ; but humanity is too frail to be able to form 
any definitive judgment from his past, for his future life. Success 
may elevate, misfortune may sour his mind, and .so overthrow that 
equality of it which now rises him almost above man. His enemies 
are numerous and inveterate, his friends few, and hardly steady 
enough to be relied on, so that his dependence is solely on the 
attachment of his own subjects, and the strength of his own soul. 

What will be the event of his fortune is not permitted me to 
conjecture. This only I must say, that, if he falls, it had been 
better for his coimtry, for Europe in general, that he had never 
been bom, as his struggles will exhaust their strength, and leave 
them an easy prey to a foe (the Turks) whose silence makes them 
not apprehensive of him, but who laughs in his heart to see them 
thus do his work, and destroy against each other the forces which 
might prevent his adding them to the number of the nations 
which already groan under his yoke ; a design which he certainly 
meditates, and will not lose a moment to put into execution, when 
the opportunity he watches for is ripe. 



CHAPTER XXV 

CHKYSAL ABKIVES AT VIENNA, WHBKE HE MEETS AN OLD ACQUAINT- 
ANCE — THE HISTORY OF HIS MASTEB's BROTHER — HIS MISSION^ 
LABOURS, AND SUCCESS IN ENGLAND — HE IS SENT TO PERU — HE 
DISAPPROVES OF THE PRECIPITANCY OP THE MEASURES CARRIED 
ON THERE, AND RETUENS TO EUROPE TO PREPARE MATTERS BETTER 

If the immediate scene of the war was shocking, the appearance of 
the countries around it was rather worse. In the former, the hurry 
of the action kept the mind too busy to attend to every minute 
distress ; but here a dismal desolation opened a field for melancholy 
reflection, which every object added horrors to. The lands laid 
waste, the villages in ashes, the inhabitants perishing in the fields 
Q 



242 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

and high-roads of wounds, sicknesa, famine, and every various kind 
of misery, which the madness of human nature can inflict upon 
itself. 

Through such monuments of military glory did we travel to 
Vienna, where my master and his wife were received with open arms 
by his brother, who insisted on their living in his house. The scene 
-was here changed from the tumults and wants of war, to all the 
luxury and ease of peace. The moment I saw this ecclesiastic, 
I knew him to have been a member of the convent, to the head 
of which I belonged in Peru. This unexpected meeting, at such a 
distance, raised a curiosity to know the cause of his removal from 
a place where I thought I had left him settled in all the happiness 
which riches and sensual pleasures could afEord. It was not long 
before this curiosity was gratified, for, the very evening after my 
master's arrival, he led him to a walk in his garden, and, sitting 
■down under a tree on the brink of a fountain, addressed him thus : — 

' It is many years, my dearest brother, since I had the happiness 
of seeing you last. Various have been the climates I have gone 
through, various the vicissitudes of my fortune since that day ; 
from despair to exultation, from royal affluence and power, to ap- 
prehension of perishing by famine, or in a prison. Wonder not at 
my words ; I will explain them to you in a short view of my Hfe, 
which it is necessary I should give you, to prepare you for the 
participation of secrets, in which your assistance may be employed 
in establishing the most extensive and firm power which ever yet 
was raised upon this globe. You may remember, though you were 
then very young, that the representations of the Jesuits, to whose 
care our education was committed, made such an impression on 
me that, in despite of my father's threats and entreaties, I renounced 
my patrimony in your favour, and, taking only a small sum of 
money to defray the expenses of my journey, went directly to Rome 
with my tutor, where I readily obtained admission iato the Society 
of Jesus, as soon as I had gone through the usual preparatory forms 
of education. Nothing remarkable happened to me during the 
first years of my being professed, my studies engrossing my whole 
time and attention, in which I made such a proficiency, that the 
general of the order thought it proper to send me into the world, 
in the service of the society. The first stage of my mission was to 
England, whither I went to counteract the poison which was dis- 
pensing against us, by an apostate ' of our order, who, under the 
pretence of employing his abilities in the service of the society, 
had been admitted to all the libraries, and suffered to take extracts 
from all the records of the Church. But no sooner had he made 
such a collection as he thought sufficient for his purpose, than he 
fled to England, his native country, where, renoimcing his vows 
and religion, he turned the weapons which had been entrusted in 
his hands for the defence of the Church, against her, employing 

' Archibald Bower [1686-1766], a Scots Jesuit, who twice left the Roman 
Church, of which he was proved guilty of cootinuing a secret member. 
Author of a History of the Popes in seven volumes. This account of 
his mode of life is by no means severe as coming from a Jesuit, 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 243 

the abstracts he had made to the defamation of the character, and 
subversion of the power of the Holy See. 

' My success in this, my first, negotiation (for, in defiance of truth, 
reason, conscience, and common sense, by plausible insinuations, 
by forged certificates, or, which was the same thing, by certificate, 
from people who would certify anything in their own favour against 
a man who attacked the very fundamentals of their power ; by 
bribery, subornation, perjury, and every kind of artifice, I, in a 
great measure, defeated his design, and overturned the authority 
of his work) ; my success, I say, in this difficult undertaking, for 
he had gone out from among ourselves, and was versed in our whole 
science, encouraged the order to continue me in that mission, but 
in a higher office. 

' The laws, religion, and government of the nation were now the 
objects assigned to my attacks, in which I laboured with various 
success for some years, in every character which human volubility 
could assume. I was a Quaker, a Methodist, a Deist ; I wrote for 
the ministry, or against the government, as the prevailing humour 
of the day promised attention to my writings ; the sea which 
flows around that island being not more unsteady than the minds of 
the inhabitants, nor more liable to be ruffled by the winds of heaven, 
than they are by every breath of popular rumour. I proceeded 
thus for some time with various success, till, happening to disclose 
some secret transactions, which were known there only to the persons 
concerned, and had been communicated to me from abroad, in 
order to sow dissension between the people and their governors, 
to the ruin of both, the conscious parties were alarmed, and my 
intelligence traced so secretly, that I had difficulty to escape by 
flight from an ignominious death, which the resentment of those, 
whose ruinous machinations I had thus discovered to their country, 
would certainly have brought me to. My failing in this attempt, 
in which thousands had failed before me, was no prejudice to my 
character, nor in the least lessened me in the opinion of the order. 
On the contrary, the efforts I had made were so daring, so deeply 
laid, and so well conducted., that I was now judged a proper person 
to be employed in greater matters. 

' I was therefore sent the next year to what is called the Spanish 
world, but is really the Jesuits' heaven in America, where matters of 
the highest moment were just ripe for execution. When I came 
there, I found things in a forwardness too great for their foundation, 
the eagerness of some of our people hurrying on events before proper 
preparation had ensured their success. In short, they were ready 
to revolt from Spain and Portugal before they had made provision 
to support themselves in such an attempt. They wanted European 
officers, soldiers, arms, and ammunition, for on the natives there is 
no dependence ; but, above all, the time was unfavourable. The 
powers they meant to attack in this vital part were at peace with 
all the world, and consequently at liberty to turn their whole force 
against them. 

' I therefore counselled them to moderate their zeal, and wait 
till better preparations and a more favourable minute should make 
their success more probable. But they would not hearken to my 



244 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

advice, but attributed it to envy or want of resolution, on which I 
left them to their own ill-fortune, and hasted home to provide a 
remedy for evils which I could not prevent '. 



CHAPTER XXVI 

CONTINUATrON OF THE JESUIt's DISCOURSE — HE SHOWS THE PKOMIS- 
ING SITUATION OF HIS AFFAIRS AT PRESENT — THE CONCISE METHOD 
BY WHICH SPAIN AND PORTUGAL ARE TO BE BROUGHT INTO THE 
WAR WITH ENGLAND — HE PROPOSES TO HIS BROTHER TO JOIN IN 
THE GENERAL, THAT HE MAY ACCOMPLISH HIS PARTICULAR DESIGN 

' The event has confirmed my opinion ; by striking too soon, the 
blow has been ineffectual. However, things, though disconcerted 
by this precipitancy, are not quite ruined, and care may yet repair 
the effects of their folly. 

' In this cause I now labour in concert with others of my brethren 
in every court of Europe, and I have the satisfaction to think that 
we have a prospect of success. The only obstacle that retards us 
at present is the difficulty of making the courts of Spain and Portugal^ 
enter into the war against England. Could we bring this to bear, 
our work would be easy. The mighty naval power of England will 
not only prevent their sending over forces to oppress us before we 
can establish our power, but will also assist us to carry on the war, 
to share in the spoil, and distress our enemies. But while the 
present kings are on the thrones of those kingdoms, it will be scarcely 
possible to bring our designs to perfection, they are so utterly averse 
to hazarding the consequences of a war with a nation from whose 
alliance they receive such advantages. The first thing, therefore, 
which we do, must be to remove them. The former has already 
swallowed his death, though the process will be so slow as to escape 
suspicion. With the other, such caution is not necessary, nor is 
there time for it ; the arm is already lifted up against him, for a 
stroke that will terrify the world. "V^Tien these obstacles are re- 
moved, the execution of our designs will meet with no further delay. 
The successors to these princes we have secured such an influence 
on, that we can work them to whatever we please, and have already 
poisoned their minds with prejudices against England. 

' To provide officers of approved fidelity and experience to com- 
mand our forces is the next object of our care. Shall I candidly 
own to you that such a length of time and multiplicity of affairs 
had almost obliterated all my remembrance of my family ; but the 
moment I heard your name mentioned, with the respect due to your 
merits in the present war, a flood of infant fondness melted my 
heart, and tears of tenderest joy acknowledged that I had a brother. 

'In January, 1762, Great Britain declared war against Spain, the step 
being rendered inevitable by the secret Spanish alliance with France. 
A month or two later, Spain invaded Portugal, whose king was our 
ally. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 246 

I immediately gave notice to our general, and by his order am 
empowered to treat thua with you. 

' On my engagement for your fidelity, for your abilities are known 
to be far superior to any that shall oppose you, I am commissioned 
to offer you the supreme command of all our forces in this great 
imdertaking. With what joy I make this offer, the pleasure that 
you would feel in serving your brother can best enable you to 
judge. 

' Though I will tell you further that mine is raised higher than 
common feelings can convey a notion of, I have hitherto only un- 
folded the general design of our order, in which I am but a party, 
though a principal and material one. But shall I tell you also that 
my designs terminate not with their's ; as your command will make 
you master of all their forces, and, as power is the consequence of 
that, you will be able to confer it where you please, or, indeed, 
rather to retain it in your own hands, while I shall only ease you of 
the trouble of conducting and establishing the policy of an infant 
state. This was my motive for writing to you so pressingly to 
come to me to Vienna. This is the end which I have been labouring 
for all my life. I am advanced in years, and shall never marry to 
beget an heir ; you are young, and will have many. Assist me, 
therefore, to acquire our throne which must descend to your posterity 
— a throne which, by holding it at first as under the sovereignty of 
the order, will soon be established by them, even beyond their own 
power to shake. 

' I have now unbosomed myself to my brother with all the con- 
fidence of so near an alliance. You will, perhaps, wonder at my 
openness with one whom I have not seen since he was a child. 
But I know your character in life, and, above all, I know myself 
safe from being betrayed, because the information would not be 
received. Considei-, therefore, whether you will embrace this offer, 
whether you will reign in a splendour that will dazzle the eyes of 
the greatest prince in Europe, or live here in slavery and depend- 
ence. The alternative will not admit a moment's hesitation ; I 
see you yield. I will acquaint our general with it. You and your 
wife shall remain here with me, till the proper time for our departure 
comes, which will depend on circumstances not yet settled. In the 
meantime, we shall have an opportunity of conferring on these 
subjects together, and preparing all things for our undertaking in 
a manner that shall ensure success '. 

Though my master made no reply to this proposal that testified 
the least disapprobation of it, I could easily see that many parts of 
the scheme affected him with the strongest abhorrence, at the same 
time, that the offer of royalty was a temptation which shook his 
resolution, and almost vanquished his virtue. His brother saw the 
conflict in his heart with pleasure ; had he yielded readily, and 
without reluctance, he should have withdrawn his confidence from 
such a depravity of soul, and the struggle convinced him that he 
was his own, and he knew that man, as well as the woman, who 
deliberates between virtue and vice, is lost. 



246 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 



CHAPTER XXVII 

THE JESUIT PEOOBEDS TO SHOW THE RISE OF THE WAB IN OBEMAIfY, 
AND EXPLAINS THE MOTIVES OF THE SEVERAL PASTIES ENGAGED 
IN IT, AS ALSO OP THE NETTTEALITY OBSEEVBD BY SOME PAETICT7LAB 
STATES 

The Jesuit the next evening resumed the conversation, and, to 
remove every doubt of success that might deter his brother from 
joining in his designs, proceeded thus : — 

' My brother ', said he, ' there is nothing so disgusting to a rational 
man as the mistakes and blunders which passion, prejudice, pride, 
and ignorance produce in the conduct of all the courts in the world, 
even ours at Rome not being quite exempt from them, though the 
freest of all others. As for this of Vienna, it is at present a scene 
where every absurd, every destructive passion rules. Among these 
must you seek for the sources of the present war that lays all Ger- 
many waste. Female pride,' piqued by some slighting expressions 
from one esteemed inferior in rank, and stimulated by a desire of 
recovering by surprise what had been yielded, or rather extorted, 
by treaty, influenced this sagacious court in conjunction with that 
of Saxony, to form designs against the King of Bulgaria. But the 
vigilance of that monarch prevented their designs, of which he had 
timely notice, and, before their schemes were ripe for execution, 
he boldly attacked them, and so anticipated the blow meditated 
against him. 

' So daring a step surprised all Europe, and influenced many who 
were unacquainted with the motives of it to take part against him, 
while more did for private advantage. Of these, France was the 
first who, concluding a league with her ancient enemy, in despite- 
of family animosity, has entered into a war that seems not to con- 
cern her at all, nor, indeed, does it in the obvious consequences of 
it. But she has further designs in view, and in return for the 
assistance she gives to crush this prince, is to receive from the house 
of Austria those dominions in the Netherlands, which have cost the 
greatest part of Europe such deluges of blood for above a century 
to keep out of her hands, while this court, inattentive to the conse- 
quences that must attend France's getting possession of these long- 
contested places has blindly, basely, entered into a league with a 
family that has been labouring her ruin for so many ages, and 
betrayed the confidence of all the states who supported her in them. 
The other nations who have acceded to this alliance have acted 
from motives merely mercenary in the first view, fighting for the 
pay promised them by the Imperial and French Courts, the latter 

1 The allies of the Empress Miiria Theresa against Frerlerick of Prussia 
were, Louis XV of France, the Czarina Elizabeth, and the King of 
Poland (Elector of Saxony). The Czarina, like Madame de Pompadour, 
bad been embittered against Frederick by the coarae jibes of that con- 
firmed woman-hater. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 247 

of whom haa stretched her generosity so far as to undertake support- 
ing her new ally with money as well as men. 

' But it is not improbable that they may all be disappointed, and 
the King of Bulgaria not only escape the ruin meditated against 
him, but also retort it on the machinators, one of the principal of 
whom the Saxon ' has already had abundant cause to repent of his 
undertaking. As for this court, it now fights pro oris et focis, as 
may be said ; for if that hero is victorious, nothing less is to be 
expected here than the total loss of the imperial dignity, of whose 
authority there want not many instances of the most flagrant abuse, 
to vindicate such a, revolution. But of all the effects of this un- 
natural combination, there is not one more base than the ingratitude 
with which this court has behaved to that of England, whose blood 
and treasure have often supported it against the very power of 
France, when every other human assistance has deserted it, and 
established it in its present grandeur, almost at the price of its own 
ruin. But now all those benefits are forgot ; and because England 
will not tamely look on (if not, perhaps, assist) to see the fabric 
which she has erected at so vast an expense, overturned to gratify 
a blind caprice, and a prince, allied to her by blood and interest, 
sacrificed by avarice and pride, all her former services are held as 
cancelled, and herself treated with the rancour of the greatest 
enemy. 

' While England thus supports her character of generosity, and 
acts with prudence, the Dutch, as if infatuated, stand quietly to 
see the barrier ^ which cost themselves even so much in erecting for 
their defence, thus given away to the very power against whom it 
was erected, and who, they cannot be insensible, means nothing 
less than their ruin, as soon as it can strike the blow to effect. But 
such is the degeneracy of that people from every sentiment of virtue, 
public and private, that they will not give up the opportunity of 
present gain to save their state from so evident, so imminent ruin, 
vainly, perhaps, expecting that England will still pursue the schemes 
of knight-errantry which have so long made her fight the quarrels 
of her neighbours, while they themselves looked on almost as if 
unconcerned in the event, and will be moved by the cries of the 
distressed states to remedy the mistakes, and repair the losses of 
their High-Mightinesses. 

' While every other state in Europe is thus employed, Spain and 
Portugal enjoy all the advantages of peace, prudently taking no 
part in a war which does not in the least concern them. Of these, 
the former, like the old lion in the fable, is only terrible to ignorant 
apprehension on account of what it has been, and is now pacific 
and harmless, because it no longer has the power of doing harm. 

1 In the first campaign, Frederick overran Saxony, and forced the 
Saxon army to capitulate ; and this unfortunate country wa3 occupied 
alternately by both parties throughout the Seven Years' War, suffering 
frightful calamities. 

" By the Barrier Treaty [1 709], Holland was secured by England in_ 
the possession of certain Flemish fortresses, as a protection againgt 
France. 



■248 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

Sensible of this weakness, it sleeps in the shadow of a mighty name, 
and mixes not in disputes which must only draw it into difficulties, 
without any prospect of advantage to engage in the attempt. But 
it must not be let to enjoy this state of tranquility, so contrary to 
our designs, any longer ; and, as the present government there is 
determined to persist in the measures that support it, it must be 
■overturned to make way for those who will be more obedient to our 
advice. A method which we must also pursue with Portugal ; 
for, though its strength is almost beneath the rank of an indepen- 
dent, much less a royal state, yet, upon the account of its wealth, 
which might hire forces to oppress us, it must be worked up to take 
the same step, and break with England, as I have said before, to 
which it has already made large advances, by several most unjust 
and injudicious encroachments, on the trade of that nation. 

' As for the war between France and England, it arises solely from 
the contradictions between the interest of the two nations, which 
Nature has set in an opposition impossible to be reconciled. But 
the seat of this war is so remote from hence, that it would have no 
influence on the affairs of Europe, did not the successes of the 
English prevent France from giving the assistance that was ex- 
pected, and might be effectual to the designs of this court, for they 
have so absolutely ruined her trade, that she is no longer able to 
fulfil her engagements with Eussia particularly, and the several 
courts of Germany, whom she undertook to pay, for fighting the 
quarrel of her ally ; so that the former, who had no other motive 
but the money for entering into the war at first, will, of course, 
and the latter must of necessity desert that cause, not having any 
internal support of their own, since this has failed them. Indeed, 
the Russians, finding all the mighty promises which were made 
them vanish into air, begin to be sick of their bargain already, 
and long again for the solid advantages of their alliance with Eng- 
land. As for this court, it is now making its last effort, and, if this 
is eluded or defeated, it has no other resource than shamefully to 
receive the law from a prince upon whom it made so unjust an 
attempt '. 



CHAPTER XXVIII 

•CONCLUSION OP THE JBSTTIT'S DISCOUBSE — HIS SYSTEM Off MORALITY 
AND KELIGION — HIS BEOTHER YIELDS TO HIS ABGTTMENTS WITH 
SOME PAETICTTLAR EXCEPTIONS — CHRYSAL CHANGES HIS SERVICE 

' This short but distinct view of the present situation of the affairs 
of Europe must convince you that a general peace must soon be 
concluded, the parties that would not being able to continue the 
war much longer ; and therefore we must be speedy in the execution 
•of our designs, or the opportunity will be lost, for it would be im- 
possible to make even the pride of Spain, or the avarice of Portugal 
take the measures we want at a time when England is disengaged 
irom other enemies, I have drawn this sketch to show you that 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 249 

our designs are not rashly undertaken, but the result of the deepest 
knowledge and insight into things. This must remove every scruple 
that may arise from doubts of success. But there is one thing 
more which must be explained to remove prejudices of another 
nature, which may perhaps represent our undertaking in a wrong light 
to you, and this is to evince the justice of it, and the means designed 
to accomplish its success. Of this matter you must not pretend to 
judge by the vulgar rules obtruded by design upon the ignorance of 
the world, and which no wise man observes, who has it in his power 
to break them with impunity. Man is thrown into this world by 
nature to obtain his own happiness by every means within his 
power. This is too sublime a truth for vulgar knowledge, as it 
would put an end to the delusion by which the wise few keep the 
herd of mankind in ignorahce and subjection. 

' But that it is really the truth, and as such made the rule of 
action by all the states and princes in the world, will not be denied, 
nor even doubted by anyone who has considered the systems of 
policy and government which are, and ever have been, established 
by them. 

' For if it was not an undoubted maxim that power constitutes 
the rule of justice, how inconsistent would be the actions of all man- 
kind ! How could a state devise laws to punish the man with death, 
who goes into his neighbour's field and steals his ox, and, at the same 
time, sends armies to invade, spoil, and depopulate the territories 
of their neighbours ? How could a poor pirate be hanged for rob- 
bing a single ship, and fleets immediately after sent avowedly to 
destroy the whole trade of the same nation ? If a state of war is 
alleged, that is the very imposition of which I spoke. Every man 
has as good a natural right to declare war with his neighbour as 
the state he lives in has with another state, and every right that is 
not natural is a usurpation, and void. This is the true philoso- 
phy of life, stripped of the idle dreams of enthusiasm, and selfish 
misrepresentations of design. 

' Aa for religion, look over the whole race of mankind, and try 
if you can find one who practises what he professes. This is an 
incontestible proof, that none believe it, as it is also, that there is 
no necessity they should, else would the want of faith and obedience 
be punished by that power which is thought to enjoin them ; whereas 
on the contrary, it is always most successful, as it affords means 
which those restraints forbid. I observed that in the beginning of 
our conversation on this subject you seemed shocked at my men- 
tioning the necessity of removing the persons who oppose our 
designs, and particularly when I said the Spaniard had swallowed 
his death. But this is all prejudice, and want of extending your 
view beyond the surface of things. For how much better is the 
method we take of striking the single person against whom our de- 
sign is levelled, than that pursued, not only without reproach, 
but even encouraged by applause, of involving the innocent with 
the guilty (innocent, I mean, with respect to us), and laying waste 
"whole nations to bring a prince to death ? How much better would 
it have been for this court to have removed the King of Bulgaria 
by poison or a dagger, than to have destroyed millions, as they have 



250 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

done, in the pursuit of hia death, by this destructive war ? This 
is demonstration ; this is conviction to him who dares open his 
eyes to see it ! judge now of our undertaking by this invariable 
system, and show me one objection to it '. 

This long dissertation was not delivered at one time ; it was the 
substance of many conversations, by which the Jesuit so wrought 
upon his brother, that he resigned himself wholly to his disposal, 
and entered sincerely into his designs. The only objection he 
made (and that was not urged against him) was, to being any way 
concerned in the compendious warfare of the society, the prejudice 
of education being still so strong with him, that he could not yet 
abstract things so nicely as to consider assassination in any other 
light than as a crime. 

I had been in this state of speculation about a week, for my 
master never stirred out, as he made sickness hia excuse for quitting 
the service, when his brother, having occasion for some money to 
send to Lisbon on the grand design, the bag in which I was, was 
ordered for that service, the brothers having joined their fortunes, 
as well as their endeavours, in the promotion of it. I now changed 
my master again, and set out for Lisbon in the possession of one 
of the society, who was to deliver us to a particular person there. 



CHAPTER XXDC 

CHEYSAL PKOPOSES A POLITICAL SCHEME THAT WILL NEVEE TAXE 
PLACE, TO SETTLE THE PEACE OF OBEMANY — A SHORT VIEW OF 
THE WAR BETWEEN THE FKBNCH AND ENGLISH, WITH THE MOTIVES 
OF THE FOEMBE FOE TEANSPBERING THE SEAT OF IT INTO GERMANY 
— INSIDIOUS AMBITION MEETS A JTTST DISAPPOINTMENT 

In so complicated an undertaking, there necessarily mxist be a 
great number of engines at work, and in many different places, 
upon the regularity and agreement of whose motions depends the 
success of the whole. The person by whom I was sent to Lisbon 
was not to go directly thither, but to take a large circuit, and 
call at several places on his way, to see that all moved in concert, 
and everything was properly prepared for the main action, that 
precipitancy should not defeat the design a second time. 

It is not necessary to recount all the circumstances of this tour, 
which, for the most part, were no more than the common occurrences 
upon such occasions. I shall therefore take notice only of such few, 
as, for their singularity and importance, may deserve attention. 
As to the secret motive of the journey (for that alleged was only to 
inspect, as usual, into the private concerns of the order), it has been 
already so well explained, that it is sufficient to say everything 
exceeded expectation, and gave the strongest assurance of success. 

As the war had overspread all Germany, it was impossible for my 
master to avoid falling in with some of the armies, which were then 
in the field ; but this gave him no concern ; he was blessed with one 
of those ready geniuses that can put on any appearance so naturally 



ADVENTVBES OF A GUINEA 25? 

aa to deceive suspicion itself ; besides, that he had passports, under 
one character or another, from every power engaged in the war. 
The first event worth remark that occurred to us (for the nature of 
war and its operations in general have been sufficiently explained 
before) was in the army of the allies of the King of Bulgaria, into 
which my master entered, in the character rf a Jewish asc-nt. This 
army was composed of the forces of several of the smaller German 
states, who were hired by the English to defend their own liberties, a 
smallnumber of Bulgarians, and a considerable body ofBnglish troops. 

You are surprised to hear that people should require to be paid 
to fight for themselves in so interesting a cause ; but so it is, and 
so it will continue to be, while a number of little sovereigns assume 
the state, and live in the luxury of the greatest kings ; for, as their 
own revenues are insufficient to support the expense, they will be 
ready to sell themselves to the first that offers, for an immediate 
supply, without looking forward to, or regarding the consequences 
of such inconsiderate, such wretched venality. They have, indeed, 
this excuse, which the general depravity of mankind seems to justify 
their alleging, that, as their ruin would involve greater states in 
some inconveniences, they find these will rather submit to this gross 
imposition, than suffer them to be swallowed up by others, who 
would grow too powerful by this accretion. 

Base as such a prostitution of principle must appear, it has been 
so successfully practised (and this not by those poor princes alone, 
the Austrians and Spaniards occasionally, and the Dutch constantly 
availing themselves of it), that England in particular has been drawn 
in to bear a part, from which, by her situation, she seemed exempted 
by Heaven in every war that has distracted Europe for some ages, 
to an expense of blood and treasure, which is already severely felt,. 
and must, if pursued much further, involve it in the very ruin it 
thus strives to avert. 

There is one, and one only remedy for this ; but this is attended 
with difficulties, which will prevent its being applied, till the evil 
itself shall work its own redress, a period that, to human foresight, 
seems not far distant at present. This is taking away the power 
of these petty tyrants, who disgrace the name of sovereign, and 
uniting their territories into one state, of strength sufficient ta 
support itself. For, while those princes have any power left, they 
will, consistently with their present systems of policy, oppose this ; 
but the manner in which they have conducted themselves in this 
war, if not speedily altered, will so effectually reduce that power,, 
that they will be no longer able to resist, but must passively submit 
to the dominion of whoever will undertake their support, an event 
as much to be desired by their own immediate subjects, as by the 
other states, which thus suffer by their absurd and iniquitous con- 
duct, as the severest form of one government is preferable to the 
capricious rule of several tyrants, whose poverty and pride put 
them upon every method of making the most of their wretched 
people, without any regard to the established rules of justice, or 
even the common rights of humanity. The usual objection 
to this expedient, of its overturning the liberty of Germany, 
which they make so great a noise about, ia of no weight, that boasted. 



252 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

liberty being, at preseat, no more than the power of those sovereigns 
to treat their subjects as they please, with impunity, the restraining 
of which within just bounds would really be establishing, not 
overturning, the liberty of mankind. 

As to the war in which the English were at this time engaged, 
it was not to be ascribed solely to this cause. The insatiable am- 
bition of the French had prompted them to strive for the enlarge- 
ment of their territories in America, where they already possessed 
a hundred times more than they were able to make any use of. 
The possessions of the English in that part of the globe were also 
uselessly extensive. However, the boundaries having been settled 
between them, usurpations were not to be tolerated, consistently 
with the honour of the state ; besides, if they were taken no notice 
of in the beginning, they might, in time, possibly be extended to the 
profitable and inhabited parts of their dominions. On this account 
a war was kindled between those powerful and jealous neighbours, 
the seat of which was properly transferred by the English to the 
place in which the attack had been made upon them, where the 
superiority of their naval force gave them such advantages, that 
they- not only recovered the places which had been taken from 
them, but also absolutely overturned the French power in those 
boundless regions, and pursued their conquests in every other part 
of the world where the French had made settlements, to the utter 
ruin of their naval power and trade.^ 

As it was impossible for the French to recover these losses directly, 
and the ambition and avarice which first gave occasion to the war 
was strengthened by pride, to prevent their making the concessions 
on which they might have obtained peace, they removed the seat 
of the war into Germany, and attacked certain powers there, with 
whom England was so inseparably connected, that it could not avoid 
flying to their assistance, in expectation of having all their own 
losses restored, in return for those territories, if they could get 
possession of them, which the number of their own land-forces, and 
the alliances they knew they could make among the venal Germans, 
gave them hopes of accomplishing, a scheme not ill founded, as 
every motive of honour and justice obliged the English to protect 
and indemnify an innocent people, attacked thus solely upon their 
account. As the French, at the same time that they made this 
attack, had also entered into the confederacy against the King of 
Bulgaria, as has been already mentioned, this necessarily cemented 
the alliance between him and England still closer, and made him 
join as many of his troops as he could possibly spare to the army 
raised by the English, upon this indispensable occasion, from which 
conduct he received this immediate advantage, that his army 
engaged the attention of the French, and prevented their joining 
their forces to the number of his enemies, besides a considerable 
assistance in money, to enable him to support his own troops. It 
was necessary for me to give you this short explanation of the nature 

' Great Britain took but a secondary part in the war in Europe ; but 
at sea won the victories of Lagoa and Quiberon ; in India, those of 
Plassey and Wandebaah ; and in America, Quebec. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 253; 

of this war, though such digressionB are contrary to my design and 
inclination, that you may be able to form a proper judgment of the 
extraordinary occurrences I am going to relate to you. 

The army through which my master was obliged to pass, as I 
have said, though paid by England, and the flower of it composed 
of Britons, was commanded by a German general,^ in disgraceful 
acknowledgment of the want of military merit equal to such a- 
charge in the natives, though to palliate the disgrace, and satisfy 
the jealousy of the English, they had the imaginary privilege of 
being immediately under a commander of their own,^ and subject 
only to their own laws, in all things, except the operations of the 
war, when they were of necessity to obey the German commander- 
in-chief. Such distinctions create animosities, often more prejudicial 
than the inconveniences they were meant to prevent. Accustomed 
to live in the most luxurious plenty and ease, and valuing themselves 
upon the riches of their country, which supported the whole army,, 
the English found fault with the victuals and accommodations pro- 
vided for them, and treated the German troops, with whom they 
were joined, with contempt, who in return affected to despise their 
delicacy, and took the advantage of their want of laiowledge of the 
language of the coimtry, to give such impressions of them as pre- 
vented the people from bringing them in provisions with that care 
and cheerfulness which their prompt and generous payment de- 
served, by which means they suffered the inconveniences of scarcity 
and dearth, while the others abounded. Though such feuds among 
the men threatened the most dangerous consequences, those whose 
authority ought to put a stop to them were far from striving to- 
restore that harmony, which alone could give success to their 
designs. The commander-in-chief either overlooked, as beneath 
his notice, or was prevented by his attention to the military opera- 
tions of the campaign, from taking notice of those misunderstand- 
ings ; and the English commander, ambitious probably of the 
supreme command which he imagined he might easily obtain, if he 
could make the other sufficiently obnoxious to the English, inflamed 
them by every artifice he could use. 

Nor did he stop here. Whenever he was summoned in conse- 
quence of his high station — for he was second in command of the 
whole army — to attend councils for concerting the operations of 
the war, he made it his constant practice to contradict whatever 
was proposed by the commander, and to treat all his schemes with 
contempt, without ever attempting to offer anything himself in 
their place ; and thus he did the more effectually, as he was a ready 
and powerful speaker, and perfectly versed in the theory of war ; 
whereas the commander was a thoughtful reserved man of few 
words, whose whole life had been spent in action, and who could 
more easily have executed than explained his designs. The conse- 
quences of this disagreement were very detrimental while it lasted, 
and must in the end have proved fatal to the army, had not the 
German, without ever attempting to discuss the affair with his 
wordy antagonist, written directly to the British sovereign, to 

' Prince Ferdinand of Brunswick. ^ The late Duke of Marlborough.. 



■254 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

inform him that he was so constantly opposed in all his designs by 
the English general, that it was impossible for him to do anything 
of moment ; wherefore he desired either that he might have leave 
to resign his command, or have his authority freed from this vexa- 
tious and dangerous opposition, concluding his letter with these 
remarkable words : — 

' Though in a multitude of counsellors there is said to be much 
safety, yet, in the operations of war, if many are privy to the counsels 
which direct them, there never can be that secrecy, agreement, 
a,nd dispatch, which are indispensably necessary to success '. 

The monarch, who was no stranger to the captious and unquiet 
disposition of the English general, was sensible of the justice of the 
German's complaint, and immediately removed the cause of it, by 
giving him an unlimited power to carry on the war as it should 
appear best to his own private judgment, without consulting v.ith, 
or being liable to be opposed by any other person. It may be 
thought that the entire removal of the English general would have 
been a readier and more effectual method ; but the nature of the 
English government made this not quite so proper, as he was de- 
scended from one of the most illustrious and powerful families in 
the kingdom, and a member of the senate, in which his talent for 
speaking gave him such weight that it was judged best tb avoid 
giving him cause for exerting his abilities in opposition to the 
measures of the government, by removing him from an employment 
which he had solicited with aJl his power and interest, especially 
as the immense expense of this army began to make the people 
uneasy, and ready to receive any impression against it. But the 
event showed that this caution was ineffectual, and productive of 
greater evils than that which it was made use of to avoid. 

Accordingly, from the time the German general received this 
enlargement of his authority, he planned his schemes without ever 
consultiug any person, or even communicating the least hint of 
them, till the very moment of their being put in execution, when he 
sent his orders with the peremptory precision of an absolute sover- 
eign. This was a severe stroke upon the English general, who had 
been accustomed to canvass the very commands of his king, and, 
therefore, could badly brook such subordination to a person whom 
he affected to hold in contempt, for the inferiority of his under- 
standing. However, as it was in vain to dispute, he obeyed in 
sullen silence, resolving to seize the first opportunity of defeating 
his measures, since he could no longer disconcert his councils, and to 
take hold of the least miscarriage to attack him in the British senate 
at the end of the campaign, where he doubted not but he should 
be able to represent things in such a light as to get him removed 
irom the command, which must, of course, devolve upon himself. 

This account my master received from a Jesuit the very night 
he arrived at the camp, who, to ingratiate the society the more 
effectually with the French king, and secure his interest and protec- 
tion, should any unforeseen accident defeat their design, had entered 
into the service of the English general as his valet de chambre., for 
the better opportunity of discovering the schemes of the allies, 
which he gave constant intelligence of to their enemies. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 265 



CHAPTER XXX 

A DEBP-LAH) SCHEME DISCONCERTED BY AN ACCIDENTAL VICTORY — 
TKBACHEKY FALLS INTO THE PIT IT HAD DUG EOK ANOTHER — THB 
TRUE WAY TO SATISFY ENGLISH SOLDIERS — THE DISGRACED COM- 
MANDER'S MOTIVES FOR APPEALING PROM THB WILL OF HIS SOVER- 
EIGN TO A PUBLIC TRIAL — HIS HOPES ARE AGAIN DISAPPOINTED, 
AND HE CONFIRMS HIS OWN RUIN 

The very next morning after my master's arrival in the camp, an 
event happened that astonished all Europe.' The French army was 
so greatly superior to that of the allies, that the general was obliged 
to be entirely on the defensive ; nor had his consummate experience 
and indefatigable assiduity been able to prevent their taking several 
advantages by their numbers, and forcing him to a retreat that 
seemed to threaten the loss of the country he was to defend. But, 
through all these difficulties, he persisted steadily in his own plan, 
and preserved his attention, cool and ready to take any advantage 
that might offer. 

Accordingly, that morning, upon notice of some motions of the 
enemy that indicated a design of attacking him, he ordered a small 
but select body of forces, almost all of them English, to advance 
towards them, and receive their charge, while he should make a 
proper disposition of the rest of his army to give the enemy battle, 
or make a secure retreat, as he should see expedient. But the un- 
exampled behaviour of those few brave troops soon changed the 
face of the affair, for, not satisfied with repelling the attack of the 
main body of the enemy's army, they intrepidly advanced to charge 
them in their turn, which they did with such irresistible valour, 
that the French were thrown into confusion, and obliged to abandon 
the field of battle. 

1 have said before that the transactions in a battle are so com- 
plicated and so confounded with each other that it is impossible 
to reduce them into the regularity of a satisfactory description. 
I shall, therefore, enter no farther into the account of this, than just 
as it concerns the conduct of the English general, which I had a 
sufficient opportunity of observing, my master having placed 
himself near his person, in company with his friend. 

The moment the commander-in-chief received an account of the 
unexpected effects of the valour of the troops which he had ordered 
to march towards the enemy, he sent to the English general,^ who 

1 The battle of Minden [1759], in which the French under Broglie 
and Contades were defeated by the allies under Ferdinand of Brunswick. 

2 Lord George Sacfcville [1716-85], afterwards Viscount Saokville, 
sou of the Duke of Dorset. He was commander of the British contingent 
at Minden, and his nervousness or jealousy, as related, saved the French 
army from complete destruction. He was found guilty of disobedience, 
declared unfit to serve the Crown in any military capacity, and in spite 
of great family influence was thoroughly disgraced. One of the griev- 
ances against Bute in the following reign was the cordial reception given 
at court to his friend Sackville. 



256 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

commanded all the horse in that wing to advance and sustain them. 
It is impossible to describe his situation when a messenger from the 
general informed him that a part of the army was engaged in the 
plain that lay before him, and ordered him to march the cavalry 
under his command to their assistance. Surprise and resentment 
at such a measure's being taken, without his having the least pre- 
vious notice of it, almost deprived him of his reason ; but he re- 
covered himself in a moment, and drawing his sword with an air of 
indignation and discontent, was just preparing to obey the orders 
he had received, when another messenger arrived, and delivered 
them, but with some variation. This the general instantly perceived, 
and resolved to take advantage of, to justify his obeying neither, 
in hopes, by that means, to accomplish his scheme of defeating the 
measures of his commander, without any regard to the consequences 
that must attend such a conduct. Accordingly, instead of advanc- 
ing, as he had before prepared to do, he entered into a debate with 
the messengers about this difference in their orders, and, finding 
each positive in those he delivered, he coolly determined to go 
himself to the general for an explanation of them ; by trifling away 
the critical moment in which manner he expected that the part of the 
allied army which was engaged would be beaten for want of proper 
and timely support, when he might have the glory of covering their 
retreat, and saving the whole army from a defeat, and the pleasure 
of effectually ruining the character of the general, by attributing 
the whole misfortune to his not taking the advice of his council, 
or even commxmicating his designs to them in proper time. 

Such a scheme was but too likely to succeed, had not the un- 
paralleled bravery of the troops, whom he thus designed to have 
sacrificed to his ambition and resentment, disappointed it beyond 
all human probability, as I have observed before, and actually 
beaten the whole army of the enemy, though ten times their number, 
out of the field, while he was taking advantage of a pretext to 
abandon them to ruin.' 

The situation of his mind when, upon his coming up to the general, 
he heard the victory was won, may be better conceived than de- 
scribed. The cool, distant reception he met with gave him notice of 
the storm which was ready to burst over his head, and he saw that 
the scheme he had laid so deeply to perpetrate the ruin of another 
had inevitably worked his own, as the very accusations which he 
had intended to bring against his general would now recoil upon 
himself with tenfold force. According to his fears, the general 
next morning publicly passed an implicit censure on his conduct, 
which he saw received with such universal approbation, that he 
thought it proper to resign his command, for fear of personal insult 
from the incensed soldiers, and return home, where he did not doubt 
but the interest of his family and his own eloquence and address 
would vindicate his character, at least, if not still accomplish his 

1 The second line of cavalry, under the Marquis of Granby, made a 
vigorous charge, though too late to complete the rout of the French, who 
were, however, afterwards cut up by 10,000 men sent by Ferdinand 
against their communications. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 257 

deaigna against the general. Though I lost sight of him at this time, 
yet, as I had an opportunty afterwards of coming to the knowledge 
of the whole affair, I think it better, and less trouble to us both, 
to continue the account here, than break my narrative with it in 
another place. 

The first construction which was put upon his conduct was that 
it proceeded from cowardice, an opinion which the cruelty of his 
temper to those under his command gave no small weight to, from 
this generally just maxim, that the cruel are always cowards, 
and which many insignificant parts of his former conduct were 
alleged to confirm. But I have shown that it sprang from another 
much less justifiable cause ; I say less justifiable, as cowardice is 
a natural infirmity, which a man is no more accountable for 
than for his being born blind or lame ; but such a scheme as 
his was a premeditated crime, and aggravated with the blackest 
circumstances. 

The first consequence of his quitting the army was a perfect 
harmony between the English and Germans, the glory they had 
acquired upon this occasion raising the spirits of the former so high 
that they thought no more of the inconveniences they had com- 
plained of before, but readily followed the example of their new 
commander, 1 whom they all loved, and entered into friendship with 
their fellow-soldiers, as if there had never been any jealousy between 
them, who, on the other hand, were so struck with their gallant 
behaviour, and so sensible of the advantages gained by it, that they 
no longer accused them of improper delicacy, or strove to do them 
ill offices with the natives of the country as before. But what 
completed the happiness of the English, was the commander-in- 
chief's indulging their natural thirst for glory under their present 
commander, by giving them the post of honour upon all occasions, 
and taking public notice of their valour, the honour of which they 
esteemed a sufficient recompense for the severest fatigues and 
dangers, an indulgence which it was not in his power to give before, 
as their late commander had always opposed their being exposed 
to danger, out of an afiected regard to them, as if they were of 
greater consequence than the rest of the army, or joined it only to 
make a figure, and not to do any service. 

As soon as the late general arrived in England, his sovereign, 
who had been informed of the whole affair, immediately deprived 
him of his many very lucrative and honourable employments, and 
dismissed him his service, an instance of clemency which few other 
princes would have shown, and which regard to the merits of his 
illustrious ancestors alone procured for ham. But so far was he 
from having a proper sense of this lenity, or acquiescing in the 
sentence of his sovereign, that he loudly asserted his being wronged, 
and demanded a trial to vindicate his character, with all the assurance 
of conscious innocence. 

This was the highest insult that could be offered to a prince, as it 
impeached his justice, and questioned his power in the tenderest 

'■ The Marquis of Granby, who also led the British troops at the 
battle of Wellinghauaen, where they greatly distinguished themselves. 



258 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

point. However, he scorned to take any advantage of it, but, 
waiving every personal resentment, condescended to grant the trial 
demanded ; but with this express declaration that, as it was at the 
instance of the party, and without any legal necessity, he should 
abide by the sentence of his judges, be it what it would, as he would 
never interfere further. But this declaration was of little weight, 
for the general was well advised before he solicited the trial, that, 
according to the laws of the country, he was exempted from the 
danger of it, by his being deprived of all his military employments, 
as they only made a Briton subject to military law, by which he 
must be tried ; and this exemption was the real reason of his being 
so eager for a trial. But, though his life might be out of danger by 
this subterfuge, the trial completed the ruin of his character beyond 
all possibility of recovery, as, upon the most impartial examination, 
his neglect of the orders of his commander, and the pernicious con- 
sequences of it, by the loss of so favourable an opportunity of 
entirely ruining the army of the enemy, and, perhaps, putting an 
end to the war, by that means appeared so plainly, that the justice 
of his being dismissed the service was not only asserted, but he was 
also declared incapable of ever being admitted into it again ; and 
thus he fell, a second time, a victim to his own schemes. As to 
the victory which had been the immediate cause of his ruin, as soon 
as the circumstances of it, as related here, came to be known to the 
world, the general lost the glory which, in the first emotions of joy 
and admiration, had been so lavishly heaped upon him for it ; and 
it was justly ascribed to accident, as human foresight could not 
possibly have formed any plan for such an improbable instance of 
bravery as that which obtained it. 



CHAPTER XXXI 

CHEYSAL AEBrVBS AT BRUSSELS — THE QEEAT SOITBCE OF JESUITICAL 
INI'LUBNCE — ANECDOTES OF A MAN OF PLEASURE AND A LADY OF 
FASHION — THBUt HISTORY CONCLUDED IN OHAEACTER 

As soon as the confusion of such an event was a little over, and my 
master thought he could travel in safety, he quitted the camp of 
the conquerors, and, throwing off the character of a Jew, whioh, 
as I said, he had borne there, pursued his journey to Brussels in 
his own, where he was to receive further instructions ; for, though 
the great design was carried on by every member of the society, 
yet the real secret of it was known only to a few of the heads, whose 
orders the rest obeyed with an implicit exactness, fidelity, and zeal, 
never equalled by the subjects of any sovereign upon earth, since 
the days of the old man of the mountain. 

It was some time before these instructions arrived, which gave 
me an opportunity of learning the intrigues of that debauched, 
gaudy, insignificant court, by my master's intimacy with the con- 
fessor of the governor, who, besides the advantage of that character 
to gain information, was himself a man of pleasiire in the most 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 259 

extensive sense of the phrase, and utterly free from ewry restraint 
of principle that could oppose its gratification, though he had the 
address to maintain the dignity of his station, by his secrecy and 
regard to propriety of appearance. 

There is nothing that contributes so much to the influence which 
the Jesuits possess over the minds of the people, as their knowledge 
of the secret history of their lives. To acquire this, they stop at 
nothing ; they assume all characters, mix in all companies, and 
enter into every scene of vicious pleasure, where reserve is thrown 
off, and the whole heart appears without disguise. Such an oppor- 
tunity of information, therefore, was not to be missed. Accord- 
ingly, the evening after my master's arrival, he went with his friend 
to court, where they had a liberty of placing themselves in a con- 
venient situation to see all the company, and make their remarks 
without danger of being overheard. Such as were merely political 
I shall omit, as I am sick of such a stupid subject, and only take 
notice of those which may extend your knowledge of the human 
heart. 

' Observe that little, mean-looking, ill-favoured person ', said the 
confessor, continuing a conversation, the beginning of which I need 
not repeat, ' who acts as master of the ceremonies. You see his 
feeble frame is quite worn out with debauchery, and he nods over 
the grave in anticipated old age ; yet still he affects an air of 
levity and youth, and strives to inflame others by his discourse, 
to vices which he is no longer able to participate of himself ; but 
this is all grimace, and he assumes this appearance of gaiety, 
to hide the gloomy discontent and remorse that prey upon his 
heart. 

' There is something so particular in the story of this man, that 
it may be worth while to give you a short sketch of it. He is a native 
of a neighbouring country, where his father, from the lowest state 
of poverty, amassed such wealth in trade, that his vanity prompted 
him to get his family ennobled, to hide the meanness of his original. 
There is something so absurdly wrong in purchased nobility, that 
it always turns the heads of the purchasers, perhaps in just retribu- 
tion for so flagrant an abuse of an institution meant as a reward 
for merit. The ennobled man lived not to show the truth of this 
observation ; but his sons abundantly made up for that, the elder 
lavishing his wealth on every kind of expensive vanity, and the 
younger the person you see, glorying in every kind of debauchery, 
as if vice and folly were the prerogatives of their honour. 

' In the course of a life of pleasure, he contracted an acquaintance 
with that lady whom you see at the upper end of the room. Though 
nature had never meant him for a man of intrigue, and debauchery 
had exhausted even the little powers she gave, he thought it would 
have been inconsistent with his character of a man of pleasure not 
to commence an affair of gallantry with so deplorable a person. 
Accordingly, as she happened to be married, he directly cultivated 
an intimacy with her husband, into whose unguarded confidence 
he so far insinuated himself, as to receive many acts of friendship 
from him. To a man who had any sense of honour or honesty, 
this would have been an irresistible reason for desisting from hia 



260 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

baae design ; but he was above such vulgar restraints, and genteelly 
took the opportunity of the husband's friendship to debauch the 
virtue of the wife. 

' Nothing but the most abandoned profligacy in the woman could 
have given success to such an attempt, as the husband exceeded 
the paramour in every natural endowment of mind and person, 
beyond every degree of comparison ; but the caprice of vicious 
inclination is not to be accounted for ; it will loath the moat 
exquisite delicacies, and sate itself on garbage. 

' They had not continued their commerce long, when their in- 
discretion betrayed them. It is impossible to describe the astonish- 
ment and rage of the injured husband at the discovery. Had it been 
possible, he would have doubted his senses, which were witnesses 
to his disgrace. In the first emotions of his rage, he was going to 
break in upon them, and take the revenge which his superior strength 
amply put in his power ; but a moment's reflection showed him the 
folly of such an action, and determined him to take the safer and 
more severe revenge of the law. 

' Accordingly, he withdrew without being perceived by them, 
and bringing some of his servants to testify their crimes, as soon as 
he had secured the proof necessary to obtain his satisfaction, entered 
the room in the height of their dalUance, and coolly telling them 
that it would be proper for them to choose another scene for their 
pleasure beside his house, retired, and left them to their meditations. 

' This conduct convinced them of his design, and that they had 
not a moment to lose to avoid some of the most disagreeable con- 
sequences of it. As soon, therefore, as they recovered from the 
first impressions of their astonishment, they directly departed 
together, and concealing the place of their retirement, for fear of a 
pursuit, quitted the territories of the state as soon as they possibly 
could. 

' But they might have spared themselves that trouble. The 
revenge which the husband sought was of another nature ; he 
directly instituted a suit at law against them, by which, as he had 
sufficient proof of their guilt, he obtained a divorce from his wife, 
and such damages against the violater of his bed, as made it im- 
possible for him ever to return to his country, without he designed 
to languish out the rest of his days in a prison. 

' The lovers, in the meantime, were very far from being happy 
in the uninterrupted enjoyment of each other. Variety and the 
mystery of intrigue were all that tempted them to the correspond- 
ence at first ; and now that these were lost, reflection opened then- 
eyes to the consequences of their folly, and made them look on each 
other as the authors of their mutual ruin. Such thoughts soon 
cool the most ardent love ; what effect, then, must they have upon 
persons in their situation ? However, necessity obUged them to 
conceal their sentiments, and, as soon as the divorce gave them 
liberty, they married, to preserve the appearance of a passion they 
never felt, and obtain a support from their families, which they 
could not have expected on any other terms. 

' When this was done, and that necessity removed, the aversion 
which they had long entertained broke out in the most violent 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 261 

manner. They lived in a state of perpetual warfare, in which the 
wife threw ofi all regard to decency, even so far as to take advantage 
of her superior strength, and frequently beat her feeble husband. 
Observe that sear on his upper lip ; the third day of their happy 
marriage he received that mark of her rage from the heel of her 
slipper, with which she also beat out two of his teeth, whose place 
he now supplies with artificial ones. 

' But the viciousness of her inclination, which first brought him 
into this wretched situation, released him from it sooner than he 
deserved.' They had fixed their residence here, where the prince 
soon happened to take a liking to her, the first overture of which 
she eagerly embraced, and completed the infamy of her character 
by quitting her second husband to become his mistress, in which 
station you behold her at present. 

' Though such a disgrace seemed to be a judicial retaliation upon 
the husband for his own base crime, he was insensible of it, and 
instead of taking advantage of his deliverance, and retiring to some 
place where his shame was not known, meanly accepted of the 
employment in which you see him, and submitted to be the slave 
of her vice and insolence. 

' But though his hatred for her, and passion for the pomp and 
dissipation of a court make him brave, the infamy of such a situa- 
tion, sickness, the constant consequence of debauchery, the faithful 
monitor of guilt, has awoke his conscience to a sense of the crime 
that has sunk him so low and raised a remorse that wastes his life, 
though he thus absurdly strives to drown its voice in the noise and 
vanity of vice ' 



CHAPTER XXXII 

THE CONFESSOR ETTTEETAmS CHKYSAL's MASTEE VSTITH ANOTHER 
NOT TTNCOMMON CHAEACTEE — THE MODERN METHOD OF EEPAIRINa 
A BROKEN FORTUNE — THE GENERAL CONSEQUENCE OF FEMALE 
AMBITION — A CURIOUS AMOUR COMMENCED IN AN ODD MANNER, 
AND CARRIED ON IN AS ODD A PLACE 

My master was beginning to make some obvious reflections on this 
account, but his friend soon diverted his attention to another 
object. 

' Observe ', said he, poiating to a person who bore all the external 
marks of nobility in his habit and appearance, ' a striking proof of 
the insignificance of being born to wealth and honours. Who that 
sees the despicable figure which this man makes here, a voluntary 
exile from his own country, where his rank and fortune placed him 
in the most exalted and advantageous light, can ever throw away 
a moment's thought on heaping np riches, or obtaining honours to 
perpetuate his name and aggrandize his family, the folly and pro- 
fusion of a single member of which may thus disappoint his hopes, 
and make his very virtues an aggravation of his own degeneracy 
and reproach ? 



262 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

' In a rank scarce inferior to that of a sovereign, and possessed of a 
fortune sufficient to support it with dignity to himself and benefit 
to the community, did this man enter into life ; but a few years 
of the dissipation of what is falsely called a life of pleasure distressed 
his fortune and debased his principles to such a degree, that he was 
obliged, and not ashamed, to have recourse to the method of a 
mercenary marriage, to retrieve his affairs, and enable him to sup- 
port the external appearance of his character. The constant conse- 
quences of these marriages might be sufficient to open the eyes of 
the unhappy victims of them to such a dangerous folly ; but vanity 
possesses so absolute an empire over the female heart, that nothing 
can prevent the gratification of it. 

' The female whom this person pitched upon, as proper for his 
purpose, on account of her immense wealth, was destitute of every 
charm of mind and person to attract or preserve love or esteem. 
But few are sensible of their own deficiencies, or can bear to be 
informed of them. On his making the first overture to her, all her 
real friends took the alarm ; they drew his character in proper 
colours ; they showed her that necessity, not inclination, was the 
motive of his addresses, and they laid the inevitable consequences 
of a connection with such a person before her in the strongest light ; 
but all was in vain. Her heart was fixed upon rank and pre- 
cedence, and, so she could obtain them, she left the rest to chance. 
Accordingly, as she was absolutely her own mistress, the match 
was soon made, to the present satisfaction of both parties. He got 
her fortune to pay his debts and pursue his pleasures, and she rode 
in a coach with coronets, and was called her grace. 

' But this mutual happiness did not last long. The moment he 
got possession of her fortune, all his wishes were fulfilled, and, as he 
had nothing further to expect, he did not think it necessary for him 
to continue any appearances of love, or even complaisance, for an 
object really disagreeable to him. Accordingly, the very morning 
after his marriage, he set out upon a party of pleasure, with some of 
his former companions, and left the bride by herself to receive the 
compliments, and go through the farce usual on such occasions. 
Though such behaviour must appear base and ungenerous to the 
last degree, yet she had no right to complain of it, as she could not 
expect any other from his known character and motives for marriage. 
She therefore put the best face on the matter, and whether from 
intoxication at her elevation, or indifference to him, seemed to be 
insensible of the slight, and went through the ceremony and parade 
with all the appearance of pleasure and content, leaving him to 
pursue his own inclination, without molestation or complaint. 

' But this calm did not hold long. As soon as new dignity lost 
the charms of novelty, nature awoke, as from a dream, and convinced 
her that something more than empty show was necessary to human 
happiness. But, alas ! this conviction came too late, and all her 
expostulations were as ineffectual to induce the tenderness or esteem 
of her husband, as those of her friends had been with her, to prevent 
her marrjang him. On the contrary, they turned his indifference 
into aversion, and made him treat her with indignity and contempt, 
insulting her deformity, and ridiculing the vanity that had prompted 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 263 

her to sacrifice her fortune for a bare title. Hard aa such, treatment 
was to be submitted to, she had no redress, but was obliged to bear 
it in silence, without even the poor consolation of compassion to 
mitigate her sufferings. At length a further aggravation of her 
wrongs gave her the pleasure of revenge, by c&iving him again 
into the distresses from which her folly had relieved him. 

' In the pursuit of pleasure, to which he had sacrificed his character 
and fortune, he never had even the excuse of a refined taste or par- 
ticular passion to palliate his folly, but blindly followed the example 
of his companions, or was a slave to every gross impulse of his own 
caprice, without the least notion of delicacy, or even decency to 
direct him. Aa he was strolling alone about his house one unhappy 
evening when he had no company to divert his thoughts, he hap- 
pened, just as it grew dark, to overhear two persons, a male and a 
female, in earnest conversation. Curiosity prompting him to 
listen, he soon discovered that love was the subject of their dis- 
course, in which the man, whom, by his voice, he knew to be one of 
his huntsman's helpers, was so successful, that he persuaded the fair 
one to promise him a meeting half an hour after in the dog-kennel. 

' Though the place of assignation might have deterred any person 
whose senses, as well as his inclinations, were not totally debauched, 
from attempting to supplant the happy lover, the novelty of such 
an adventure made his lordship overlook that, and resolve to 
supply his dog-boy's place. Accordingly, he retired, unperceived, 
and going to the stables, ordered him to be called, and sent him 
directly on a message some miles off, without giving him an oppor- 
tunity of letting his mistress know anything of the matter. As 
soon as the time appointed drew near, his lordship went to the 
agreeable scene, where the punctual fair one did not let him wait 
long. As he was about the dog-boy's size, and the place was quite 
dark, she never perceived the change put upon her, but lavished 
her caresses upon him with the greatest tenderness, vowing never 
more to have any correspondence with the pantry-boy or scullion, 
who, it seems, were the dog-boy's formidable rivals, but to be always 
constant to him alone, and took her leave of him, with a promise to 
meet him there at the same time next evening. 

' Disgusting as every circumstance of this afiair should have been, 
the oddity of it, with the pleasure of supplanting another, even so 
mean a person, and in so unworthy an object, made him determine 
to be punctual to her appointment. But then the difficulty was 
how to prevent his rival's traversing his design, for his delicacy was 
not in the least alarmed at the thoughts of his participating in her 
favours. He was also at a loss to know who the obliging female 
might be, for the darkness that concealed him was equally favourable 
to her, and he was a stranger to her voice ; nor did he care to ask 
any questions, as that would betray his own imposture, and bring 
on an explanation that he did not desire, both as his greatest plea- 
sure was in the cheat, and the discovery might be attended with 
circumstances he should choose to avoid, in case the female was 
disagreeable to him. 

' To obviate all these inconveniences, he ordered his rival to 
attend him the moment he returned, when he gave him a letter to 



264 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

carry that instant to a gentleman who lived about twenty miles 
off, with directions to be back early the next day with an answer. 
This he said aloud, in hearing of all his servants, that, if his mistress 
should happen to hear of her lover's being sent from home, she 
might also have reason to expect his return time enough to keep 
the appointment ; but to prevent this he had desired the person 
to whom he wrote to keep the messenger, as if for an answer for the 
letter, two or three days, in which time he concluded he himself 
should be tired of his amour. 



CHAPTER XXXIII 

CONTINTJED : HIS LOEDSHIP'S SCHEME TO FLINO HIS RIVAL TJN- 
LTJCKXLY DISAPPOINTED — A DISAGBEEABLE MEETING OCCASIONS 
STRANGE DISCOVEBIES — WOMEN NEVER AT A LOSS — LAW OFTEN 
SPOILS SPORT 

' Pleased with the sagacity of this scheme, he waited for the next 
evening with an impatience that he did not often feel on such occa- 
sions ; but an unlucky accident disappointed his designs. The 
gentleman to whom he wrote the letter happened not to be at home, 
nor was expected for a day or two, wherefore, as his lord had ordered 
him to make haste back, he left the letter, and returned without 
any delay, perhaps not more in obedience to his orders than from 
hia impatience to retrieve the disappointment his desires had met 
by his absence the evening before. As soon as he alighted, there- 
fore, his first care was to find out his mistress, to tell her the reason 
of his disappointing her the evening before, and to make a new 
assignation for that ; but what was their mutual surprise when 
they came to compare notes ! As he insisted on his not having 
attended the appointment, she flew into a rage, and accused him 
of having betrayed her basely to some of his companions, and, as 
she positively asserted her having met some person there, he accused 
her with equal warmth of inconstancy, and sacrificing him to some 
of his rivals, on whom he vowed the severest vengeance, if he could 
ever find him out. 

' As this altercation was not carried on with much delicacy on 
either side, it soon produced an absolute rupture between the 
lovers, who separated with sentiments for each other very different 
from those with which they met. The dog-boy, in an hour or two, 
when his resentment cooled a little, recollected that it might be 
proper to let his lord know the success of his message, who sent 
for him into his presence directly, and being freed from his appre- 
hensions by hearing that he was but that moment returned, ordered 
him to set out again instantly, and deliver the letter to the gentle- 
man, wherever he was, and not return without an answer. 

' His orders were so urgent that the fellow did not dare to make 
the least delay ; but fortune, that seemed resolved to cross his 
lordship's designs, contrived it so, that he met the gentleman on 
his road, without having called at home, or received the letter that 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 265 

had been left for him. Upon the dog-boy's informing him of it, 
he concluded, aa he was much nearer to his lordship's than to his 
own house, that it was the readiest way for him to wait upon him 
directly without minding to send the man for the letter. Accord- 
ingly, he bade him turn back and ride on before him, to acquaint his 
lordship of hia coming. 

' Though it was late when he had set out the second time, he made 
such haste that he reached home just at the time of his lordship's 
appointment, when it unluckily coming into his head that his per- 
fidious mistress might possibly have taken the advantage of his 
absence to make another assignation in his dog-kennel, the fkst 
thing he did the moment he dismounted from his horse was to go 
there to see if anyone had invaded his territories. Nor was his 
suspicion disappointed ; for the fair one was so uneasy to unravel 
the mystery of the adventure of the evening before, that she punctu- 
ally attended her appointment, where she had not waited many 
minutes before her unknown lover arrived. The scene of their 
meeting was so dark, that it was impossible for either of them to 
know the other. However, she soon thought of a method to remedy 
this, which was to purloin something out of his pockets, by which 
she might discover who he was, without betraying herself ; for she 
soon found that he knew no more of her than she did of him. 

' She had just executed her design, and was taking her leave of 
her lover, when his jealous rival came upon them unawares, and 
overhearing their expressions of fondness, was so enraged that he 
resolved to take immediate revenge. Accordingly, he approached 
them without any noise, and turning the butt-end of his whip, aimed 
a stroke so unluckily, though at a venture, that it felled his lordship 
to the ground. The female, who instantly guessed what was the 
matter, took advantage of the darkness to make her escape, which 
she happily effected without any disaster, the dog-boy stumbling 
over his fallen adversary the first step he advanced to pursue her. 
His lordship, half recovered from the blow, laid hold of his anta- 
gonist, who, grappling with him directly, a battle ensued, in which 
nobility was so rudely handled that his lordship was obliged to 
declare himself, and cry out for quarter. It is easy to conceive 
the confusion of the conqueror upon this discovery. He instantly 
strove to disengage himself and make his escape, but his lordship 
held him fast, promising to forgive him, though, if he would have 
the discretion never to mention a syllable of the affair, and inform 
him who the female was with whom he had made the assignation 
to meet in this place the evening before. 

' These conditions were too easy not to be immediately complied 
with. He accordingly swore eternal secrecy, and readily told his 
lordship that the girl was no other than the kitchen-maid's daughter, 
who served as a scullion-wench under her mother. This discovery 
of his mistress's quality was almost as disagreeable to his lordship 
as the dog-boy's jealousy. However, he smothered his vexation, 
and stealing secretly into the house, that he might not be seen in 
such a condition, retired to his own apartment by himself, to change 
his clothes, and wash off the blood and dirt with which he was all 
over plentifully daubed. 



266 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

' As soon as he had set himself somewhat to rights, he rang for 
his valet de chambre, who was his usual agent upon such occasions, 
and ordered him to bring the kitchen-maid's daughter up to him. 
The valet, who was sufficiently acquainted with the caprioiousness 
of his master's taste, was not in the least surprised at his choice of 
such an object, but obeyed him directly. The fortunate female, 
who had found out the quality of her new lover by his snuff-box, 
which she had picked out of his pocket, was almost afraid to obey 
the glad summons, for fear she might be suspected of having de- 
signedly occasioned the outrage his lordship had lately met. How- 
ever, her ambition getting the better of her fear, she suffered 
herself to be prevailed on, and went, trembling and blushing in 
all the bashfulness of virgin innocence, to know his lordship's 
commands. 

' If he had been surprised at the discovery of her condition, he 
was much more agreeably so at the sight of her ; for, though she 
was far from being handsome, there was something in her face 
which, with her extreme youth, and a glow of health that her 
confusion heightened not a little, struck his fancy in an uncommon 
manner. He therefore, without giving her the least hint of what 
had happened, as he imagined she knew nothing of him, made no 
ceremony of proposing love to her. But, young as she was, she had 
too much woman in her soul to comply so easily, though there was 
nothing she desired more ardently. Accordingly, she refused his 
lordship with the most respectful modesty, and, on urging his 
request further, threw herself at his feet in a flood of tears, and 
begged him to have compassion upon her friendless youth and 
innocence. Such behaviour would have made him doubt the 
dog-boy's information, did not the sound of her voice convince him 
she was the person. He therefore laughed at her artifice, and told 
her that, as soon as the farce was ended, he should expect another 
answer, as he knew she had granted to others the favour he asked 
of her. This convinced her that he had discovered her, and that 
it was necessary for her to enlarge her scheme to accomplish the 
design she had formed, of establishing a lasting interest in his 
affections. Accordingly, upon his saying this, she embraced his 
knees in a seeming agony of distress, and conjuring him to have 
mercy on her folly, owned she had transgressed with one, and one 
only, who had made such an impression upon her heart, that though 
she had taken him for another, and knew not even who he was, she 
had made a vow never to repeat her folly with any other. 

' The candour of this confession, the greatest part of which he 
thought he knew to be true, completed her conquest over him. He 
raised her from the ground, and, embracing her tenderly, discovered 
himself to her. The consequence is obvious. She immediately 
appeared in public as his mistress, and had the address to accom- 
modate herself so entirely to his caprices, that she soon gained the 
absolute mastery of his heart. As for the poor dog-boy, he was 
turned off, of course, as an offence to her sight, though not without 
a considerable gratuity to purchase his silence. But that was 
impossible. The moment he left the house, he looked upon himself 
as freed from the necessity of concealing it any longer, and made 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 267 

it the common subject of his discourse, till it became as publicly 
known as ids lordship's name. 

' This happened just as his affairs became again so distressed, 
that he was forced to withhold the support he had allowed his wife. 
She therefore directly took advantage of it, to sue him for a separate 
maintenance, on the plea of his thus living in avowed adultery. 
The fact was too flagrant to be denied, and his infatuation was 
such, that he would not remove the cause to avoid the consequence 
of the suit, but chose to quit hia native cotmtry, and come here with 
his mistress to live in the disesteem and contempt you see him 
treated with, on the poor pittance of his fortune, which the law allows 
hirn for his support, the rest, much the greater part of it, being 
assigned for the maintenance of his wife and payment of his debts '. 



CHAPTER XXXIV 

chbysal's master meets an old acquaiittance, who relates 
the history oi' his liee — cttrious anecdotes of a great 

MAN 

My master's friend proceeded to give him an account of several 
other persons who were present ; but as his remarks were confined 
to their political characters, I shall omit them, as I said before. 
On these I have dwelt so long, becausa Hey display a just, however 
disagreeable, picture of human nature. 

The day after my master's being with his friend at court, he went 
■to see an old acquaintance of his. The principles of the soul are 
sometimes so strong as to baffle hypocrisy, and mark the character 
of a man, in the lineaments of his visage, to every common eye. 
The first view of my master's old friend and acquaintance struck 
me with horror ; every vice that can deform the human soul appeared 
triumphant, and unallayed with any the least tinctirre of virtue in 
his face. Though I was no stranger to the latitude of my master's 
principles, the intimacy of such a person blackened my worst opinion 
of him. They flew to each other's arms, and, embracing with the 
tenderness of long-parted friends, asked each other a thousand 
questions, almost in a breath, concerning their mutual welfare, 
and the adventures they had met with since they had seen each 
other last. In the account given by my master, there was none but 
common occurrences ; but the history of his friend had something 
so strikingly singular in it, that for the curiosity of such a character, 
I will give you a short sketch of it, as drawn by himself, with this 
difference only, that I shall omit several facts too gross for repetition, 
and soften the colouring of the whole, as the glaringness of it would 
overpower human sight, and strike imagination with horror too 
strong to bear. 

' You have often expressed a curiosity, my friend ', said the 
stranger to my master, ' to learn the particulars of my life. That 
I did not gratify it, was not owing to any diffidence or disinclination 
to oblige you, but beoause I had not arrived at any fixed period, to 



268 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

make a proper pause at, and therefore an imperfect account could 
give but little aatisfaction. But that objection is now removed. 
I am here settled in a situation which, though far below my former 
hopes, I shall strive to be contented in, and not launch out any 
more into the fatigues and perils of the world at this late season of 
my life. One caution only I must hint to you, which is, that in 
the account I am going to give, I shall throw aside all prejudice, 
and represent everythmg in the unadorned simplicity of its first 
principles, without any regard to the received notions of self -deluded 
man. 

' I was born in France of poor parents, who were scarcely able 
to give me the first rudiments of a liberal education. To avoid a 
life of labour, I rashly entered into the monastic, before I had 
experience enough to see the folly of such a step. But my stay 
here was not long. To a man of sense, the obligation of a vow 
ceases with the motive that induced him to take it. I made my 
•escape from the convent, and as I was destitute of money to support 
me, and as yet too ignorant of the ways of the world to be able to 
live without it, was driven by necessity to enlist myself for a soldier. 
But I soon found that I had not gained by the change, the slavery 
of a soldier's life being still more intolerable than that of a monk. 
I therefore had recourse to my former expedient for relief, and 
deserted the very first opportunity. I then threw myself at random 
upon the world, without any particular point to direct my course 
to ; but this did not discourage me. I had boldly thrown off the 
shackles which foolish man had forged for himself, to prevent his 
rising in life, and regulated my conduct solely by my convenience. 
This gave me a superiority over the rest of mankind, which I never 
failed to avail myself of. I looked upon their follies as my in- 
heritance, and soon found abundant opportunities of turning them 
to my advantage. For some years I lived a life of ramble, in the 
course of which I met with many adventures. At length I thought 
my own country too narrow a sphere to confine my activity to, 
and so I went to Spain, where I expected an ample harvest from the 
ignorance and superstition of the people ; but their poverty dis- 
appointed my hopes, and almost starved me into repentance of my 
expedition. However, I proceeded to Madrid, where the credulity 
of a countryman of my own made me amends for the reserve of the 
natives. He not only relieved my immediate wants, which were 
too pressing to be borne, but also entrusted into my hands some 
valuable materials for a literary work, from which he expected both 
reputation and profit. But I disappointed his hopes, for, being 
tired of Spain, I took the first opportunity of going to try my fortune 
in some other country, and carried all his papers vrith me. Nor 
was this all he suffered by his confidence. I had before experienced 
the inconveniency of depending upon charity, in a country where 
there is scarce sufficient for the necessities of nature. I therefore 
thought it proper to take all the money and valuable effects in his 
possession, to defray the expenses of my journey. As to the dis- 
tress this might throw him into, I never regarded that a moment, 
no more than I did his being my countryman. I despised the 
narrowness of thought that made such accidental circumstances of 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 269 

any weight, when they clashed with my own particular designs, 
and I esteemed the lesson I had taught him, to be more cautious 
whom he placed his confidence in, a sufficient recompense for his 
loss. From Spain, I directed my course to Germany, where the 
political knowledge I acquired from my late friend's papers made 
me so much taken notice of, that after some time, not disagreably 
spent among the great, I was recommended to the prime minister 
and favourite of the King of Poland, as a proper person to be en- 
trusted with the education of his only son. Not to disgrace this 
character, I assumed a fictitious name and title, and gave out that I 
had been obliged to leave my own country for an afiair of honour. 
My emplojrment gave me frequent opportunities of conversing with 
the father of my pupil, in which I displayed my skill in politics to 
such advantage, that I soon was admitted into his esteem and con- 
fidence. In this intercourse I had the honour of starting the first 
hint of that project, which afterwards kindled a late war in Germany, 
and will immortalize his name (for he has had the ungenerous 
meanness to assume it to himself) to all ages. 

' Such a situation was sufficient to satisfy the desires of any other 
man ; but my ambition knew no bounds. I thought my patron 
did not reward my merit as it deserved, and, in revenge, I resolved 
to work his ruin. For this purpose, I entered into a correspondence 
with several noblemen, who were his enemies, and, taking advantage 
of the opportunities his confidence gave me of seeing his papers, 
copied some, and counterfeited others that I thought necessary to 
my design, which was no less than to raise a civil war, in which the 
minister should be sacrificed, and the master dethroned. But, 
just as my plot was ripe for execution, it was discovered, and I 
hurried from a palace to a prison, where I was condemned to lan- 
guish out the rest of my days, my life being spared in compliance 
with a delicacy of my patron, who thought it would be a disgrace 
to him to have his son's tutor hanged. When I had lain here some 
time, a happy thought procured me my liberty. I wrote a most 
penitential letter to the Pope's nuncio, in which I discovered my 
true name, and my having fled from my vows, and pretending a 
thorough sense of my guilt, and desire of returning to my order, 
begged his intercession in my favour. My scheme succeeded. 
He claimed me as an ecclesiastic, and the king, whose mind was too 
intent on greater matters to think of me, readily complied. I was 
accordingly released from my prison, but instead of being set 
absolutely at liberty, as I had hoped, was sent under a guard of 
ecclesiastics to Rome, where all the favour I could obtain was to be 
ordered back to my convent. This was a great disappointment 
to me ; but I was obliged to submit. I accordingly set out, guarded 
as before, but determined to take the first opportunity of making 
my escape, which I at length effected, after many vain attempts. 

' To frustrate the pursuits of my guards, I fled into Switzerland, 
where the name of liberty flattered my hopes of doing whatever I 
pleased. The first thing I did there, was to abjure my religion 
and profess theirs, to conciliate their good opinion. This was no 
difficulty upon me, as I had long looked upon all religions with 
equal indifference. As I had no money, I immediately commenced 



270 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

author. But, though I gained reputation, my profits were so 
inconsiderable that I was obliged to have recourse to other methods 
for my support, some of which, happening to contradict their pre- 
judices, I was obliged to leave their dominions with circumstances 
of disgrace. You will laugh at the narrow notions of mankind, 
when I tell you that the affair they made so great a noise about 
was only my denying a debt which I was unable to pay, and the 
creditor did not even want. 

' There were some other particulars, indeed, of my conduct, 
which would have met with a severe fate, had I not taken prudent 
care to obviate it. I had entered into an intimacy with a person 
of some fortune, who had an agreeable wife. The connections of 
the wise are always made with a view to some particular end. I 
had more than one in this acquaintance ; the supply of my neces- 
sities, by the generosity of the husband, and the gratification of 
my pleasure, by the enjoyment of the wife. I succeeded in both, 
but was prevented by an accident from enjoying my success long. 
The husband surprised us one day in a situation that did not admit 
of doubt. He diew his sword, to have revenged his wrongs with 
my death ; but I disappointed his design by presenting a pistol at 
his head, which I always carried about with me, for fear of accidents. 
Upon this, he ran out of the house in a kind of frenzy. I saw the 
delicacy of my situation, and that my safety depended upon the 
proper use of that moment. The wife had swooned away at the 
first sight of her husband. I ran and fetched a glass of water, as 
if to recover her, but conveyed a few drops into it, which I never 
went without, for any such emergency, that delivered her for ever 
from all fear of her husband's resentment. It was in her power to 
make discoveries to her husband, which I did not choose ; beside, 
as the suspicion of her death would inevitably fall upon him, I 
thought that a good way to escape his revenge. I then quitted the 
house without being perceived. All things happened as I could 
wish. The husband was obUged to fly from his country, to avoid 
an ignominious death for the murder of his wife, and all his effects 
were confiscated to the state. It is true, I did not entirely escape 
suspicion. He had laid open all he knew of the affair by letter to 
his friends, but, though they believed him, he had no evidence to 
support his charge, so that I despised his impotent accusations. 

' Prom Switzerland I once more turned my face to Grermany, 
where my name was so famous for my political knowledge that 
a war being just ready to break out, I received considerable offers 
from most of the parties concerned to engage me in their service. 
But though I refused none, I resolved not to engage myself absolutely 
to any, till I could know which might prove most advantageous to 
me '. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 271 



CHAPTER XXXV 

CONTINTTED : HE COMES TO ENGLAND, WHERE HIS SERVICES AKE EB- 
JECTED BY THE STATE, AND HE IS OBLIGED TO EXERT HIS ABILITIES 
IN A LOWER SPHERE — HE GAINS THE CONFIDENCE OF HIS LAND- 
LORD, EROM WHOM HE BORROWS ALL HE IS WORTH, AND THEN 
STRIVES TO PAY THE DEBT WITH A HALTER — A GOOD RETREAT IS 
BETTER THAN A BAD STAND 

' As England was likely to bear a considerable part in the war, I 
thought it proper to go over and sound the inclinations of the 
ministry there also. The riches and credulity of the inhabitants 
of that country have long made it esteemed the inheritance of needy 
adventurers. The thought of displaying my abilities in so fertile 
a soil inspired me with an ardour I had never felt before. I already 
grasped all the wealth of the nation, and looked upon myself as the 
oracle of the people and the terror of the ministry, who would not 
fail to purchase my silence with a pension that should enable me 
to spend the rest of my days wherever I liked with dignity and 
ease '. 

' Pull of these flattering hopes, I arrived in London, where I soon 
found that just as the notion I had formed of the people in general 
might be, the government would not take the bait I had prepared 
for them, and treated me and my proposals with equal contempt. 
This threw me into the necessity of prostituting the abilities which 
I fondly hoped would have been employed in embroiling nations, 
to the deception of individuals for the support of life ; for all the 
wealth I was master of consisted solely in the projects of my brain. 
My success in this under-plot made me some amends for the mis- 
carriage of the other. I no sooner fixed my habitation, than I was 
crowded to by tradesmen of all kinds, to solicit my custom for things 
which I had not the least probability of being ever able to pay for. 
But that gave me no concern. I accepted their offers to such an 
amount, that I was immediately able to procure considerable sums 
of money for other occasions, by the sale of commodities which, 
so far fi'om having occasion for, I scarcely knew the use of. 

' Flushed with this good fortune, I threw off all reserve, and gave 
a loose to every passion which luxury could raise in a temper natur- 
ally warm, never reflecting that the day would soon come when 
my inability to pay my present debts would not only put a stop 
to these artificial resources, but also probably plunge me in the 
horrors of a gaol for life. I professed myself a man of pleasure ; 
I dressed, gamed, and iatrigued with people of the first rank, and 
for some time was so intoxicated as to forget my purpose in coming 
over, and think I could support this life for ever. Not that I was 
ever so intent upon my pleasures as to miss any opportunity of 
procuring the means immediately necessary to obtain them. On 
the contrary, the moment I threw off my designs upon the govern- 
ment, I doubled my application to turn the follies of particulars to 
my own advantage, stopping at nothing, however iniquitous in the 
opinion of the world, to accomplish my designs. Such a life must 



272 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

necessarily involve me in a variety of adventures, many of which, 
it is true, I got not so smoothly over as I could wish ; but I had 
learned philosophy enough to take the bad with the good, without 
repining at what it was not in my power to redress. It would be 
endless to enter into a particular detail of everything I did and 
suffered in the course of this life ; I shall, therefore, only just men- 
tion xme or two affairs, which may serve to give you some notion of 
th6 rest. As I particularly valued myself upon my literary char- 
acter, there was no kind of acquaintance I was fonder of cultivating 
than with men of letters, for which I had also a further motive that, 
as their attention to books generally made them strangers to the 
ways of men, they were most easy to be made the property of any 
mercenary designs. 

' On both these accounts I had taken lodgings in the house of a 
clergyman, who, besides the character of a man of learning, was 
also reputed to be in good circumstances. I soon found that he 
was a person exactly fitted for my designs, and therefore lost no 
time in making a proper impression on him. The first step towards 
acquiring confidence is to place it yourself. I immediately made 
him my banker, lodging every sum of money I won at play, or raised 
by the means I mentioned before, in his hands. As my success 
made these sums very considerable at first, he conceived an opinion 
of my being a person of consequence and fortune above my appear- 
ance. This inspired him with such respect for me, that if at any 
time I even hinted an occasion for more than I had in his hands, 
he not only offered to supply me, but even looked upon my accept- 
ance as an honour. To confirm him in this way of thinking, I 
frequently accepted of his offers when I had no occasion, only Siat 
the punctuality of my payment might make him still the readier 
whenever I should. Nor was it long before I was obliged to avail 
myself of this scheme. A bad run at play stripped me of all my 
money, and my tradesmen brought in their bills, so that my former 
resources were at an end. In this difficulty I applied to my land- 
lord, who readily supplied me with all the money in his possession, 
and, that not being sufficient, borrowed as much more as he could, 
till my remittances should arrive from my estate. 

' This supply might have extricated me from the difficulties of 
the present moment. But I was awoke from my golden dreams, 
and saw that this was the last money I could anyways expect to 
raise, as my practices began to be suspected, and everybody had 
taken the alarm against me ; so that, if I parted with it, I should 
only gain a momentary relief, as my landlord would soon expect 
to be paid also. I therefore resolved to serve all my creditors alike, 
and go back to Germany with the money in my possession, leaving 
them to cuise their credulity, and be more cautious for the future. 
As I had still a considerable quantity of valuable effects in my 
possession, I knew it would be impossible to remove them without 
giving the alarm to my landlord, and I could not think of leaving 
them in his hands, though they were far short of the debt I owed 
him. In this dilemma my ready genius prompted a scheme that 
would not only secure me from him, but also give me time to prepare 
for my decampment vrith more convenience. Upon my first coming 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 273 

to his house, I had contrived, by taking the impressions in wax, to 
get false keys to all his locks. This is a piece of precaution which 
no man of prudence will ever neglect. In pursuance of my scheme, 
the morning after I received the money from him, and before I was 
to pay it away by appointment, I took the opportunity while he 
was at church to convey into his closet several things of value, my 
property in which I could clearly prove, taking away, at the same 
time, the obligations which I had given him for the money he had 
lent me, which his confidence in my honour had prevented his 
taking the precaution of having witnesses to. As soon as I had done 
this, I went directly to a magistrate, before whom I made oath of 
my being robbed of a large sum of money and many of my most 
valuable effects, among which I particularly named the things I 
had left in his closet, and required an authority to apprehend my 
landlord and search his house, as I had reason to suspect that he 
had stolen them, having caught liim often coming out of my apart- 
ments in evident confusion, and at times when my being absent 
deprived him of every honest reason of going into them ; and this 
charge I had confirmed by the testimony of my valet de chambre 
and another person, whom I had prepared properly. 

' Though the execution of sentence is not quite so sudden in 
England as in Turkey, an accusation of this kind, however ground- 
less, is in many respects not much less dreadful, the harpies of the 
law never losing their hold of the accused till they have devoured 
everything in his possession. The warrant I demanded was readily 
granted for this reason, and away I resolutely went, in company 
with the officers, to execute it. We found my landlord, in the 
security of innocence in his parlour, waiting for my coming in to 
dinner. It is impossible to express his astonishment when they laid 
hold of him like a thief, and told him it was on my accusation. All 
the resolution and presence of mind I was master of were requisite 
to bear me through the scene. At first he was unable to speak a 
word, which the candour of his accusers did not fail to construe 
into a silent acknowledgment of his guilt ; but, recovering himself 
in a few moments, he first raised his eyes to heaven, and then, 
turm'ng them upon me, gave me a look that almost froze the blood 
in my veins, but never deigned to speak a word to me. He then 
addressed himself to the officers, and mildly desired that they would 
execute their duty with lenity, nor offer any indignity to the sacred 
character he bore, till a proof of his guilt should make him appear 
unworthy of the sanction of it. Such behaviour had an effect not 
to be described upon all that were present. The very officers forgot 
their hardened nature for a moment, and the tear of pity fell from 
eyes that never wept before at human misery. Even I began to 
feel the foolish infection, and was obliged to charm up other passions 
to prevent my betraying myself, though my ruin was at stake. 
Accordingly, I raised my voice, and, with a stern accent, commanded 
the officers to do their duty, and search the house before hjs accom- 
plices should have time to convey away the things we came in quest 
of. This word put an end to a compassion that was contrary to 
their nature, and they proceeded to their business with their usual 
keermess, though still with respect, till they came to search his 



274 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

closet, where the sight of things which I had sworn to have been 
stolen from me appeared so plain a proof of hia guilt, that they 
treated him with all the indignity of the vilest malefactor. 

' Secure in his innocence, he had hitherto preserved a steadiness 
of temper that seemed superior to the power of fortune ; but at 
this sight his resolution failed him. He fell upon his knees, and 
raising his hands and eyes to heaven — " Just God ", said he, 
" Thy will be done. Thou knowest my innocence, and art able to 
defend me, and wilt defend me ", said he, rising, and recovering his 
former spirits. 

' In the meantime, I seemed encouraged by this success, to hope 
for the recovery of the money which I pretended to have lost also, 
and ceased not to urge the officers to make the strictest search. 
But this was not necessary ; they ransacked every place, and tossed 
about everything that was too large for them to convey away, till 
they made his whole house one scene of desolation. They then 
dragged him before the magistrate, where the finding of the things 
gave such weight to the charge which I positively swore against 
him, that he was on the verge of being hurried to prison, and would 
certainly have suffered an ignominious death, had it not been for 
some unlucky prevarication in my valet de charribre's evidence. 
This, with some suspicions that were suggested against my own 
character by the pawnbroker to whom I had sold the goods I took 
up from my tradesmen, and who unfortunately happened to be 
present, gave the affair such a turn in his favour, that he was ad- 
mitted to bail, till his innocence or guilt should be proved by a 
public trial. But it was far from my intention to wait for this. 
The moment I left the magistrate, I went to the house of an ac- 
quaintance, whither I had ordered my effects to be removed before, 
where I resolved to prepare for my departure with the utmost 
expedition. As to my creditors, when they called upon me next 
morning, as I had appointed, for their money, I told them the story 
of my having been robbed the day before by my landlord, and 
therefore that they must wait till I should receive another remittance 
from my own country ; and though I saw that few of them believed 
me, or were inclined to grant me that indulgence, I was imder 
no concern, as the habitation of my friend was in a place privileged 
from the immediate power of the law. However, it was impossible 
to be easy in such a situation, where every eye that saw me re- 
proached me with what I had done. I therefore took the oppor- 
tunity of going off, in which I was so successful aa to elude the 
vigilance of my pursuers, and escape to Holland, where I had the 
vexation to learn that half of my scheme was disappointed, my 
landlord being discharged without trial, for want of my appearing 
to prosecute him. But though he escaped death, his affairs were 
so effectually ruined by the loss of the money he lent and had pro- 
cured for me, and the expense and damage he sufiered by my accusa- 
tion, that he was obliged to fly for refuge to the savages of America, 
from the power of his more savage creditors ' 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 275 



CHAPTER XXXVI 

CONTINUED : HE LAtTNOHBS AGAIN INTO THE TKOUBLBD OCEAN OF 
POLITICS, AND SUBTBBS A SECOND SHEPWBBCK IN ENGLAND — ' HE 
THAT WILL NOT WHEN HE MAY ', ETC. — IT IS OFTEN BETTEE TO 
PLAY A POOR GAME THAN STAND OITT — OHBYSAL AREIVES AT 
LISBON 

' I NO sooner arrived in Holland, the general rendezvous of politicians, 
than I reassumed that character once more, and that with such 
success, that the minister of a power in alliance with England con- 
ceived such an opinion of my abilities, as made him offer to recom- 
mend me to that court for an employment of the highest consequence 
in one of the principal courts of Germany. Though I was sensible 
that my return to England must be attended with disagreeable, 
if not dangerous circumstances, from the general prejudices that 
were entertained there against me, I boldly resolved to accept of his 
ofier. The former, which could consist only in impotent marks of 
disUke, I disregarded, and the latter I judged my recommenda- 
tion would enable me to defeat. Accordingly, I set out with the 
utmost privacy, and was safe in London before my leaving 
Holland was even suspected by those who would have lain in wait 
for me. 

' The very morning after my arrival, I waited upon the minister 
to whom I was recommended, with my letters, who received me 
very politely, and, upon the credit of the character given to him 
of me, entered into a familiar conversation on several subjects of 
intricacy and importance, in .which I supported the character he 
had received of me so well, that he dismissed me with an assurance 
of his protection and favour. I now thought myself secure of my 
hopes, but the pleasure of this thought was of a very short continu- 
ance. The very next morning I received a message from the 
minister to attend him directly, which you may think I obeyed in 
the highest spirits. Instead of the affability with which I expected 
to be received, upon my advancing to him, he darted a look at me, 
that seemed designed to search my very soul. After viewing me 
steadily thus for some moments — " You are recommended to me ", 
said he, " as a man of abilities, and such I have found you to be ; 
but you have imposed upon the person who recommended you, 
a,nd concealed your real character from him, or he would never 
have entertained so favourable an opinion of such an abandoned 
■wretch. But I have unravelled the mystery of your iniquities, 
and am guarded against your wiles. Your crimes call loud for 
vengeance, and the stroke of fate hangs over your head. But, in 
hopes you may repent and amend your life, and in respect to the 
recommendation you brought, of which I cannot give you a stronger 
testimony than this, I will give you an opportunity to escape, for 
this time, the ruin that threatens you. Fly this country directly. 
If you are found in this city an hour hence, or make the least delay 
in any part of the kingdom (and all your steps are watched), you 
are to expect no favour or protection. And that you should not 



276 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

plead inability to obey this injunction, take this purse of gold, and 
let me never see your face more ". 

' I need not tell you the effect this speech had upon me. I took 
the purse, and retired T\'ithout making any reply ; nor did I close 
my eyes in sleep, till I had bade adieu to that inhospitable shore. 
On my return, I went to wait upon my former patron, but was 
denied admission, and ordered never to go there any more, the account 
of my disgrace in England having, as I learned afterwards, been trans- 
mitted to him in the very ship that brought me over. 

' Though these miscarriages mortified my pride, they did not 
deject my spirits. The gold given me by the English minister 
enabled me to support myself in a state of independence for some time, 
during which I successively offered to accept every proposal that I 
had formerly rejected ; but I had missed my opportunity, and was now 
rej ected myself in my turn. At length, when I was almost reduced to 
despair, the employment I hold here was offered to me, which, 
though far beneath my former hopes, I thought it not prudent to 
refuse, especially as it opened me an opportunity of venting my 
rage vidtli impunity upon all who had ever offended me. I am 
literally hired to wage open war with truth, honour, and justice, 
by inventing false news to support the exhausted spirits of the 
people ; by defaming the enemies of my employers, to give a colour 
to the iniquitous designs of the latter, and by varnishing over the 
most flagrant acts of oppression, cruelty, and deceit, with the 
specious colours of authority, justice, and religion. To a man who 
retained any of the prejudices of the world, and did not examine 
things in the simplicity of nature, such a task must be most dis- 
agreeable. But to me all things are indifferent, as I know all things- 
are alike '. 

Here my master's friend concluded his history, the enormity of 
which would prevent its obtaining credit, had it been related by 
anybody but himself, though, as I told you before, I have omitted 
the blackest particulars, and softened the colours of the rest. 

In a few days after this interview my master left Brussels, and 
proceeded on his journey to Lisbon, during the remainder of which, 
nothing occurred worth relating. 



CHAPTER XXXVII 

CHEYSAL COMES, AT LISBON, INTO THE POSSESSION OF A PORMEB 
ACQUAINTANCE — HIS MASTER MAKES THE GEBAT ATTEMPT VTITH- 
OtTT SUCCESS — SEVERAL OF THE NOBILITY AEB SACRIFICBD TO 
OTHER MOTIVES, ON PRETENCE OE BEING GUILTY OP THIS FACT — 
CHRYSAL'S master is at length taken up, and he CHANGES- 
HIS SERVICE 

If I was formerly surprised at meeting a Peruvian acquaintance at 
Vienna, I was no less so when I found that the person to whom he 
sent me in Lisbon was the very captain, of whose miraculous con- 
version, after the rape and murder of his brother's wife, I gave 
you an account in the beginning of this relation, whom I found to- 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 277 

lie a man chosen for the great attempt, the proof which he had 
given of his capacity in that affair having raised their opinion of 
him so high, as to make them think him the only proper person 
for this. 

I did not remain long in a state of speculation in the possession 
of this master ; the orders, which were brought along with me, 
were all that were waited for, to accelerate the execution of the 
design. Accordingly, the blow was struck a few nights after, 
but in the confusion inseparable from such attempts, without 
effect. 

The kingi was shot in his coach as he returned one night from a 
love assignation, at some distance from his palace, by my master, 
who had waylaid him at a proper place, and fired a blunderbuss, 
loaded with sroall balls, at him, through the back of the coach. 
By an instantaneous stupefaction of fear, which is often taken for 
resolution and presence of mind, the king fell down in the coach, 
and spoke not a word, which made my master conclude the work 
done, and so prevented a repetition of the blow. But what was 
his confusion the next morning, when he found that the king, 
though severely wounded, was likely to recover ! The opportunity 
was lost, nor was it probable that another would offer, till it would 
be too late. However, he attended the event, so far safe, that no 
one could endanger his safety by betraying him, there being no 
person there, not even of the order, privy to the action, for secrets 
of this importance are always entrusted to as few as possible. 

While he thus calmly looked on as an unconcerned spectator, it 
is impossible to describe the distraction that reigned all over 
the city, where every person suspected his neighbour, and was 
almost afraid to converse with his brother, for fear of being sus- 
pected of a participation in a crime of which he knew not the person 
guilty. 

At court, in the meantime, the most mysterious silence was ob- 
served, and all conversation on the subject discouraged. This was 
thought to be the most probable way of coming to the knowledge 
of so dark an afiair, as their spies could thereby mix with the people 
with less suspicion, and make their observations with the greater 
certainty, when they shoiild be off their guard. Not that they were 
at a loss to think from whence the blow had come, but by whom it 
was struck was the difficulty to find out, that so they might found 
their proceedings on an evidence of justice, for the Jesuits were too 
mighty a body to be attacked upon an uncertainty. 

The reason for suspecting them of this fact was, that upon the 
miscarriage of their premature attempt in America, the king was so 
incensed against the whole society, that he dismissed them from the 
direction^of his conscience, and every other place and employment 
about his person and court. Such an indignity he was sensible 

1 Pombal, the prime minister of Joseph I of Portugal, charged the 
Jesuits collectively with complicity in the Tavora Plot (Sept. 3, 1758), 
in which the king was fired at and wounded. The evidence as to their 
guilt cannot be substantiated. At any rate, all Jesuits were ordered 
to be deported from Portugal and its dependencies. 



278 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

must alarm the resentment of a set of men not remarkable for 
patience, or forgiving affronts ; he had, therefore, taken every 
precaution to guard against them, as far as human prudence could 
direct his fears, which was only against disturbances in the state, 
for of such an attempt as this he could not suspect them. While 
things hung in this suspense, I had an opportunity of seeing into 
the character of the people I was among ; but hujnan language 
wants force to describe them. I have already given you the genuine 
character of the Dutch ; to that, let us add poverty, pride, super- 
stition, bigotry, and its inseparable attendant, cruelty, and they 
will give you some idea of the present Portuguese. A people of 
whom it is hard to say whether to abstracted speculation they are 
more ridiculous or execrable, the struggle between their follies and 
vices is so unremitted and so strong. 

A little before I arrived there, the city had been reduced to ashes 
by lightning, and, before they had recovered from the consternation 
which such a misfortune threw them into, they received an account 
of the capital of their American dominions being swallowed by an 
earthquake. Such signal instances of the wrath of Heaven might 
have been expected to alarm their consciences to look for the causes 
of it in their vices, and to try to avert it by repentance and amend- 
ment. But, instead of that, the first proof they gave of coming to 
their reason (or, I should rather say, of coming to themselves, for 
reason it was not) after their fright, was to attribute these mis- 
fortunes to a relaxation in superstitious severity, and to demand, 
as victims to it, the only people under heaven whose good nature 
had given effectual relief to their distress. At length, after a calm 
so long that people began to think the storm was quite allayed, 
it broke out with a fury that amazed not only the unhappy heads 
on which it burst, but also the whole nation beside. I told you that 
the attempt had been made upon the king, as he was returning 
from a love-meeting. The person with whom he had been was 
descended from the first, and related or allied to all the greatest 
families in his kingdom. 

In a country whose characteristics are pride and revenge, such an 
intercourse must be dangerous even to royalty, as the honour of 
all those families seemed to be wounded through her. Accordingly, 
a rumour of her being with child having extorted some inadvertent, 
illative general menaces from some of her relations, as the fact was 
really so, the conscious apprehensions of the king were alarmed, 
and, as he could not declare the true reason of them, he made a 
pretence of the assassination, the charge of which received some 
appearance of probability, from the very circumstance which now 
occasioned its being brought against them, it being known that he 
was returning from that lady, at the very time when the attempt 
was made upon him. 

Thus, to the fear of danger arising from a real crime, were the 
greatest subjects in the kindgom to be sacrificed, on a pretence of 
guilt, which their very accusers believed them innocent of. For, 
before they were apprehended, their ruin was resolved on, which 
was not a little forwarded by the opportimity which it gave the 
king of seizing all their vast possessions, and thereby repairing the 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 279 

losses he had suffered in the late calamities. Accordingly, after 
suffering every torture which human ingenuity could invent, to 
make them confess a guilt of which they were not even suspected, 
they were pubUcly executed in the most ignominious and cruel 
manner, in the sight of an astonished people, without any proof being 
given of their guilt, beside the bare affirmations and strained infer- 
ences of those who were both accusers and judges, and also reaped 
the profits of their ruin. Such scenes as these are too horrid to be 
dwelt on ; I shall therefore return to my master, with whom I had 
an opportunity of coming to the knowledge of every transaction 
relative to this mysterious affair, the miscarriage of his attempt 
having made it necessary for him to disburse the money among 
which I came to him, and by that means continued me so long in 
his possession. Could anything have heightened the opinion my 
first knowledge of him gave me, it must have been to see him an 
unconcerned spectator of the suSerings of those unhappy victims 
to his guilt, and to hear him argue for the justice of their punishment. 
But his triumph was not long. Secret and inscrutable as the 
Jesuits imagined they had laid their schemes, the king either 
received, or pretended to have received, such information of them 
as, confirmed by a multitude of facts not to be denied, gave an 
appearance of probability and justice to their being charged as 
accomplices with the unhappy nobles, and treated with the utmost 
severity, a step that could not have been taken on such grounds, 
while these nobles were alive and at liberty, or the people in spirits 
to exert the influence of their prejudices in their behalf. But the 
favourable minute was come to strike at the root of ecclesiastical 
tyranny, and deliver both king and people from a yoke imder which 
they had so long blindly groaned, that at length they thought it 
just and natural. Accordingly, in the midst of his security, -i my 
master was seized, and hurried away to a prison with the rest of 
his brethren, and all his papers and efieots secured for the govern- 
ment. Of the former they could make but Uttle use, as it is an 
invariable rule with all the order never to keep any by them, whose 
discovery may endanger them or their designs ; but the latter were 
turned to ready account. 

In this dissipation I fell to the lot of one of the officers, who, in 
his search, took an opportunity to secrete the bag in which I was, 
and that very night lodged his acquisition with a banker, for fear of 
detection. , 



CHAPTER XXXVIII 

CHKYSAL MEETS AJTOTHEK ACQUAINTANCE AT HIS NEW MASTBK's — 
CONCLrSION OF THE HISTORY OF HONEST AMINADAB — ADVEN- 
T0EES OF HIS SON — HE BNTBBS INTO BUSINESS AT LISBON, XS 
WHICH CHBYSAl SUFFEES A GEBAT MISFOBTUNE — HIS INGBATI- 
TTJDB TO HIS UNCLB JUSTLY EBWAKDED — CHBYSAL ENTEBS INTO 
A NEW SERVICE 

I WAS scarce settled in the possession of my new master, whom I 
found to be a concealed Jew, when I saw a person enter his counting- 



280 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

house, the sight of whom made me almost distrust my senses. Nor 
was the surprise of my master less. 

' O God of Abraham ', said he, ' is not this the son of my brother 
Aminadab ? Where hast thou been ? and where is thy father ? 
He lias been sought from Dan to Beersheba. His spoiling that 
Gentile, that Egyptian woman, has been a joy to all the brethren. 
But I am amazed to see thee here. I hope he is safe out of the reach 
of every Christian power '. 

' O brother of my father ', replied the son of Aminadab, ' men- 
tion not that unhappy affair, if thou hast not a mind to kill thy 
wretched nephew with grief. My father is dead '. 

' But where is the wealth, nephew ' ? interrupted my master 
hastily, ' where is the wealth ' ? 

' All lost ; all buried with him in the bottom of the ocean ', 
replied the nephew. 

' All lost ! The wealth all lost ! O my brother ! 
Aminadab, my brother ! my brother ! Since the destruction of 
Jerusalem, there fell not such a misfortune on our tribe. The 
wealth all lost ! Aminadab, my brother ! my brother ' ! 

' Alas, my father, I faint through weariness, weakness, and 
hunger ; I have not eaten bread this day. Let us retire into the 
inner chamber, and when my soul is refreshed with a morsel of 
bread and a drop of water, I will put ashes on my head, and ungird 
my loins, and then unfold the whole unhappy story to thee '. 

The repast was literally what he had asked, and, as soon as it 
was ended, and the young Aminadab and his uncle seated on the 
floor together, in the posture of mourning, the former proceeded 
thus : — 

' By the letters which my father wrote to thee fi-om England, in 
the sacred cypher of our family, thou wert informed of his intended 
return into his native land of Africa, and invited to meet him at 
Tetuna and share in his fortune. This he told me while we were 
upon our voyage, but thy better angel prevented thee, and saved 
thee the labour and loss of such a journey in vain. 

' The ship, on board which we unfortunately embarked, was a 
Dutchman bound for the coast of Italy, but was to land us at 
Gibraltar, from whence we knew we could get an immediate passage 
over. But, behold, when we were just in view of the port, when the 
sight of his native land made the soul of my father rejoice, and we 
thought of nothing but safety and content, a Sallee rover gave chase 
to our ship. The Dutch captain immediately crowded all the sail he 
could to escape, but the wind dying away, and the pirate gaining upon 
US with oars, he came to my father with tears in his eyes, and told 
him that we were all ruined, for he had neglected to bring a pass. 
This news was like a clap of thunder to my father, who too well 
knew the consequence of their finding such a mass of wealth in his 
possession. " Wretch that I am " ! exclaimed he, " why did I 
venture with one of thy sordid nation ? slaves to Mammon, who 
would hazard liberty and fortune to save such a trifle ". Then, 
turning about and going into his cabin, he stood some moments, 
as if lost in thought, when bursting into an ecstatic rage, he snatched 
up the coffer in which his gold and jewels were from under the head 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 281 

of his bed, and embracing it eagerly — " I have gained thee ", said 
he. " I have earned thee mth anxiety and toil, and I -ndll not lose 
thee now. O Jonas, send thy whale to receive me, and bear me 
to the land of my fathers. I will not be a laughing-stock to the 
<3entiles, nor a byeword in my father's house ", saying which words, 
he rushed upon the deck, and before any person could possibly 
prevent him, he plunged into the sea with the coffer in his arms, 
and was never seen more. While we stood amazed at this rashness, 
the heavens, as if appeased with the sacrifice, immediately sent a 
wind that filled our fluttering sails, and soon bore the ship, delivered 
thus of its Jonas, out of the reach of the enemies. You may better 
conceive than I can describe the situation I was in at this event. 
I prostrated myself on the shore, when we landed at Gibraltar, and 
bewailed my misfortunes with tears and lamentations. But this 
afiorded no relief to my distress, and something I must do to earn 
a morsel of bread. I therefore sold all my superfluous raiment 
for four ducats, for all our money was in the coffer, and with these 
did I purchase some eggs and fruits, which I sold again in the 
garrison, to support my life, till I should have an opportunity of 
coming to thee, my father, for advice and assistance in this distress* 
And now behold these four ducats are become twelve ducats in my 
hands, and that is all my worldly wealth '. 

The uncle covered his face with his hands, and remained silent 
some time. At length he spoke to his nephew in these words : — 

' It is in vain, O son of my brother, to mourn for what is not to 
be remedied ; holy David wept no longer for his child after he was 
dead. Let us therefore arise, and think of something that may, 
if not retrieve thy mighty loss, at least administer relief to thy 
distress. Thou hast been initiated in the mysterious art of lessening 
the weight, without defacing the image, on the golden coins of these 
idolaters. This was the first rise of thy father, who began the 
world as poor as thou art now, till his unwearied industry in this 
practice raised him from want. Follow thou, therefore, his ex- 
ample, and may the God of thy fathers give thee the same success, 
but with a happier blessing than he found. And lo ! fortunately 
it has happened that I have this very hour received a large quantity 
of the coin of Britain, all new from the mint. On that, therefore, 
thou mayest begin thine endeavours, and the fourth part of the 
produce of this labour shall be thine. I was just going to have sent 
for another, who always works for me, for a fifth, but I am willing 
to give thee a profit extraordinary, to encourage thee. 

' Tliine earnings in this business will soon produce thee a con- 
siderable sum, with which thou mayest go privately to London, 
and purchase old clothes, which will bring great profit in Germany, 
as soon as this war shall be at an end. Till thou art able to provide 
for thyself, thou mayest eat bread here, and sleep under the shadow 
of my roof. Be not dejected ; honest industry never fails of 
success '. 

The young Aminadab was no sooner introduced thus into a way 
of honesty industry, than he seemed to forget his loss, and settled 
himself most intently to work. I fell one of the first sacrifices to 
his arts, which deprived me of a fourth part of my weight, and of 



282 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

all my beauty. Nor did my compamona fare much better ; so 
that from a thousand of us who were in the bag, his share of the 
spoil was a treasure on which he immediately commenced mer- 
chant, stocking a box with all the gaudy trinkets that could allure 
the ignorant, and give him an opportunity of exerting his talents of 
imposition. 

You have often heard me mention the beauty of my figure with 
pleasure ; but, alas ! vain boasts, it was now no more. I came 
from this fiery trial with all the marks of age and infirmity so strong 
upon me, that I could not forbear comparing myself and my com- 
panions to a number of British soldiers, just come from soup-maigre 
and straw, in a French prison. In this mutilated condition I was 
made up in u, parcel to be sent to England, against whom this trade 
was mostly carried on, there being no other nation who would 
receive their own coin under the disgrace of such diminishing. 
But before I could be sent oS, an accident happened in the family 
of my master, the banker, which gave me a longer delay in Lisbon. 
I have told you that in secret he was a Jew, though the prospect of 
gain made him profess Christianity, in despite of the horrors of the 
Inquisition. But, happy had it been for him that he had not 
made such profession, or that his nephew had been drowned with 
his father ; for no sooner had his gains, in his art of diminishing, 
restored him a little to his spirits, than, thinking his portion of that 
profit too little, and insufficient, besides, to raise him to opulence 
80 suddenly as he desired, he oast about how to acquire the whole, 
or at least a great part of his uncle's wealth, at once. He therefore 
took a proper place to work in, for his merchandise did not interrupt 
him in his main business, at some distance from his uncle's house, 
and, having conveyed a large sum of money thither to work upon, 
he directly informed the Holy Office of his tmcle's Judaism, with 
directions how to detect him in it, concluding that, when he should 
be seized, there would be no inquiry made after the money that 
was in his own hands, as he knew it was impossible he should ever 
escape from thence. And though this was but a poor pittance in 
comparison of the sums which he knew would be forfeited yet he 
comforted himself with the thought that it was more than he could 
any other way hope to obtain from him. But he was deceived by 
his avarice, and justly involved in the ruin which he drew upon his 
benefactor, for when the officers of the Inquisition took possession 
of his uncle's effects, finding an entry in his books of the money in 
his hands, they went directly in quest of it, and that so unexpectedly, 
that they caught him at his work, beyond a possibility of evasion or 
escape. 

This is a crime never forgiven in any state. He was therefore 
immediately delivered up to the civil power, from which he received 
a death not less cruel than that of his uncle from the Inquisition. 
Of all the human sufierings I had yet seen, except in the case of the 
sacrifices, this gave me the greatest pleasure, as there is no crime 
that can deform the heart of man more than ingratitude. 

I here changed my service, of course, and entered into that of the 
Holy Office, to the judge of which I was delivered the day I was 
taken out of the possession of the unfortunate Jew. I have before 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 283 

given you my sentiments on the absurdity of thinking to please the 
Deity by cruelty to His creatures, in the instance of the human 
Passover of the Jews. The same arguments will hold here, and with 
this additional force, that cruelty of every kind is, if possible, more 
absurd under the Christian dispensation than any other, as, beside 
the general laws of nature and reason, the particular laws of Chris- 
tianity do everywhere clearly and expressly command brotherly 
love, tenderness, and compassion, forbidding every appearance of 
cruelty under the severest denunciations of wrath. 

But there has been so much, and that so well said, on this subject 
already, and the nature of the sufferings of those unhappy wretches 
who are brought before this tribunal are so well known, that I shall 
spare myself the pain of the repetition, and only mention one 
affair, the circumstances of which appeared singularly affecting to 



CHAPTER XXXIX 

AN UNCOMMON CRIMINAL APPBABS AT THE TEIBUNAL OP THE HOLY 
OFPICE — ^A LOVB-SOENB IN A STEANGB PLACE — THE HISTORY OF 
PHBEON AND ILISSA 

The next day after I came into the possession of the Inquisitor, 
there appeared at his tribunal a person of a most august presence, 
though overcast with all the melancholy which his unhappy situa- 
tion could inspire. He seemed to be advanced in years, but not 
past the vigour of life, and was distinguished from the national look 
of the Portuguese by an uncommon turn of feature, which showed 
him of another people. 

As soon as he was brought to the place appointed for him, the 
Inquisitor, with an awful solemnity in his voice and manner, ad- 
dressed him thus : — 

' Thou art once more brought to this tribunal, to try if the stub- 
bornness of thine heart has yet relented, and thou wilt confess thy 
guilt '. 

' I told thee before, judge of the faith of Christians ', replied 
the prisoner, with a composed look and determined voice, ' I told 
thee before, and I repeat it again, that I am not conscious of any- 
thing that should incur the censure of this tribunal ; nor shall all 
the tortures which the inventive cruelty of man can inflict upon 
this wretched body make me lie against mine immortal soul, or 
acknowledge guilt to which I am a stranger. But tell me of what 
I am accused, and my conscience shall direct my lips to answer 
thee the truth. Perhaps I may unwittingly have erred ; thou 
knowest that I have not always professed the Christian faith, 
according to the laws established here. Pardon, then, the errors 
of mine ignorance, and instruct me to avoid the like for the future. 
And oh, I adjure thee, by thy Christian faith, to relieve my heart 
from the anxiety that tears it, for the fate of my daughter. Oh, 
let ine know '. 

His adjuration was broken off at these words by the officers of 



■28i ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

the court, and his answer, not being satisfactory, he was remanded 
back to prison, without any further questions, with the strongest 
menaces of severity, though, in secret, the judge ordered him to be 
treated with tenderness and respect, and supplied with every comfort 
and convenience of life that could mitigate the horrors of a prison. 

My master then withdrew, and, changing his judicial robes for 
a more convenient and splendid dress, retired to his own apart- 
ments, where, after the respectful ceremony of sending to desire 
admission, he went into a particular chamber, in which w£is a young 
female, whom he approached vrfth all the timid tenderness of love. 

' I have seen thy father, my dearest Ilissa ', said he, ' and he is 
well ; nor shall any human means be wanting to preserve him so '. 

' Why, then, may I not see him ' ? replied the lady. ' How can 
I trust thy words, who hast already deceived me ' ? 

' Thou knowest, my love ', returned he, ' that thy request is 
impossible ; and if I have deceived thee by promising compUance 
with it, it was only to calm the transports of thy passion, that in a 
cooler moment thou mightest hearken to the voice of love and 



' Mention not happiness to me in this place. Can happiness be 
without hberty ? Is a prison the proper scene for love 1 But I 
will be deceived no longer ; I will see my father, or I will not Uve. 
Grant me this request, and expect my gratitude. Thou knowest 
that for myself I fear not thy power. Thou knowest that immediate 
death is ever in my reach ; trifle not, therefore, with me any longer. 
Restore me to my father ; restore us both to liberty, and then, 
then only, speak to me of love '. 

' Thou hast conquered, my lUssa, thou hast conquered. Your 
father shall be restored to you, and we will all fiy together to thy 
native land, where we shall live in happiness. But this cannot be 
compassed on a sudden ; it will require both time and address to 
secure our retreat. But when I have done this for my Ihssa, can 
I be sure of her love ? Will her heart return the sacrifice I make ' ? 

' I have told thee that my heart is grateful ; I tell thee now it is 
not insensible to softer passions. Urge me no further. When I 
am freed from this prison, and my father is present to give the 
sanction of his authority to my actions, I promise thee to become 
thy wife, and my inclination, which has never yet contradicted my 
duty, will not find it difficult to pay the love I promise at the altar '. 

These words raised my master's heart into an ecstasy ; he pros- 
trated himself at her feet, he kissed her hand, and swore eternal 
love. The rest of the day was spent in forming schemes for their 
escape, and planning scenes of future happiness, in the prospect of 
which their imequal years seemed to raise no cloud. The lady 
appeared to be about eighteen ; her beauty, though very great, 
was rather majestic than soft, different from the Bohemian lady I 
mentioned before. An air of grandeur kept everyone around her at 
an awful distance, and the flash of her eye, like lightning, terrified 
the heart it warmed. Her lover was just past his meridian, but 
still in all the vigour of his life, and far from disagreeable in hia 
appearance or conversation. 

There was something so extraordinary in this afEair, that it raised 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 28S- 

my strongeat curiosity to know the circumstances of it ; nor was I 
long at a loss. In the happiness of his heart that evening, my 
master presented a jewel of immense value to the lady, from whom, 
in the way of gallantry, he asked a tablet, cased with gold, as a 
return. The lady refused not his request, but, at giving it, desired 
that he would be careful of it, as she esteemed it much beyond its 
apparent value, it having been given her by her father. 

The moment I heard her say this, and saw him put the tablet in 
his pocket, I knew my curiosity would be gratified by the spirit 
of the golden case. As soon, therefore, as my master retired to 
rest, I entered directly into his heart, and summoning, by our 
sympathetic impulse, the spirit I wanted, I showed him my curio- 
sity, which he complied with, by a look which signified these 
words. 

' There is something so extraordinary in the whole history of the 
persons who have raised your curiosity, that it will be necessary to 
trace it from the beginning, to give you the satisfaction you desire. 
The father of the young lady who gave me to our master, is the 
person whom you saw this morning at his tribunal. His name, in 
his own country, was Pheron. He is a native of Abyssinia, where 
his ancestors have possessed ample territories for many ages, being 
descended from the race of their kings. 

' From the first dawn of reason in the mind of Pheron, he showed 
the strongest desire for knowledge, and the steadiest attachment to 
virtue. The advances of human knowledge have not been so great 
in those countries as here ; yet natural reason has been able to 
discover the sublime truths of morality, the practice of which is 
called wisdom, and the time consumed here in fruitless speculation 
devoted to it, by which means, if men are not so knowing, they are 
certainly more wise. In this happy employment passed the first 
years of the youth of Pheron, till riper manhood, calling him to the 
service of his country, he went, at the head of his father's vassals,, 
to repel the invasions of the Ethiopians. His success was so great 
in this first essay of his arms, that he not only repelled the invaders, 
but also carried the war into their own country, where, after many 
victories, he compelled them to sue for peace. 

' The fame of his actions soon reached the ear of his sovereign, 
who sent for him to his court, and rewarded his services by giving 
him his sister in marriage. Dignities, in those countries, are not 
prostituted to the support of luxury and idleness. Pheron returned' 
home with his bride, to govern and protect his people, who, safe in 
his care, pursued their usual occupations, war not being there made 
a constant profession, nor the gratification of the worst passions 
of human nature reduced into a science, and practised by rule.. 
The peace which Pheron had made was not injurious to his enemies, 
and therefore was preserved by them, which gave him leisure to 
attend to the improvement of his country, and instruction of hi» 
people. 

He had lived in this happy state some years, when there arrived 
a person in his country who gave an unexpected turn to his affairs. 
The situation of those nations is such that the inhabitants them- 
selves rarely ever travel, nor is the face of a stranger seen in an age 



286 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

among them. This made the arrival of this man the more taken 
notice of. He was immediately introduced to Pheron, to whose 
friendship his knowledge in several branches of science soon recom- 
mended him. When the stranger had thus established an interest 
with him, he at length disclosed to him the motive of his coming 
into a country so remote from his own ; he told him that he had 
imdertaken this hazardous and painful journey in pure obedience 
to the divine command of instructing the ignorant in the knowledge 
of salvation. He explained to him the mysteries of the Christian 
religion, the hierarchy of Rome, the Divine foundation of its power, 
and the several orders in its government in so forcible a manner, 
that he soon made a convert of him. 

' Pheron had always adored the name of Christ, but never till now 
knew what it was to be a Christian. One only book of His gospel 
had he ever seen, and from that he could understand no more than 
that faith in the death of Christ for the redemption of mankind, 
in obedience to the self-evident laws of morality, with the pious 
worship of the one God alone, was the whole religion taught by him. 
It is not strange, therefore, if the glorious fabric of the Church, 
as represented by this Jesuit, for such he was, had all the effect he 
could desire upon him, the natural inquisitive turn of his mind 
making him listen with eagerness to everything which seemed to 
open a new prospect to it. Nor was he content with his own know- 
ing these sublime doctrines ; he also instructed his wife, whom he 
tenderly loved, and their example converted the greatest part of 
his people, for nothing could prevail upon him to attempt forcing 
their assent. But this did not satisfy him. The descriptions which 
he had heard of the learning, piety, and glory of Rome had filled 
his soul with an ardent desire to see that metropolis of the world, 
that he might learn its virtues, and transplant them into his own 
country. He communicated this thought to his instructor, who, 
fired with the glory of such a proselyte, encouraged him in it by 
every argument he could use. This determined his resolution to 
make an attempt, the hazards of which would be rewarded with 
such happy consequences. He therefore prepared all things for 
his journey, in which his wife would bear him company, and also 
bring her only child, the lady whom you saw to-day, to receive the 
benediction of his holiness ; and, committing the government of 
his people to his brother, and taking jewels and gold of an immense 
value, to defray the expenses of his journey, he set out with a 
company sufficient to protect him from the dangers of travelling 
through such inhospitable countries, and arrived without any accident 
at the Red Sea, where he embarked on board a ship for Alexandria. 

' While he waited here for a ship boimd to Italy, the plague 
deprived him of his instructor and his wife. He was at first in- 
consolable for his loss ; but virtue soon awoke reason to his guard, 
and his care for his daughter made him careful of himself. His 
attendants would have persuaded him to return directly home, as 
he had lost hia guide, but the loss of his wife made the thought of 
home a torture to him. He therefore sent them back, and resolved 
to settle his daughter in a convent, and enter into the monastic life 
himself at Rome. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 287 

' With this design, he emharked in the first ship that sailed for 
Europe, not heing able to bear the sight of a place which had been 
so fatal to him. The ship was bound to this place, but, for a large 
sum of money, the commander engaged to land him at Leghorn ; 
but happening to come to the knowledge of his wealth on the pas- 
sage, he brought him directly hither, where he was no sooner landed, 
than he informed the Inquisitor, who is his brother, who immedi- 
ately seized both Pheron and his daughter, for errors in their opinions, 
and confined them in the prisons of the Holy Office, where they have 
now been above a year. The first motive of this outrage was the 
stranger's wealth, an unpardonable crime in that court, and which 
would soon have brought them to an unhappy death. But the 
beauty of the daughter has hitherto deferred their fate, and, by 
what you have overheard to-day, may probably prevent it entirely '. 



CHAPTER XL 

THE LOVE ADVENTTTBE CONTINUED — THE INQUISITOB VISITS PHERON, 
AND OBTAINS HIS CONSENT — HE EMPLOYS AN ENGLISH SAILOE, 
WHOM HE SETS AT LIBBBTY, TO ASSIST HEM IN HIS DESIGNS 

The Inquisitor's heart was too full of love to let him sleep long ; 
he arose about midnight, and taking the keys of the prison, which 
were every night deposited with him, he went directly to visit the 
father of Ilissa. 

He found him^ wrapped in so profound a sleep, that his approach 
did not awake him ; a sight so unusual in those mansions of despair 
astonished him. He paused a moment in admiration, gazing at 
him, to try if he could trace that virtue in his face which made 
his heart superior to such terrors. Just then a smile of indignation 
flashed over the face of Pheron, and, in the allusion of imagination, 
he cried out, ' It is in vain ! My conscience is secure^ and I despise 
your tortures '- 

As he said these words, the working of his mind awoke him, when, 
seeing my master standing at the side of his bed, the scene seemed 
to him, in his surprise, to be continued, and he proceeded thus — 
' I ha^ve told thee that thy tortures should not bend my soul to 
falsehood, and now thou ahalt find it so '. 

' Oh, father of Ilissa ', returned my master, melted into tender- 
ness at such a sight, ' I come not to give thee torture. I bring the 
balm of comfort to thy soul '. 

' Ar t thou not the Inquisitor ' ? 

' I am, O Pheron, and thy friend '. 

' Am I awake ? Is this, or was the former, but a dream ? Guard 
me, good Heaven ; let me not fall from virtue '. 

' Such virtue ever is the care of Heaven. Pheron, behold thy 
friend ! the proselyte of thy virtues. The time admits not many 
words ; I come to offer thee liberty, and concert with thee the 
methods of our obtaining happiness. Thy Ilissa '. 

' Heaven guard my child ' ! 



288 ADVENTVRE8 OF A GUINEA 

' Thy Ilissa is well, and happy in her father's welfare '. 
' Oh, my child ! my child ! But shall I ever see her again ' ? 
' You shall ; she shall be restored to your bosom, and never torn 
from it more '. 

' Good, gracious judge ! Oh when ? oh how — my child ! my 
child ' ! 

' Suppress your joy a moment. The beauties of Ilissa have 
triumphed over the malice of her fate. She has found a lover, 
who offers happiness to her and you '. 

' Does my child love him ? Is he an honest man ' ? 
' His life will prove him such. He offers to restore you and your 
Ilissa to liberty, and to accompany you both to your native country, 
for there cannot be any safety in Europe for you, after you leave this 
place, your escape from whence, and every circumstance relating 
to your return, shall be hia care. Nor will he demand the reward 
his heart pants for, till your safety shall remove every fear, every 
doubt of his sincerity ' 

' Oh, name the generous man ' ! 

' Behold him at your feet. Receive me for your eon '. 
' Thee, the Inquisitor, who threatened me with torture ' ? 
' But treated thee with tenderness — treated Ilissa with respect \ 
' Make me know that '- 

' I ask no favour but on that condition. If I procure liberty for 
you and your Ilissa, if I restore you to your native land, and accom- 
pany you thither, if your Ilissa acknowledges the services of my 
love, and asks your consent to reward them, will you confirm my 
bliss, and own me for your son ' ? 

' I will, and thank kind Heaven that gave me such a son '. 
Saying this, he embraced my master, who, in a few words, let 
him know the scheme he had formed for their escape, and then left 
him to his happy reflections while he went to prosecute it. In 
one of the cells of the Inquisition there was confined an English 
seaman, who had been seized and secretly conveyed thither for 
some disrespectful expressions against the divinity of Saint Dominic. 
The manly, modest resolution with which he had refused to owa 
the authority of their tribunal, and his firmness under the first 
tortures, marked him out to the Inquisitor as the person proper for 
his design, for he would not trust any one of his own country, not 
even his brother, whose treachery to Pheron he now abhorred. 

As soon as lie opened the door of his cell, the sailor, whose sore- 
ness prevented his sleeping very sound, perceived him, and, imagin- 
ing it was a summons to a repetition of the torture, he sprang up 
as far as his chains would admit him, and cried, ' Hullo, who comes 
there ' ? 

The Inquisitor, advancing, answered, ' A friend '. 
' Ay, damn all such friends ', replied the sailor. ' I suppose you've 
come to give me another toasting ; but if my hands were out of the 
bilboes, I'd send you off with a salt eel for your supper ', 

' Moderate your rage a moment, my friend ; I come to set you. 
free, if you desire, and will deserve it '. 

' Avast hauling, brother ; I do not understand you '. 
' Why, do you not desire to be free ' ? 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 280 

' Desire ? Ay, that I do ; but I may whistle for that wind long 
enough before it will blow '. 

' Perhaps not. Perhaps that wind, as you say, is nearer blowing 
than you imagine. What would you do to be free ' ? 

' Do ? I'd burn the Inquisition, and cut the Inquisitor's 
throat. I'd do anything but turn papist or fight against Old 
England '. 

' Honest Briton ! But suppose I should set you free, would you 
serve me faithfully in one thing that is neither against your country 
nor your religion ' ? 

' Belay that, and I'll warrant you if I say it, I'll do it, without 
more words. I am no landsman nor Portuguese '. 

' Well, then, I'll take your word ; and so come with me '. 

The sailor was so surprised, he scarce knew whether he was asleep 
or awake. However, as soon as the Inquisitor had unlocked his- 
chains, he shrugged his shoulders, and followed him, without more 
questions. 

When they were come into my master's apartment, he made the 
sailor sit down, and giving him some wine to cheer his spirits — 
' You are now at liberty, my friend, ' said he, ' without any further 
condition, and may go where you please ; but, if you will serve me 
in an affair I shall mention to you, you shall have reason to think 
of this night with pleasure as long as you live '. 

' Serve you, master ' ? replied the sailor, ' that I will. Name but 
what you would have me do, that is, as I said before — you under- 
stand me — and I'll do it, though it was to hand the main-top-gallant 
sail in a storm at midnight, when the yard was broke in the slings, 
and it was not my watch ; for if it was a man's watch, do you see, 
it would be but his duty, and there is no merit in a man's doing his 
duty. I am no flincher. I never say " Ay " when I mean " No ". 
Though I say it, I am a gentleman. My father was a lieutenant of 
a man-of-war, and I have been at sea these five and thirty years, 
man and boy, and never was once brought to the gangway in all 
that time. If the noble captain that rated me a midshipman 
twenty years ago had lived to be an admiral, I should have been an 
officer before now.' 

The honest openness of heart that appeared in the sailor's giving 
his own character made my master hear him with pleasure, and 
place an entire confidence in him. As soon as he had finished, 
therefore, he opened his scheme to him, and the sailor undertook 
to go to London, buy a good ship, and freight her for Alexandria, 
and to call at Lisbon on his way, and to take my master and his 
friends on board ; to do which he gave him money and jewels to 
a great amount ; the latter he was to dispose of in London, and 
account with the Inquisitor for the surplus, after the purchase of 
the ship and cargo, which were to be his own, in reward for his 
trouble, as soon as he had made his voyage. 

All things being thus settled, the sailor was just departing, when 
on a sudden thought, he turned short on the Inquisitor. 

' Steady ', said he, ' steady ; so far go right before the wind, and 
all's well. But whom do you mean to clap aboard me when I 
oome ? If it is the Pretender or the French king, here, take back 



290 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

your trinkums ; I'll be damned before I'll help either of them to 
make his escape '- 

' Never fear, my friend ', replied the Inquisitor, scarce able to 
contain his laughter at the strangeness of such a thought. ' I 
promise you it is neither of these ; I promise you not to do anything 
against your king or your religion '. 

' But shall we not have one dash at this damned place ' ? added 
the sailor. ' Shall we not set it on fire, and cut the Inquisitor's 
throat ? I'll bring a gang of jolly boys that would shoot the gulf 
of hell to have a stroke at Devil Dominic. Shall not we see the 
Inquisition on fire, and cut the Inquisitor's throat ' ? 

' We will consider about those things ; but you had better lose 
no time. And let me once more caution you not to be seen in 
Lisbon at present, and to be as expeditious as possible in your 
return '. 

' Never fear, master, never fear ', replied the sailor, and shaking 
iiim heartily by the hand, away he went. 

I here quitted the service of the Inquisitor, being among the 
money which he gave to the sailor. 



CHAPTER XLI 

THE SAILOR SOBS TO LONDON, BUYS A SHIP, AND EETUENS TO LISBON, 
VniBBB HB TAKES HIS PASSBNGEES ON EOAED — HIS BEHAVIOTJE ON 
MEETING A FEENCH SHIP — HE LANDS HIS PASSBNGEES AT ALEX- 
ANDEIA, EETDENS HOME, AND MAEEIES 

My new master no sooner found himself at liberty, than he hasted 
away to the seaside, -ndthout ever stopping to look behind him, 
and, luckily finding the packet just ready to sail, he was out of 
sight of Lisbon before morning. 

Never was a heart so intent upon executing a commission faith- 
fully as his ; he thought of nothing else all the passage, and the 
moment he arrived in London, he sold the jewels, bought a ship, 
manned her well, and having laid in a, proper cargo, set sail for 
Lisbon, and was there before his employer imagined he was arrived 
in London. 

I had been an idle spectator of these transactions, for it so hap- 
pened that, in all my master's dealings, he never offered me in 
payment, at which I was greatly delighted, as I was very desirous 
of witnessing the completion of the Inquisitor's enterprise. 

The moment he arrived in Lisbon, he gave notice to his friend, 
whose joy at his fidelity and expedition is not to be expressed. 
He immediately had the treasures, which he designed to take with 
him, conveyed secretly on board, and, as soon as the wind served, 
embarked himself with his friends in the night, and obliged my 
master to sail directly, though greatly to his dissatisfaction, be- 
cause he would not consent to his firing the prison of the Inquisition, 
and cutting the Inquisitor's throat. 

Heaven seemed to approve of the undertaking, sending a fair 



ADVENTURES OP A GUINEA 291 

wind, which aoon carried us out of the fear of our enemiea. It is 
impossible to conceive a happier company than were now together ; 
nor did the blunt festivity of my master add a little to the pleasure 
of the voyage, which met but one cloud, that seemed first to threaten 
a good deal, but soon blew over. 

When we were about half our voyage, my master entered the 
cabin hastily one morning, and, with a kind of fierce delight flashing 
in his eyes, says to the Inquisitor, whom he always called owner : 
' Well, owner, you shall now see what English boys can do. There 
is a large EVenchman bearing down upon us, but if you do not see 
him sheer off as short as if he had got foul of a lee shore, I will 
never take the helm again, if he is not even obliged to drop anchor 
to bring him up alongside of us ; and, as I expected some such thing, 
I took a letter of marque, so that you need not fear of being hanged 
for a pirate if the worst should happen '. 

But, delighted as my master was, his passengers did not seem 
so well pleased with the news, especially his owner, who was not 
used to fighting, and beside was too anxious for his escape with his 
fair prize to think of anything with pleasure which could possibly 
deprive him of her. 

They all went directly, therefore, upon the deck, and seeing the 
ship really coming towards them, the Inquisitor went into the cabin, 
that he should not be observed by the men, and, sending for my 
master, accosted him thus : — 

' Surely, my friend, you cannot mean to wait for that ship ' 1 
(for we were lying to). ' She certainly means to ruttiick you '. 

' And so let her, owner ', replied my master ; ' I'll warrant she 
gets as good as she brings '. 

' But consider, my friend ', returned the Inquisitor, ' consider we 
are on board you ' 

' Well, owner, and what then ? You are not afraid ? The lady 
may be stowed safe below, and you will stand as good a chance as 
another. You are not afraid ' ? 

' My good friend, I have not time now to explain my reasons to 
you ; but if you have any regard for me, you will instantly crowd 
all the sail you can, and get clear of this affair. I desire it — I beg 
it'. 

' Why, look you, owner, what needs all these words ? If so be 
you order us, we must put about, to be sure, for the ship is yours. 
But then the honour of Old England ; consider that, the honour of 
Old England '. 

' Oh, my friend, I can consider nothing but my desire to avoid 
this danger ; so once more I beg '. 

' Enough said, enough said ' ! Then going upon the deck — 
' Well, my lads, our owner does not choose this brush while the 
lady is on board ; so we must about ship, but, as we come back, 
soup-maigre shall pay for it '. And, saying this, he obeyed the 
desire of his owner as faithfully as if it had been his own, only not 
with the same appearance of pleasure, not being able to avoid 
ejaculating ' Damn fear ! ' at every turn of the tune he whistled, as he 
walked, the deck the rest of the day. 

He had so punctually observed his owner's instructions in getting 



292 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

a good ship, that we were soon out of sight of the Frenchman ; 
nor did we meet with anything disagreeable during the remainder 
of the voyage. 

The day after this affair, when they had all recovered their good- 
humour, my master addressed his owner thus : ' Now, owner, 
while the sky is clear, and we have nothing else to do, I had better 
give you an account of your money. Here is the log-book, which 
you may overhaul at your leisure, though the sooner the better. 
This is the time. There is no taking a good observation in a storm, 
as may happen by-and-by ; you will find all as fair as a new cable. 
But I must give you one point to direct your reckoning by, and that 
is this : You bade me buy a sliip and freight her, and so forth, 
and she and the cargo should be my own after I had done your job 
this trip. Now, owner, it is very true that a less vessel than this 
might have made the run, but then you seemed so desirous to be 
safe that I thought it best to make a bargain in this stout ship, 
which I knew to be as good a sea-boat as ever turned to windward, 
and able to go, hank for hank, with anything that swims the sea, 
as we showed when we run the Frenchman out of sight yesterday, 
though it went against my heart to do it. But no matter for that 
now ; the ship is yours, and you have a right to be obeyed. How- 
ever, there is the account, and here is the rest of your money, of 
which I did not lay out a shilling that I could avoid, but one guinea, 
which I gave Will Crosstree to repair his rigging, and one I gave 
Black Moll of Wapping to heave down ; and I could not well avoid 
those neither, for Will was an old messmate, and I owed Moll for 
many a good turn in her way. But all this signifies nothing to you : 
they can be stopped in the account. And now, owner, as you may 
think this ship cost too much, and that the cargo is too good, I 
will not keep you to your bargain ; she is your own, and all that is 
in her, only pay the men. As for me, I am satisfied with having 
got out of that damned Inquisition, and leave the rest to yourself. 
If you think that I have deserved anything, well and good, if not, 
I do not f'. ar bread while the sea fiows round Old England ; all that 
grieves me is that you would not let us set iire to the Inquisition, 
amd cut the Inquisitor's throat '. 

If my master's bluntness in the affair of the French ship gave 
offence to his owner, the honesty of his speech restored him to 
his wr/i-mest esteem, and made Pheron, who was present, cry out 
in a rapture — ' Thank Heaven there is still some honesty among 
mankind '. 

' Honesty ? Ay ', replied my master, ' a little among the tars 
of Old England ; a little ' ! 

The Inquisitor having recovered from the astonishment into 
which such nobleness of soul threw him, returned the account un- 
opened, with these words : ' I am convinced your account must be 
just, and I freely make you a gift, not of this ship and cargo, for 
they are justly your own already, but of the rest of the money which 
is in your hands '. 

' What ! All, ovmeT, all ' ? 

' All, mj' friend ; if it were many times so much, you justly 
merit it '. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 293 

' But then, owner, had you not better sign the account, if you 
please, for fear of after-reckonings with your executors ; for I hate 
the law damnably, ever since I lost a year's pay for hindering our 
boatswain's mate's brother from beating his wife ; the brimstone 
swore I beat her husband, and so I paid for meddling ; but it was 
the la-\vyer's fault that set her on. Damn all lawyers, say I '. 

'Well, then, my honest worthy friend, there is a receipt, and I 
wish you success equal to your merit ; and you cannot have more '. 

' Enough said, owner, enough said ; I thank you, I thank you '. 

The remainder of our voyage was one continued scene of happi- 
ness. My master landed his passengers at Alexandria, from whence 
they soon set out for Pheron's country, and, at his talcing leave of 
them, advised them to be careful how they ventured in any of the 
ships of those countries, which, he assured them, were not better 
than bum-boats, nor did their mariners know any more of the sea 
than a Thames waterman. 

Having finished this, his first business, he proceeded to dispose 
of his cargo, for which he met so good a market, and made so profit- 
able a return from thence home, that as soon as he arrived, his 
landlady's daughter at Gosport, whom he had been in love with 
many years, but never dared to speak to till now, readily consented 
to marry him. One thing, however, I must not omit, and that 
was that he kept a constant lookout all the voyage home for that 
Frenchman he had fled from so much against his will, and was 
greatly concerned that he could not meet him, to have one brush 
for the honour of Old England. 



CHAPTER XLII 

CHUYSAL ENTEBS INTO A NEW SEBVICB, AND SAILS FOB THE COAST 
OP MEXICO — HE AGAIN CHANGES HIS SEBVICB, AND COMES INTO 
THE POSSESSION OF THE CAPTAIN OF AN ENGLISH MAN-OF-WAB — 
HIS MASTEB FINDS AN INQENIOTJS EXCUSE FOE BETDBNING HOME, 
BUT IS UNEXPECTEDLY STOPPED SHORT BY THE WAY — IN THE 
COMMON COUKSB OF BUSINESS, CHEYSAL CHANGES EHS SERVICE — 
CHARACTER OF HIS NEW MASTEB 

I DID not remain with my master to be witness of his happiness, 
for, on the morning of his marriage, he paid me to the master of 
a vessel who was immediately about to sail to the coast of Mexico, 
in hopes of falling in with some rich Spanish merchant ships that 
were expected in those seas. The first vessel we saw, however, 
proving an English man-of-war, I passed, in the way of business, 
to the purser thereof, and from him to the captain,^ who, not unlike 

1 Captain Lord Harry Powlett (afterwards sixth Duke of Bolton). 
He is identified in Davis's Olio with the captain mentioned in chapter x 
{see note,  27), but can hardly be the same man. Whilst cruising 
with Hawke in 1755, Powlett, in the Barfleur/was sent after a sail. He 
separated from the fleet, and on the report of the carpenter that the 



294 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

the officer to whom I was presented by the Spanish commander in 
the shape of a doubloon, had been so well satisfied by the Spaniards 
for not doing his duty, that he was very desirous of returning home. 
However impatient he might be to accomplish this wish, it was 
necessary for him to find some pretence to justify a conduct so 
contrary to his duty, the time appointed for his continuing on that 
station not being near expired. 

But a proper knowledge of the world is never at a loss for ex- 
pedients. He immediately came to a right imderstanding with 
the master of the ship, who, alarming him suddenly at midnight 
with an account that her stern-post was loose, and the rest of the 
officers between sleeping and waking formally signing his report 
without examining, he bore away directly for home with a happy 
heart, anticipating in imagination the enjoyment of all those plea- 
sures which he had hitherto looked at with a longing eye from a 
distance. 

When a man, confiding in his own wisdom, quits the straight path 
to strike out a nearer to his wishes, he generally blunders into that 
which leads directly to their disappointment. My master had not 
proceeded many days on his voyage, when he fell in one morning, 
just at the dawn, with a mighty fleet,'' from which it was impossible 
for him to escape. His anxiety made him instantly conclude 
tliem enemies. He cursed his fate in the bitterness of his soxil, 
and leaving the care of the ship to his officers, pretended to be sick, 
and threw himself on his bed, in agonies little short of despair. 

' Was it for this ' ? exclaimed he, wringing his hands and gnashing 
his teeth, ' was it for this I betrayed my trust, and favoured the 
enemies whom I was sent to distress ? For this did I put my honour 
in the power of a venal wretch, and desert my station in direct 
disobedience to my orders ? But I am justly rewarded. I have 
stopped at nothing to gather wealth, and now I lose that and my 
liberty together. May every villain meet the same fate ' ! 

But the severity of his distress lasted not long. As soon as it 
was clear day, the fleet which caused his fears was found to be 
English, the moment he was informed of which he recovered from 
iiis sicluiess, and, putting the best face he could upon the matter, 
went to wait upon the admiral. 

Though the fleet which the admiral commanded was irresistibly 
superior to any that could possibly be opposed to it, he was so 
desirous of every addition of strength that he received my master 
with evident pleasure, and never inquiring what had been the 
cause of his quitting his station, informed him whither they were 

stem -post was loose, he returned to Spithead. In the court-martial 
that followed, he was admonished, but the carpenter was dismissed 
the service. Public opinion held that Powlett was responsible for 
the carpenter's report, and he was known henceforth as ' Captain 
Stempost'- 

'The expedition against Havana. The fleet, under Pocock, was 
carrying 10,000 men under the command of the Earl of Albemarle. 
Setting sail in March, it passed through the Bahama channel in June 
1762. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 295 

going, and congratulated him on tlie opportunity lie -would have of 
making his fortune. But this opportunity, promising as it might 
appear, had no temptations for my master, whose thoughts were 
turned another way. However, to carry off the chagrin which he 
could not conceal, he expressed his concern in the strongest terms 
at not being able to bear a part in so glorious an enterprise, and 
produced the report of the condition of his ship, by which she was 
represented to be incapable of service, the reason, he alleged, for 
his having quitted his proper station. This instantly changed the 
whole scene. The adroiral, assuming all the consequence of his 
unbounded authority, answered, with a supercilious look, that he 
would order the ship to be surveyed by the proper officers, and then 
turned away, without deigning to take any further notice of him. 
As this was no more than my master had expected, his knowledge 
of the world, which brought him into the scrape, soon suggested 
the proper means for preventing any disagreeable consequences 
from it. Accordingly, when the survey was regularly made next 
morning, he was honourably acquitted ; but the master of the ship 
was broke for his error, and the other officers severely rebuked for 
not having examined his report before they signed it. 

In the course of these transactions, I changed my service for that 
of the admiral's secretary, who directly gave me to the admiral in 
some dealings between them. 

When I entered into the possession of my new master,^ he was 
lolling in a listless manner on a sofa in his state-room, where every 
art was exerted to counteract nature, and elude the mid-day heat, 
in one of the fiercest climates of the torrid zone. A gown of thinnest 
silk hung loosely over his large limbs ; the radiance of the sun was 
softened by shades of linen drawn before the open windows, and 
kept constantly wet, to cool the air as it entered through them, 
and every disagreeable savour was drowned in the most delicate 
perfumes. The contrast between such magnificent luxury, and 
the condition of those whose numbers made his strength, showed 
in the most glaring light the infatuation of vanity, in displaying 
such temptations to its ovni destruction, as the most implicit obedi- 
ence to the laws could hardly be supposed proof to. The awkward- 
ness with which my master bore his state showing that it was not 
natural to him, I looked back to his past life, to see by what illus- 
trious actions he had risen to such an exalted station, but, to my 
surprise, discovered that the foundation of his fortune had been no 
more than a phlegmatic indolence and servility of soul, which in- 
duced his superiors to entrust power in his hands, without appre- 
hension of its raising him to a consequence that might clash with 
their designs on any future occasion. 

I see you are astonished that a person of such a turn should ever 
engage in active scenes, or be entrusted with the conduct of an 

1 Admiral Sir George Pooook [1706-92]. He iserved in the Navy from 
1718-1766, and was present in many engagements. He never showed 
initiative, but acting strictly according to the ' Fighting Instructions ', 
was out-manoBuvred by the French in several actions, the results of which 
were indecisive. 



296 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

■enterprise so opposite to his disposition as to make success improb- 
able. To unexperienced reason, such things must seem unaccount- 
able, but the least acquaintance with the ways of man would soon 
reconcile you to greater absurdities. The convenience of the 
parent, not the genius of the child, is in general the only thing 
considered in the choice of a. profession on which the success of 
life depends, and this is the reason why so few are eminent in things 
BO easy to be eminent in ; and when at length a person may have 
it in his power to quit a profession which he did not choose, it is 
too late for him to choose another, and therefore he plods on with 
habitual indifference, not knowing what else to do with himself. 

This may remove your surprise as far as it concerns my master's 
first entering into, and continuing in such a way of life. As to his 
fitness for so difficult and important a command, that was the thing 
least thought of when it was entrusted to him. The insignificancy 
•of his character, and his servility to his superiors, pointed liim out 
as the person proper for their purpose, as they not only made them 
secure that he would not go beyond their orders, but would also put 
it in their power to arrogate to themselves the merit of success, 
■or lay the blame of miscarriage upon him ; and for these great 
■qualifications only did they choose him on this occasion to execute 
the design of another,' who had been guilty of the unpardonable 
crime of showing that he knew more than themselves, and whose 
penetration and activity of soul might too probably have made 
him see through their designs, and push matters farther than was 
■consistent with them. 



CHAPTER XLIII 

MOTIVES OF THE ENTEBPRISE IN WHICH CHBYSAL'S MASTEB WAS 
ENGAGED — IN A PRIVATE CONFBEBNCB BETWEEN HIM AND HIS 
AGENT, SOME CUBIOUS SECRETS, IN A BUSINESS NOT GENEBALLY 
UNDERSTOOD, ABB LAID OPEN, AND A SEEMING OONTBADIOTION 
NATURALLY BECONCILBD 

Whenever England is at war with any of her neighbours, the 
effects are felt to the extremities of the globe. The armament 
which my master now commanded was sent against one of the most 
important and wealthiest settlements of the Spaniards in that part 
of the world ; not, indeed, with an ambitious design of annexing 
it to the state, or reimbursing any part of the expenses of the war, 
but merely to distress the enemy by its destruction, and enrich 

' Admiral Sir Charles Knowles (d. 1777) [Davis's Olio]. Knowles, 
who had at an earlier date been reprimanded for the incompetent way 
in which he engaged a Spanish squadron, got into hot water again 
over the abortive expedition against Roohefort in 1787. He published 
a, pamphlet justifying his conduct, but failed to exonerate himself 
either with the public or with the Government, who shortly after super- 
seded him. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 297 

those immediately employed in the conquest, the prospect of which, 
and the consequent schemes to accomplish it so entirely engrossed 
the attention of them all, except my master, that they disregarded 
the diificulties, and ran so eagerly into the dangers of the attempt, 
though such and so many as were sufficient to have damped the 
aidour of any beings directed by reason, and not insensible to the 
first principle of human action, that his phlegmatic disposition was 
no impediment to their success, as it left them at liberty to pursue 
auch measures as the instant occasion should show to be expedient, 
without the delay of consulting him. I say, except my master ; 
for not all the cares of so extensive a command, all the hurry and 
bustle around him, could ever ruffle the characteristic stagnation of 
his mind. 

He was just awoke from his noontide nap, when his clerk 
laid the bag in which I was upon the table along with some 
papers. The chink of the gold immediately attracted his 
attention. 

' Eh ', said he, rubbing his eyes and yawning, ' what is o'clock ' ? 
and being told — ' Ay ', continued he, stretching and yawning 
again, ' I thought I had overslept myself, I am so heavy. This 
<;limate is fit for nothing but sleeping '. Then rising languidly — 
' What papers are those ' ? said he. ' Did I not say I would not 
be troubled about business ' ? 

' The survey of that ship, and your own accounts for the outsets 
of this expedition ', answered the clerk, ' which, if you please, you 
had better look over now, as we shall have others to attend to soon. 
I am sorry to say it does not answer your expectations, but the 
people alleged that they had been made to pay so extravagantly 
for their contracts, that it was impossible for them to sink the 
qualities of the stores so low as to be able to give you anything 
worth your acceptance '. 

' Not able to give me anything ' ? said the admiral, who had been 
roused from his lethargic indifference by the first mention of his 
own affairs. ' They lie, the scoundrels, and I'll make them linow 
it. Tlie sick-lists show that they have sunk them with a vengeance, 
and beyond every degree of reason, and if they think that I'll con- 
nive at their murdering the men, without having any share in the 
profit, they shall find themselves damnably out in their reckonings. 
And therefore do you go directly to every purser in the fleet, and 
order them to have a survey privately made of their worst stores, 
to produce when I call for it. I'll make them come down, and 
handsomely, too, or they shall repent it '. 

' But, sir, is there not danger of their being provoked by such an 
attack, to say something improper, and that they who made the 
contracts with them may do you an ill office on another occasion ? 
There are wheels within wheels '. 

' Let them, if they can ', answered the admiral, clapping his 
hands akimbo ; ' I shall trouble them no more. If I mind my hits 
this trip, I shall be as rich as the best of them, and will stay at home 
and take my ease as well as they ; and as to their speaking, whom 
are they to speak to ? Tell my brother that I am a knave. No, 
no, we shall hardly hear tales of each other ; things hang too close 



298 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

together for that. Do you, therefore; mind your business, and leave 
these matters to me '. 

' But may not they spread stories abroad, which may injure your 
character with the public ' ? 

' My character ? not in the least. Such stories affect only the 
clerks and such low people, whose perquisites these things are re- 
puted to be, and who only appear in them. But that caimot be 
said to injure them neither, for what clerk ever had a character 
that could be injured ? Ha ! ha ! ha ! so that your care for char- 
acter, forsooth, is quite unnecessary. Do what you will, you 
cannot suffer in that. All you have to do is to mind your business, 
and when you have got money, no one will inquire about your 
character '. 

Saying this, he waved his hand to the clerk to withdraw, and then 
walking a turn or two about his great cabin, opened the money- 
bag, and telling the contents, put a few pieces, among which I was, 
into his pocket, and locked up the rest in his strong box, after 
which he threw himself again on the sofa, to rest after the fatigue 
of so much business. 

You seem at a loss how to reconcile the sentiment which my 
master discovered in his conference with the luxury and magnifi- 
cence of everything about him, but they contradict not each other 
in the least. In the transactions with his clerk, he showed the 
genuine motions of his heart, but with the other, he has nothing to 
do. They are entirely at the expense of the public, though in a 
maimer not obvious to every eye, being a kind of tax established 
by custom on the pursers of men-of-war, under the appearance, 
indeed, of a present to their commanders, but in reality as a bribe 
for coimdving at their impositions, and this tax it is that enables 
those commanders to live up to their rank, which their just pay 
would never do — a striking instance of that wise economy which, 
to save a penny, lays a man under the necessity of stealing a pound. 



CHAPPER XLIV 

THE BEHAVIOUR OF CHRYSAL's MASTER ON HEARDfG AN INTBRBSTINQ- 
PIECE OF NEWS, VflTS HIS CONCISE METHOD OF CONDUCTING AN 
ENTERPRISE — CHBYSAL CHANGES HIS SERVICE FOE THAT OP A 
PERSON OF A VERY DIFFERENT CHARACTBE — AN ELOQUENT SPEECH 
PRODUCES THE USUAL EFFECTS OF ELOQUENCE 

My new master had not passed his time long in this agreeable 
manner, when the officer next to him in command ' entered hastily, 
and told him, in a transport of joy, that the man at the masthead 
had made the land. 

' What land ' ? said my master, unmoved at the news, or the 

1 Commodore the Hon. Augustus Keppel [1725-86]. He was made- 
admiral this year, [1762] and created Viscount Keppel in 1782. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 299' 

manner in wMoh it was delivered by the other, whose eyes flashed 
fire as he spoke. ' What land does he make ' 1 

' The place of our destination ', replied the officer. ' I had just 
then taken an observation myself, and am convinced I am right '. 

' Well, then ', returned my master, ' if you are sure it is the place,, 
here are your instructions. You are to lead the van and cover the 
landing, about which proper directions will be given by the general ' ; 
when that is done, you shall have further orders '. Then, swelling 
with the thought of his own consequence, and resolving to support 
his dignity by an uncommon effort of generosity — ' Has the fellow ' 
said he, ' been rewarded for his news ' ? 

' Not yet ', answered the officer. ' The moment I heard it, I 
ran up myself to the masthead, and, as I was convinced he was 
right, flew to acquaint you. But I shall remember him when I go 
back '. 

' And, pray, when you do, give him this in my name ', replied 
my master, putting his hand into his pocket, and reaching me to- 
him ; ' the men's spirits must be kept up. We shall have warm 
work of it — warm work '- 

' Glorious work ', added the officer ; ' the trophies of your fame- 
will now be established in the opposite extremities of the globe. 
Few attain to such happiness '. 

' Ay ', said the admiral, puffing and sweating with the sense of 
his great achievements, ' I have done something to be talked of in 
more places than one. I have endured the severities of various 
climates. But we must bear everything in the service of our 
country ; we must bear everything without complaining '. 

' Have you any further commands, sir ', said the officer. ' It is 
proper I should be on board. I see several of the ships have now 
made the signal of seeing land '. 

' Nothing more at this time ', answered the admiral. ' You 
have your orders, and will take the best method to execute them. 
Only observe to keep as clear as possible of that other man's scheme. 
I had rather all should miscarry than appear in the least indebted 
to him for success '. 

My new master on this withdrew, leaving the admiral to enjoy 
the contemplation of his own consequence, and keep himself cool 
till dinner. If the indolence of my late master was inconsistent 
with his station, the activity of my present seemed to exceed the 
abilities of a human being. The moment he got to his own ship, 
he made a signal for all the captains in his division, and the general, 
to come on board him, and then, ordering his ship's crew to be 
called aft, he went to the barricadoes, and waving his hat over his 
head — ' Courage, my lads ', said he, ' the day is ours. The admiral 
has given us leave to take yonder town, with all the treasure in it, 
80 that we have nothing to do now but to make our fortunes as 
fast as we can, for the place can never hold out against us. The 
purser will give every brave fellow a can of punch to drink pros- 
perity to Old England, and then we will go about our business with 

^ The general was Keppel'a elder brother, the Earl of Albemarle- 
[1724-72]. 



300 ADVENTURES OF A OVINE A 

spirit. We shall all be as rich as Jews. The place is paved ^vith 
gold, which the lubberly dons have gathered for us. Old England 
for ever, is the word, and the day is ours '. 

This eloquent harangue had the effect that eloquence usually 
has ; it transported his hearers out of their senses. They answered 
with three cheers, which made the welkin ring, and then went 
skipping and dancing with joy to get their punch, a foretaste of 
their good fortune, which many of them would not have given up 
for all their expectations. As they were going off, my master hap- 
pened to see among the crowd the man who had first discovered 
the land, and calling to him — ' Here, shipmate ', said he, giving 
him a doubloon, ' here is something the admiral has sent you for your 
good lookout ; and take this also from me ' — giving him another — 
' and I hope to give you a hundred more for hoisting your colours 
on the top of yonder walls '. 

' Ay, noble captain ', said the sailor, shrugging his shoulders and 
making his best bow, ' and so I will, or it shall cost me a worse 
fall than from the main-top-gallant-masthead, that is, when the ship 
takes a heel. I'll pull down proud Spain, and clap Old England in 
its place '. 

The spirit which my master showed in every word and action 
interested me so far in his favour that I was pleased at his not 
having parted with me on this occasion. 

By this time the general and the captains were come on board, 
and being shown into the great cabin — ' Good news, gentlemen ', 
said my master in an ecstasy, shaking every one of them by the 
hand as they entered, ' I bring you good news. Yonder is the 
•object of our hopes, the place that is to make our fortunes and 
crown us with glory, if it is not our own faults, for the admiral 
has given us general orders to proceed in the best manner we can, 
and without losing time or opportunity in waiting to consult him 
on every occasion '. 

This news filled them all with the highest spirits. They con- 
gratulated each other on a success of which they made no doubt, 
and ha\nng concerted the measures proper to be taken, returned to 
their ships to carry them into instant execution. 



CHAPTER XLV 

THE QBNBKAL PROFESSES AK TJNCOMMON MOTIVE FOR MILITARY 
ARDOUR — AN OFFICER DESIRES TO SPEAK WITH HIM, THE MENTION 
OF WHOSE NAME OPENS SOME SECRETS IN THE SERVICE — ACCOUNT 
OP THE OFFICER — AN EXTRAC^DINARY INSTANCE OP I6NORANCB 
OP THE WORLD — HE SIGNALIZES HIMSELF AT THE EXPENSE OP HIS 
SUPERIORS, WHO REWARD HIM ACCORDINGLY — THE BEST QUALI- 
FICATIONS FOR RISING IN THE ARMY, WITH REASONS WHY THINGS 
WERE OTHERWISE UNDER ANOTHER COMMANDER 

As soon as the captains of the men-of-war were gone — ' Now, my 
■dearest friend ', said my master to the general who stayed, ' you 
will have an opportunity not only of gaining such glory as will add 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 301 

lustre to the dignity of your birth, but also of acquiring a fortune 
to support that dignity properly '. 

' True ', answered the general eagerly, ' but, powerful as these 
motives are, my heart is stimulated by one stronger on this happy 
occasion '. 

' How ? Can any motive be stronger than honour and inde- 
pendence ' ? 

' Yes, gratitude ; grateful anxiety to prove myself not unworthy 
of his favour who procured me this opportunity. He promoted my 
interest with the ardour of a friend ; he supported it with his whole 
weight, and in a manner staked his honour for my abilities. Till I 
have acquitted him, therefore, by a signal discharge of my duty, 
I can have no thought for myself '. 

' These sentiments prove you worthy of his favour : nor can you 
possibly serve yourself more than by paying this debt honourably 
to him, in which I shall think myself happy to give you every in- 
stance of that assistance which the nature of my command so 
fortunately puts in my power '. 

' I doubt you not ; and therefore, as our unanimity deprives us 
of the excuse of disagreement, which former commanders in the 
different services have made for their miscarriages, we must be 
doubly careful not to omit anything that can ensure success ' 

.The friends then embraced with ardour, and were just separating 
to attend the business of their different departments, when a sub- 
altern officer desired to speak with the general. On hearing his- 
name — ' Did you not know that I am engaged ' ? said the general, 
with an embarrassed air. ' He must wait till I am at leisure '. 

' Don't let me hinder you ', said my master, ' I am just going '. 

' You do not, in the least. He can have no business with me but 
what you may hear, and, indeed, what you must help me to 
extricate myself from, for I know he comes upon some scheme of 
distinguishing himself, that will only give me trouble '. 

' How can that be ? If you do not approve of what he proposes, 
surely you have it in your power to reject it, without fear of giving 
him offence : or if, on the other hand, you think it practicable and 
worth pursuing, I cannot suppose that any honour or advantage 
that can possibly accrue to him can make you unwilling to carry 
it into execution ' 

' Most certainly not. The difficulty I am under is of a very dif- 
ferent nature. The character of the man gives me reason to believe 
that he will not propose anything which is not both practicable and 
important ; and, as it is not in my power to reward his success, 
his doing anything out of the common course of duty would involve 
me in the highest distress, both on account of the injustice to him, 
and the poor figure I must make myself on so flagrant a breach of 
my own public declaration that, in the disposal of all preferments, 
I would pay due respect to seniority, where superior merit did not 
give a stronger claim '. 

' Well, and why should it not be in your power to fulfil that 
declaration ' ? 

' My dearest friend, I blush to think of, much more to expose- 
even to you, the mortifying hardships laid upon me. The truth is 



302 ADVENTURES OF A OUINEA 

I have, since I made that declaration, another officer, who was in 
his cradle since this has been in the army, and has never yet seen 
the face of an enemy, put upon me for the first preferment, by one 
whose directions I must not disobey, however detrimental to the 
service '. 

' That is a disagreeable circumstance, I own. But who is this 
officer, your good opinion of whom gives you such apprehensions ' ? 

' He is a military enthusiast, who knows so little of the world as 
to think of rising in the army by merit alone, and with that view, 
not satisfied with doing his duty in the most signal maimer, is 
always a volunteer wherever he thinks any glory can be acquired, 
though his own particular experience, as well as general observation, 
might have long since convinced him of the folly of such a thought. 
You must know him. This is he who, in that unlucky affair upon 
the coast of France, made a stand with the single company to which 
he belonged, and which he had so attached to him, by giving, out 
of his own pocket to such as behaved well, a daily gratuity, in 
addition to their pay, that they would follow him anywhere, to 
cover the embarkation of the troops, while every officer was shifting 
for himself, as he actually did in a great measure, tiU most of his 
little party was out off, as it was a thousand to one but they all 
must, unsupported as they were, though it appeared after, that if 
a proper force had been posted in that very place at first, or he 
reinforced in any time, the heavy loss and disgrace suffered on that 
occasion might have been prevented. But still that was reckoned 
no business of his, and therefore all the reward he got for his pains 
was to have two officers, who were not even in the action, put over 
his head, and the company's money, which he had lost along with 
all his own baggage, refused to be made good to him, because he 
was a volunteer on that attack. For, sorry I am to say it, that is 
not the way to rise in the army nowadays. Where a man has not 
interest to push him forward, being able to sing a good song, or 
pimp well, or having a handsome wife or sister, with a proper degree 
of humility and complaisance, will avail him more than all the 
courage and conduct in romance. In my patron's ' time, indeed, 
things were not so. Brave himself, he expected that every man 
under him should be brave also, nor would let any recommendation 
compensate for the want of merit in those who sought his favour, 
as his own interest and honour were naturally and inseparably con- 
nected with those of his country ; and he was not lifted up to power, 
only to be the tool of a party, nor obliged to support himself in it 
by intrigue, without any other view or motive than that of amassing 
its emoluments ; and therefore it has been the great misfortune of 
this officer that he never served immediately under him.' 

' The king's uncle, the Duke of Cumberland, victor of CuUoden. 
He was less unpopular now than he had been for many years, his oppo- 
isition to Bute winning him the good graces o£ the public. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 303 



CHAPTER XL VI 

chbysal's master makes some remaeks on certain matters — 
the method which the general took to parry the officer 

— CHEYSAL's MASTER MAKES UP THE AFFAIR — THE GENERAL GIVES 
THE OFFICER AN 0PP0RTT7NITY OF DISTINGUISHING HIMSELF, 
WHICH HE DOES IN A SIGNAL MANNER 

It is remarked that men seldom inquire into the causes of things 
continually before their eyes. Habitual acquaintance prevents 
that curiosity, which is one of the strongest incentives to knowledge. 
They have always seen such things, and therefore have never 
inquired how they came to be so. 

My master, who had long observed the fact, but never thought of 
the cause, was struck with what his friend said. After some pause 
— ' I am afraid what you say is too true ', said he, ' and cannot help 
attributing it to a cause, not much to the credit of the commanders, 
who certainly would never discourage merit in others, were they not 
conscious they had not risen by it themselves, and therefore look 
upon it with an envious eye, as a reproach to them. Indeed, it 
can scarcely be expected that a general, who has spent his life in 
paying court to a minister or favourite, or who was preferred only 
for his interest in parliament, should act otherwise. But what will 
you do with this officer ? It will have an odd look if you don't 
see him ; at the same time, if he should propose anything of real 
consequence, I am absolutely at a loss how to advise you to act '. 

' The only method I can think of, is this : his temper is warm, 
and his notions of honour punctiliously high. I will, therefore, 
receive him with a distance that I know will hurt his sensibility, 
and provoke him to say something, of which I may take advantage 
to break off the conference, without entering into the subject of 
his coming ; for he speaks as boldly as he acts, and thinks it beneath 
him to soften his sentiments by any qualifying expression '. 

Accordingly, the general ordered the officer to be admitted, and 
asking him slightly what was his business — 

' I come, sir ', answered he, ' to inform you that I have discovered 
a proper place for landing the troops, and formed a plan for that 
purpose '. 

' You have discovered, sir ' ? interrupted the general, haughtily. 
' Pray, when and how did you make this notable discovery ' ? 

' Just now, sir ', returned the officer, too intent upon the object 
he had in view to take notice of the manner of his reception. ' The 
transport in which I was, happening to stretch away ahead, I got 
out a boat, and have carefully reconnoitered a great part of the 
coast, in the thick of the enemy's fire '. 

' And pray, sir ', interrupted the general again, determined not 
to let him explain himself, ' who gave you orders to reconnoitre in 
this manner ' ? 

' No. one, sir ', answered the officer warmly, and hurt at the 
manner in which the general spoke. ' I never wait for orders to 



304 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

do anything in which my own safety is concerned, when I think it 
for the advantage of the service '. 

' When you think ' ? retorted the general sternly. ' I should be 
glad to know who has appointed you to judge of those things ? 
At this rate, the whole army will be generals by and by, and every 
one will be out reconnoitering, forsooth, when they should be at 
their posts. But I'll put a stop to such contempt of discipline, 
and make you know that it is your duty to wait for orders, not to 
go rambling thus, wherever you please '. Saying which, he called 
one of his aides-de-camp, and putting the officer in arrest, sent him 
away, bursting with indignation and resentment, to his ship. 

When he was gone — ' I am very sorry ', said my master, ' that 
your engagement to that other man laid you under a necessity of 
treating this officer so harshly. I have conceived a very good 
opinion of him. He appeared to be actuated by true zeal, and 
spoke with a confidence that showed he was convinced of what he 
said, for which reason I am resolved to reconnoitre that place 
myself, and don't doubt but I shall find his account of it to be just ', 
' Nor do T in the least. He has a head to plan, and a heart to 
execute the most important enterprises, and I am as sorry for what 
I have been forced to do as you. But, as soon as I have it in my 
power to reward his merit, I'll give him every opportunity of dis- 
playing it, till when this affair will keep him out of the way '. 

I see you are anxious to know the sequel of this officer's story. 
To avoid breaking the thread of my narrative with it, therefore, 
at another time, I will conclude it here. 

My master, as he said, went that very night, and reconnoitered 
the place pointed out by the officer, whose account of it proved so 
just, that he repaired to him directly, and inquiring into his plan 
for landing the troops, found it so judicious, that he immediately 
adopted the whole, and carried it into execution with success. 
After some days, when the officer's impatience of being idle thus in 
the midst of action had in a great measure got the better of hia 
resentment, and the severe loss sustained in the siege made the 
worth of men more attended to, my master attacked him on his 
foible, his passion for glory and zeal for the service of his country, 
and prevailed on him to return to his duty, on the general's making 
an apology for what he had done, which he attributed to his anxiety, 
and apprehension of the enemy's being put on their guard by h5s 
reconnoitering in that daring manner ; and, to cancel the disgrace 
of the arrest, treated him with particular attention ; and as he 
was now at liberty to do justice to his merit (the other, who had 
been imposed upon him, being provided for), gave him the first 
opportunity he could of signalizing himself, which he did in a manner 
that amply justified the opinion my master had conceived of him. 
The afiiair was this. The general had resolved to make an attack 
upon the principal redoubt that defended the fortress, and gave 
the command of it to him. The plan laid down by the general 
was, that an officer, with a party of men, should go from another 
post, just before the dawn, to reconnoitre the redoubt, and if he 
found that the fii'e of the night had made the impression expected, 
a signal was to be given for this officer to advance and make the 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 305 

attack. The other accordingly marched, but missed his way, and 
falling in with a lesser redoubt, mistook it for the object of his 
designation, and inconsiderately attacked it, upon which the signal 
was given for this officer to proceed. The alarm had set the soldiers 
in the principal redoubt upon their guard, which he perceived before 
he came within their shot, and being sensible that his attempt could 
succeed only by surprise, by one of those instantaneous efforts of 
genius which mark the true military character, he resolved, without 
a moment's hesitation that might discover his disappointment, to 
try a stratagem of his own, since that of his general had been frus- 
trated by this mistake, and directed his march regularly towards 
the attack that was begun upon the lesser redoubt, as if he had 
been sent on purpose to support it. 

Deceived by this feint, the officer who commanded in the principal 
redoubt, knowing the force there to be too weak to make resistance, 
sent the greater part of his own to their relief. This was what he 
had foreseen. He therefore continued his march slowly, till they 
had got beyond him, and then, facing suddenly about, pushed with 
all speed for the redoubt they had just abandoned. The moment 
they saw this motion, they turned back, but the narrowness of the 
entrenchment in which they were prevented their making such 
expedition, and coming up in a body, as his men did on the plain, 
so that he entered with the very foremost man of them, and made 
himself master of the place with inconsiderable loss. 

The importance of this redoubt, the taking of which greatly 
facilitated the operations of the siege, enhanced the merit of the 
action. Nothing else was talked of in the army, where the fortune 
of this officer was looked upon to be made. But no opportunity 
offered for promoting him during the remainder of the expedition, 
so that the only reward in the general's power to give him, was 
thanking him publicly at the head of the army, which he did in the 
strongest terms. Resolved, however, to be the instrument of his 
promotion, though he could not promote him himself, he represented 
him, on his return, in so advantageous a light to one^ whose inclina- 
tion it was known to be, and who, from his office, should have had 
it in his power to reward merit, that he promised to do him justice. 

But the delicacy of this officer's sense of honour defeated these 
generous intentions. He would not accept of the preferment 
offered him, without having, at the same time, reparation for the 
injustice he had suffered, by an honorary rank, superior to those 
who had been put over him ; and, when this was refused, for reason 
of convenience, insisted on quitting the service, in the permission 
for which his patron did justice to his character in the most authentic 
manner, before he himself resigned an office, which he would hold 
no longer than it was in his power to fulfil the declaration he had 
made on accepting it — ' that while he should be in that office, he 
would not only be a vigilant servant of the Crown, but also a faithful 
trustee for the honest claim of the brave and deserving officer '. 

1 Charles Townshend, then a member of the government ; went into 
opposition for a short space, and afterwards succeeded Fox as Paymaster 
of the Forces. 



306 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 



CHAPTER XLVII 

CHEYSAi ACCOUNTS CUEIOTJSLY FOE SOME INTEEESTINO POINTS OF 
POLICY — HE StJPPOETS HIS EEASON FOR NOT ENTEEINO INTO THE 
PAETICITLAES OF THE SIEGE, BY SOME Elr. MAB. Tra ON WAE, MOEE 
JUST, PERHAPS, THAN POPULAR, AND ASSIGNS A MOTIVE FOB 
COURAGE NOT LIKELY TO BE MEANT BY THOSE WHO GIVE IT 

I HAVE been so particular in the story of this officer, in order to 
give you some notion of matters, with, which your maimer of life 
has made you unacquainted. In his fate you see the consequence 
of a subaltern's striving to distinguish himself, by doing anjrthing 
more than his immediate duty. 

This, however strange it may appear to you, who judge only from 
reason, is strictly consistent with the principles of modem policy, 
which is calculated entirely for private convenience, without the 
least regard to public good. Every attempt of the kind is taken 
for an affront by his superiors, as implying a design of enforcing 
them to promote him, and putting himself in competition with 
them for the good opinion of the public, and therefore discounten- 
anced. Indeed, if it were otherwise, few men of fortune or interest 
would, according to the present way of thinking, go into the army 
at all, as they could not expect to enjoy their ease, or show a pru- 
dent regard to their safety, without being subject to disgraceful 
comparisons from the officious assiduity or rashness of every man 
desperate in disposition or circumstances, who disregarded life and 
all its pleasures, or had no way of being able to live, but hazarding 
the loss of them. 

In former times, men entered into the profession of arms with a 
certain prospect of honour and advantage, if they could merit 
them, and therefore exerted all their abilities of mind and body in 
emulation for so tempting a prize ; but now, every idler who is 
unfit for any other business, purchases a commission, in order to 
live upon the pay, and as he is sensible that no efforts of his own 
can procure an addition to that pay, by raising him to a higher 
rank, he is satisfied to enjoy his bargain as easily as he can, and do 
no more than he needs must to avoid losing it. And this will ac- 
count to you for the difference between the English forces now and 
in those days. Nor is the case otherwise with those who get into 
the army by interest. They depend solely upon the same interest 
to push them forward, and therefore give themselves no trouble to 
deserve promotion, which they are convinced no desert could pro- 
cure them. But, to quit reflections not likely to be regarded, and 
return to my story. You must not expect a minute detail of the 
progress of this enterprise. The operations of war are too confused 
to give pleasure to reason in the representation, too horrid not to 
give pain to humanity. 

I see you think this too severe, but such thoughts are the effect 
of prejudice. When the victories which have been blazoned highest, 
and which reflected the greatest honour on those who gained them, 
are stripped of the false colouring laid on only to dazzle and deceive, 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 307 

and examined coolly, most of them will be found owing to some un- 
foreseen accident— -some lucky improvement of a blunder of the 
enemy, or else an obstinate perseverance in their own, after every 
boasted rule of art had been broke through, every resource of judg- 
ment exhausted in vain, and to have been attended by circumstances 
of such misery and loss to victors as well as vanquished, as tarnished 
all their glory, and infinitely overbalanced eveiy advantage possible 
to be gained by them. I shall therefore mention only such particu- 
lars as may contribute to illustrate this picture of the heart of man. 
The ardour shown by the subaltern officers and private men in 
carrying on the siege, in which they suffered more from the inclem- 
encies of a climate unnatural to them, and against which no proper 
provision had been made, though they had been delayed to meet 
its fiercest fury, as well as from the diseases caused by the badness 
of every necessary of life, than from all the efforts of the enemy, 
all the arts which the ingenuity of man has devised for the destruc- 
tion of his own unhappy species, was impossible to be accounted for 
from any other principles than disregard to a life destitute of every 
comfort and convenience that could endear it — a remark which,' 
to''the humane wisdom of some, may seem to justify the deficiency 
and badness of every kind of provision, too generally made for them 
on such occasions, while those whose higher rank may be thought 
to animate them with a sense of honour and ambitious hope, and 
who therefore may be thought not to want such incitements to 
desperation, enjoy a luxury scarce to be reconciled with the confu- 
sion of such an unsettled state — that neither of these motives, 
though powerful as they may be in general, will always prevail over 
a foolish fondness for Ufe, instances appear in every war. 



CHAPTER XLVIII 

ONE OF THE CAPTAINS tWfDBB GHBTSAL's MASTBE BEHAVES IN AN 
BXTBAOEDINABY MANNEB, AND VINDICATES HIMSEO' AS EXTKA- 
ORDINABILY — HIS CRIME IS OVERLOOKED EOR PRUDENTIAL REA- 
SONS, WHICH HE MISTAKES, AND DEMANDS A TRIAL — HE MEETS 
HIS DESERTS 

As my master was attending one morning to the success of an 
attack which he had ordered to be made by some of the men-of-war 
under his command, upon a fort which principally obstructed the 
progress of the siege, he was surprised to see one of them not only 
notoriously make the most shameful delay in bearing down, but also, 
the moment she came within reach of it, instead of joining in the 
attack begun by others, put about and quit her station without 
even attempting to do anything. 

Though the captain of the ship ' had drawn the general disesteem 
of the corps upon him by his arrogant behaviour, and, by his morose 

1 Captain Campbell [Davis's Olio], probably the commander, James 
Campbell, of the Stirling OasUe, a 64-gun ship. 



308 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

treatment of his mea and officers, raised suspicions of his spirit, on 
this unerring maxim, that cowardice is the inseparable companion 
of cruelty, yet, as he had those powerful motives to courage, pride 
of family and poverty, and must know that the inevitable conse- 
quence of such a flagrant breach of duty must be a disgraceful 
death, if it could not be properly accounted for, my master con- 
cluded that some accident must have happened, which was the 
more probable, as the ship was the worst in the fleet, and therefore, 
as soon as the affair was over, made his signal to come on board, 
that he might learn what was the matter. 

Though the first sight of him might have explained the whole, 
the fears of his heart being visible in every feature of his haggard 
face, my master disdained to aggravate his distress by an appear- 
ance of severity, and only asked him coolly the reason of his not 
having borne down to the attack with the same expedition aa the 
other ships. 

' Sir — sir — sir ', faltered the trembling wretch, not sufficiently 
recovered from his fright to express the evasion he had prepared, 
' I — I made all the expedition I possibly could '. 

' How can you have the confidence to say so ', returned my 
master, " when there were several of your sails which you never 
set' ? 

' That was not my fault, sir ', replied the captain, resuming hia 
natural assurance. ' How could I set them, when I had sent the 
booms ashore yesterday by your orders ' ? 

' The booms ' ? interrupted my master, with a look of the most 
contemptuous astonishment. ' Can such ignorance be possible t 
Surely you must have known that the booms meant in my orders 
were those the boats are stowed on, which were to be sent ashore, 
that the men might not be hurt by the splinters in the attack, not 
those of your sails '. 

' Very likely, sir, it might have been so, to be sure. But, as the 
order was to send all my booms without any such exception, I did 
not think I could justify disobeying it on my own opinion '. 

' And pray, sir, how can you justify your quitting your station 
in the manner you did, when you at length made a shift to come 
up ? Was that in obedience to your orders, too ' ? 

' No, sir, that was quite another thing. When I came up, I saw 
the other ships had suffered considerably, and, as I thought they 
were sufficient for the purpose, I judged it best to save his majesty's 
ship, entrusted to my care, for another occasion. That was my 
reason, sir '. 

' A very prudential one, truly ; but I believe you should add, 
too, to save the captain, for, if I mistake not greatly, that was not 
the least object of your care '. 

' Very true, sir, and with good reason, too, let me tell you, as I 
know that the interest of my family, which has promoted me thus 
far, will not fail to raise me higher. Men of low birth, or whose 
relations will not serve them, may set no value on their lives ; but 
that is not my case ; I am akin to most of the nobility of my country, 
who always stand by their own blood, where any preferment or 
advantage is to be gotten. Hem ! hem ' ! 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 309 

' I know their interest full well ', retorted my master, scarce able 
to suppress his indignation at such insolence, ' and the closeness 
with which they hang together, but take care that you do not 
depend upon them too far '. 

Unabashed by the manner in which this was said, the captain 
asked if he had any further commands, and, being answered in ths 
negative, marched off in triumph. 

There are some crimes in the punishment of which all men are 
more than ordinarily severe, in order to prove their own exemption 
from them. One of the first of these is cowardice, which, though 
often an involuntary defect of constitution, is justly reckoned a 
crime in military men, from the consequences that may attend it, 
and as it makes them unable to perform the duties of, a profession 
which they should not have entered into under a sense of such 
incapacity. All the captains present were for punishing the offender 
instantly, in the most exemplary manner, for so flagrant a breach 
of duty. But my master, much as he detested the crime, and was 
provoked at the insolence with which he strove to carry it off, 
thought it better to overlook it for the present, than by bringing 
him to justice, throw a disgrace upon the forces, that might en- 
courage the enemy to exert themselves, in hopes of more instances 
of the kind. But this moderation was disappointed by a common 
cause. In a few days after, the captain, judging by himself that 
nothing but fear of giving offence to his great family could have 
prevented his being fallen upon directly (for, notwithstanding his 
evasions, he was conscious of his crime), instead of improving that 
precious respite to extenuate his guilt by some meritorious action, 
presumed, upon meeting some instances of contempt from the rest 
of his corps, to demand the justification of a public trial, in order to 
be formally acquitted of what he thought they dared not to convict 
him, and also to escape being involved in any further dangers during 
the expedition, as he knew the immediate consequence of such a 
demand must necessarily be suspending him from his command till 
he should be tried, which he knew could not be before the conclusion 
of the siege ; and in this latter particular his expectation was not 
deceived. 

This directly put an end to the prudential reasons that had 
hitherto saved Mm, and of which the successful progress of the 
seige had also greatly lessened the force. Accordingly, to end his 
Btory here in a few words, the trial he desired was granted, the 
result of which was that he was broke with infamy, in contempt 
of all his boasts and menaces of the power and resentment of his 
family and friends. 



310 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 



CHAPTER XLIX 

CHEYSAL ACCOUNTS POE THE PBCULIAE ANIMOSITIES WHICH SOME 
NATIONS SHOW IN WAE — A NOBLE SPANIARD IS TAKEN PEISONBB 
IN A SALLY — HE MAKES A PEOPOSAL TO THE GENEEAL, WHICH 13 
ACCEPTED, AND OPENS A PEOSPECT OF PEACE — A BEUTAL OTTTEAGB 
DISAPPOINTS HIS DESIGN, AND EMBEOILS MATTEES MOEE THAN 
EVEE 

Theeb is nothing suggests so disadvantageous an idea of mankind 
as the more than brutal ferocity with which they destroy each other, 
when quarrels between nations set the animosity of individuals free 
from those restraints of law with which necessity has taught human 
prudence to enforce the observation of the general duties of social 
and moral life. 

This animosity, though, is never seen in its most sanguine colours, 
but in wars between people of different modes of religion. In that 
revelation of the wiU of Heaven, which should be the rule of the 
religion of Cihristians, the first precept in respect to the mutual 
intercourse between man and man, is brotherly love to each other. 
Such a precept bears intrinsic evidence of its divine origin. But 
still, human perversion has dared to represent the breach of it as 
a duty of that revealed law, by confining the benefit of the obliga- 
tion to the profession of some particular opinions, and not only 
excluding the rest of mankind from the circle of the general brother- 
hood, but also making it a merit to propagate those opinions, by 
the extirpation of all dissenting from them, who are held incapable 
of the favour of Heaven, and therefore not entitled to the common 
rights of humanity. 

Of all the people who profess Christianity, the Spaniards are the 
most bigoted slaves to this narrow and gross prejudice. With 
them, therefore, the natural animosity of war is heightened by 
religious abhorrence, against all who iffer in opinion from them, 
and the laws which more enlightened nations have mutually agreed 
in, to restrain its ravages, and facilitate the restitution of peace, 
are often broken through, with a cruelty disgraceful to the name of 
man. 

In a sally made one night by the besieged, a noble Spaniard, 
who had penetrated so far into the trenches that it was impossible 
for him to get back, fell wounded into the hands of the English. 
The gallantry with which he had defended himself gained him re- 
spect from his enemies, and he was treated with that generous 
tenderness which brave men feel for each other. 

Struck with a behaviour so different from what he expected, for 
he had been taught to look upon the English as enemies to man- 
kind, and delighting in the most savage cruelty, he desired to be 
led to the commander, to whom, he said, he had something of con- 
sequence to propose. Accordingly, as soon as his wounds were 
dressed, he was conducted to the general, with whom my master 

happened to be, and advancing to him with an air of dignity ' I 

am' come, illustrious chief ', said he ' to thank you for the humane 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 311 

and generous treatment I have received from your brave soldiers, 
which, if known to my countrymen, would facilitate an accom- 
modation between them and you, as dread of your power, raised, 
I am now convinced, by injurious misrepresentations, has hitherto 
principally prevented their listening to any terms from you. I 
speak not this from ignorance. My father is governor of the city. 
If you will let him know that I am your captive, he will directly 
pay for me whatever ransom you desire, and, on my return, I will 
faithfully remove the prejudices which keep up their animosity 
against you, and by that means open the way to a reconciliation, till 
the pleasure of our sovereigns shall restore peace to their subjects '- 

Such an offer required no arguments to enforce it. 

' The English ', answered the general, ' never abuse the advan- 
tages they obtain in war. I desire no ransom for your liberty ; 
you are free to return to your father when you please ; and if you 
can be the means of preventing the effusion of more blood, as you must 
be convinced that resistance is in vain, I shall think myself happy 
in having an opportunity to show respect to all whom you shall 
recommend as your friends, and deserving of it '. 

These words filled the benevolent heart of the Spaniard with joy. 

'I fly ', replied he eagerly, ' to execute a commission, in which 
there can be no difficulty. As you are brave and faithful to your 
sovereign, you will require no terms which brave men and good 
subjects ought not to comply with '. 

The general then prevailed upon him to take some refreshment, 
after which he and my master went with him to the head of the 
lines, where he dismissed him with every mark of respect, attended 
by an officer with a flag of truce to bring back the governor's answer. 
But this pleasing prospect was soon overcast. The officer and he 
had not advanced haU the way between the trenches and the town, 
when they were fired upon by a party of Spaniards, who lay in 
ambush among the ruins of some old buildings. At the first sound 
of their fire, the Spaniard rushed forward, in order to put a stop 
to it, and the officer waved his flag of truce over his head, but that 
aacred ensign afforded him no protection. They repeated their 
shot, and, seeing him fall, ran up, and in despite of all the Spaniard 
could do, who received a mortal wound as he covered his body 
with his own, butchered him in the most barbarous manner, reply- 
ing to his appeal to the law of nations, violated thus in him, that 
heretics were excluded from the benefit of all laws. 

The indignation with which such an outrage fired the English 
forces is not to be described. They vowed to exterminate a people 
who were unworthy to live ; and, in the first madness of their 
rage, were with difficulty restrained from attempting to storm the 
walls, before a breach should give them even a possibility of success. 

The leaders did not fail to improve such a spirit. Everything 
was pushed on with redoubled vigour ; and war became more 
horrible when blackened with a passion for revenge, which had 
taken possession of the men, that it was some time before all the 
endeavours of their officers could put a stop to their indulging it, 
and bring them back to that generous valour which is their peculiar 
glory. 



312 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 



CHAPTER L 

CHEYSAL's ATTENTIOIT IS AGEEBABLY DIVEBTED BY THE APPEAE- 
ANCB OP A YOUNG SPANIAED, WHO THEOWS HIMSELF AT THE FEET 
OP HIS MASTER TO PEEPEE AN EXTEAOEDINAEY BEQUEST — THE 
HISTOEY OF DON ALPHONSO GUZMAN, THE YOUNG SPANIAED 

I WAS relieved from the pain of attending to suoh scenes of horror, 
by an affair that showed, in a striking light, the force of passions 
more natural to the heart of man. 

As my master, who, active as light, was everjrwhere, and joined 
in everything, was standing one night to see the effect of a battery 
that commanded a, particular quarter of the town, a youth, who 
had made his escape from the garrison, and advanced in the face 
of all their fire, though sufficient to terrify any being capable of 
terror, threw himself at his feet, in agonies of distress. My master, 
whose heart was warmed with that generous compassion which is 
inseparable from true courage, was struck at the sight, and, raising 
him from the ground, bade him declare the nature of his distress, 
and expect every assistance to which he was entitled by the sacred 
duties of humanity. 

Encouraged by these words, the youth raised his head, and fixing 
his eyes upon my master, with a look inexpressibly supplicatiug, 
' Oh, stop your fire, gracious chief ' ! said he, pressing his lips 
passionately to the hand that had raised him, and on which he 
still hung ; ' stop your fire in that fatal direction, where it can hurt 
only innocence and virtue. That building against which it is 
levelled is not a part of the fortifications, the destruction of which 
can be of any service to you. It is a convent dedicated to the 
Virgin Mother of God, and at this time contains all that my 
soul holds dear, all that is beautiful and virtuous under heaven '^ 

Though his youth, beauty, and distress, interested every one 
present in the suppliant's favour, the nature of his suit must neces- 
sarily have prevented its success. But an accident saved him from 
the pain of being refused, the powder which was to serve the guns 
somehow catching fire, and destroying the greatest part of the 
battery, in the very instant he spoke. Not all the horrors of such 
a scene could suppress the joy he felt at an event so favourable 
to his hopes. 

' Heaven has interfered ' ! exclaimed he, in an ecstaoy. ' Heaven 
has interfered to save her ; and man will not presume to oppose 
its pleasure '. 

liie enthusiastic manner in which he said this struck my 
master. 

' Restrain your passions for a few moments ', said he, ' tiU I have 
leisure to attend more particularly to you, and then, if you can 
convince me of the truth of what you say, your request shall be 
complied with. Far be it from me to hurt those helpless votaries 
of reUgion. Britons seek other objects for their valour '. 

He then gave the necessary orders for repairing the battery, and, 
desiring the youth to follow him, went on board his ship, where 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 313 

he treated liiin with every mark of politeness and compassion. 
As soon as they had taken some refreshment, my master made 
a sign to every one else to retire, and then, addressing himself to the 
youth in the most humane manner, desired to know who he was, 
and what motives could have induced him to run into such im- 
minent danger, in order to prefer a suit, of the success of which 
there was so little probability. 

The youth for some moments hung down his head abashed, then 
with a sigh that seemed to burst his heart, ' It is my duty, most 
generous chief ', said he, to give you the information you require, 
however painful the task may be to me ; especially as your con- 
descending to listen to the story of my misfortunes awakes a 
hope that you wiU be moved by them to grant a request on which 
depends my life. My name is Alphonso. My father, Don Pedro, 
bears an honourable command in the forces which defend yonder 
city against your arms ; but glories more in the honour of being 
descended from the noble family of Guzman, which has preserved 
its blood pure from every debasing mixture, since the beginning 
of time, in the mountains of Castile, and produced a race of heroes 
whose fame has iiiled the world. When my father arrived at an 
age fit to bear arms, as none of the powers of Europe dared to 
provoke the wrath of Spain, disdaining a life of inglorious peace, 
he entered into the forces sent hither to reduce such of the rebelli- 
ous natives as still presumed to refuse submission to the monarch 
of the Spanish worlds, where he signalized himself so eminently 
that at the end of seven years his merits were rewarded with a 
commission, signed by the viceroy himself, in the name of the king. 
Such a distinguished honour gave weight to the addresses which 
he had for some time paid to the only daughter of Don Alonzo 
Garzias, who was a native of Arragon, and had been sent over by the 
king to fill the important office of secretary to the receiver of his 
revenues. !From this marriage, so honourable to both parties, I 
have the happiness to derive my birth, if it can be called a happiness 
to be born only to misfortunes. 

' As I was the sole hope of two such illustrious houses, no pains 
were spared to give me an education suitable to my birth ; the great 
exploits of my ancestors, the antiquity and imtainted nobility of 
my blood, were continually repeated to me to excite emulation, 
and inspire me with proper sentiments of honour. Such care seemed 
the surest means to procure happiness, but the wisdom of man 
strives in vain against the decrees of fate. 

' In the neighbourhood of my father's house there lived a merchant 
named Don Antonio, between whose family and ours there was the 
closest intimacy — an intimacy mutually advantageous, the counte- 
nance of a person of my father's consequence being an honour 
to his friend, who never omitted those returns of gratitude which 
his wealth often gave him an opportunity of making. Don Antonio 
had an only daughter, whose being heiress to his great fortune was 
the least blessing Heaven had bestowed upon her. Oh, my Olivia, 
shall I ever behold you more ? May I yet raise my hopes so high 
as to think of calling you mine ' t 

At these words, a flood of tears choking his utterance, my master 



314 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

took the opportunity to go out, and give some orders to hia officers ; 
and on his return the youth proceeded : — 

' Don Antonio's daughter and I being nearly of the same age, 
the tender connection of infant fondness grew up between us, and 
improved with our ripening years. The attention of my father 
was too much engrossed by his military cares to take notice of our 
attachment, and my mother was so sensible of the many perfections 
of Olivia, that far from discouraging, she promoted it by every 
means in her power, dwelling continually on her praises, and sug- 
gesting to me such little offices of affection and respect as were 
suited to our ages, and most likely to make an impression on her 
tender heart. Nor did the father of Olivia (she had lost her mother 
in her infancy) show any dissatisfaction at a passion which could 
not escape his notice, influenced, most probably, by a sense of the 
honour which he should derive from such an alliance. 

' In this happy state we lived till I entered on my fifteenth year, 
when my father thought it proper for me to learn the art of war 
in order to quality me for such military promotions as I was entitled 
to by my birth, and for that purpose gave me notice to prepare 
myself to march with some troops, which were going to reinforce 
a garrison in the most distant part of the kingdom. Though my 
heart glowed with all the ambition and desire of glory which my 
noble blood must naturally inspire, the thought of being separated 
from Olivia overbalanced every other consideration. In the first 
emotions of my soul, therefore, I threw myself at my father's feet, 
and rashly owned my passion, imploring him as he regarded my 
life, to make me happy in the possession of my love, before he 
attempted parting us, even for a moment. It is impossible to 
describe his rage on this unhappy discovery. Spuming me from 
him with his foot, " Degenerate wretch " ! said he, when his wrath 
permitted him to speak ; " degenerate wretch ! to stain the honour 
of your blood by thinking of an alliance with the daughter of a 
person of whose family you have no knowledge " ! — ^for in all the 
intercourse of intimacy, the father of OUvia had never discovered 
in what part of Spain he had been bom ; nor could the recital 
of illustrious pedigrees, the constant topic of discourse among 
the nobles, ever incite him to an emulative mention of his own. 
" Hence ! fly my sight this moment ; nor ever presume to appear 
before me again till you have conquered this disgraceful passion ". 

' I knew the inflexibility of my father's temper too well to attempt 
making any reply, even would the fulness of my heart have permitted 
me. I retired, therefore, without speaking a word, and going 
to my mother, informed her of my distress, which she strove to 
alleviate by every expression of tenderness and consolation, promis- 
ing to exert all her influence, as soon as the first heat of his wrath 
should be allayed, to prevail upon him to consent to my suit '. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 315 



CHAPTER LI 
CONTINUED : Olivia's father is taken up by the inquisition, 

AND HEESBtF PUT INTO A CONVENT, ON AN ENGLISH BATTBEY'S 
EIBING UPON WHICH, DON ALPHONSO COMBS IN DBSPAIE TO 
CHBYSAL'S MASTER TO MAKE A VERY ODD REQUEST, WHICH HE 
GRANTS AT LENGTH, AND ALSO PROMISES HIM HIS ASSISTANCE TO 
OBTAIN HIS MISTRESS 

' Though I received some encoTiragement from these assurances 
I could not forbear going, in the boding of my heart, to acquaint 
Olivia with what had happened, but in the most delicate terms. 
Her affliction was not less than mine. She saw the sincerity of my 
love, and in the tenderness of such a scene, yielded to my entreaties, 
and plighted her faith to me by the most sacred vows. Comforted by 
the thought that she could not now be torn from me, I returned 
home, where I found my mother fulfilling her promise, and pleading 
with my father in my behalf. As their earnestness made them 
speak aloud, I could not resist the natural desire of listening to a 
debate of such importance to my hopes. She urged, with all the 
strength of reason, the absurdity of thinking a family dishonoured 
by the admission of a female, and enforced her arguments with 
the examples even of sovereigns ; she insisted on the beauty, virtues, 
and fortune of Olivia, which made her worthy of the most honour- 
able alliance ; and concluded with saying how much better it would 
be for us all to have me married to a person whose wealth would 
enable us to spend the remainder of our lives in plenty and happi- 
ness than to continue struggling with every misery of poverty, 
merely to indulge a false, ill-grounded pride. 

' My father had listened to the former part of what she said with 
an appearance of attention ; but the moment she mentioned his 
poverty he lost all patience. " Forbear, mean, mercenary woman "! 
said he, stamping his foot upon the ground with a violence that 
shook the house ; " forbear to tempt my wrath by such base in- 
sinuations. Did ever a Castilian think poverty a hardship, or put 
riches in competition with his honour ? Such sentiments may suit 
an Arragonian, but are beneath me. I see the source of the wretch's 
degeneracy ! My blood never could have stooped to such meanness, 
had it not been mixed vrith yours ". Saying this he flung out of 
the room, and finding me at the door, " Mark me, thou disgrace 
to my blood " ! said he, with a look that appalled my soul ; " if 
ever I hear more of this affair, I swear by the offended honour of 
all my ancestors to sacrifice every one concerned iu my being offered 
such an affront ". 

' What I felt on hearing this dreadful denunciation may be easily 
conceived. I swooned away, nor recovered my senses till several 
hours after, when I found my mother weeping over me, in the bitter- 
ness of resentment and grief. As soon as she perceived that I was 
come to myself, she strove to comfort me by repeating her former 
promises, to the accomplishment of which she was now further 
impelled by her resentment of the reflections which my father had 



316 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

tlirowii upon her country. But an unforeseen misfortune blasted 
all our hopes before she had time to make another effort. The 
father of Olivia having had occasion to go to England on some 
affairs in the course of his extensive dealings, was so taken with the 
people of that country, that, after his return, he never omitted any 
opportunity of vindicating them from the injurious aspersions of 
those who spoke only from prejudice, and without proper informa- 
tion. This attachment naturally raised the jealousy of the clergy ; 
but as he confined his approbation merely to their moral and social 
virtues, without ever saying a word in vindication of their religious 
"tenets, they contented themselves with cautioning him against 
misplacing his praise, and telling him that there could be no virtue 
where the true faith was not ; and, therefore, those actions with 
which he was dazzled, were no more than shining sina ; and they 
were thus mild in their reprehension, as he was remarkably punctual 
in the professions and practice of all the rites and doctrines pre- 
scribed by the Holy Church. But this lenity lasted not long. On 
the breaking out of the present war with England, some persons, 
who envied the success with which his honest industry had been 
rewarded, raised a suspicion in the governor of his holding an im- 
proper correspondence with the enemy, to which his former regard 
for them seemed to give an appearance of probability. 

' Bold in conscious innocence, he denied the charge, nor could 
the strictest inquiry procure the least proof of it ; but in the course 
of their search, a discovery was xmhappily made that involved him 
in ruin, if possible, more dreadful ; a number of books containing 
opinions contrary to the Catholic faith, being found in his possession, 
concealed among some of his goods. In vain did he allege that 
they belonged not to, nor could possibly have been known of by him, 
the goods among which they had been concealed having been 
landed but a few day before out of an English ship, which had been 
taken by a Spanish man-of-war, in her passage to one of their own 
colonies, where such books were openly allowed of, and sold to him 
unopened, as they still remained. But evident as the truth of this 
was, the Holy Office, to whose jurisdiction the affair belonged, 
would not admit of any such excuse. They instantly seized the 
unhappy man, and, hurrying him away to their own prison, took 
possession of all his wealth, and forced his helpless daughter into 
yonder convent. This misfortune, which deprived me of the 
wretch's poorest consolation, the liberty of complaining, drove 
me to despair. I pined in silence ; and was beginining to meditate 
on laying down a life that was become a burden to me, when my 
father, calling me to him one morning, " The time is come ", said 
he, smiling fiercely, " that will prove the blood of Guzman. The 
evil genius of the English has prompted them to come, and seek 
their deaths here. The most noble governor has not only promoted 
me this day to the command of a company in the forces destined 
for the defence of this city, but also, in respect to my family, has 
appointed you to be my lieutenant. Let this arouse you to a sense 
of yourself ; consider what you owe to your country, and to your 
name. Every feebler passion flies at the manly voice of war ". 

' Languid as my soul was, I could not hear this news -n-ithout 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 317 

joy, especially aa it opened me a prospect of meeting honourably 
that death which was now my only hope. Accordingly, aa soon 
aa the enemy appeared, I courted danger with such eagerness, that 
my father, in spite of all his magnanimity, more than once desired 
me to restrain a courage that arose to an excess. But even death 
itself is deaf to the wretch's call. Nothing material happened to 
me till the battery, to which I came to you, opened upon the convent, 
when the thought of my Olivia's danger of being buried in its ruins 
drove me to madness. I instantly flew thither, and, imagining 
that such circumstances bore down all regard to rulea calculated 
for timea of peace, demanded entrance to convey the inhabitants 
to aome place of safety ; but what was my astonishment to hear 
the governor had given the strictest orders that not a soul should 
be admitted to stir, committing to the immediate hand of Heaven 
the protection of its peculiar votaries. 

' Such inhumanity, for I can call it by no milder name, broke 
every bond of duty and allegiance. I abjured all further connection 
with so cruelly insensible a monster ; and recollecting the many 
exalted instances of generosity which the unhappy father of Olivia 
had told me of the English, I resolved to apply myself to them, 
and try whether I could not obtain that safety for the beloved of 
my soul, which I could not hope from him whose duty it was to 
protect her. 

' This, moat illustrious chief, is the story of my misfortunes, the 
cause of that conduct which appeared so atrange to you. If you 
grant my suit, you will be amply rewarded by the conscious ap- 
probation of your own mind. You will merit the blessing of Heaven 
on your undertakings by sparing the most perfect of its works. 
And may I presume to add, you will attach to you a heart that is 
incapable of deceit. Through every vicissitude of life will I attend 
your steps, the faithful servant of your fate '. 

The brightness of truth breaks through every cloud, and forces 
conviction. 

' I grant your request ', said my master with a smile of consola- 
tion and encoxiragement, ' the convent shall be spared. Nor is 
that all. If Buccess crowns my hopes, I will also use every means 
in my power to restore your Olivia to your arms '- 



CHAPTER LII 

THE FOBTITNATB EPEECTS OF CHSYSAL'S MASTER'S SPARING THE CON- 
VENT — THE MUTUAL ADVANTAGE, TO VICTOBS AND VANQUISHED, 
OF AETICLES OF CAPITULATION — CHBYSAi's MASTER PEBPOEMS HIS 
PBOMISE TO ALPHONSO, INTO WHOSE SEEVTCE CHEYSAL BNTEBS — 
ALPHONSO KECOVEES HIS MISTRESS, WHOSE FATHER IS SET AT 
LIBERTY BY A PIECE OF FUN OF SOME ENGLISH SAILORS — CON- 
CLUSION OF THE STOEY OF ALPHONSO — CHEYSAL CHANGES HIS 
SERVICE 

AccoEDlNGLY to his promise, the next night, when the battery 
was repaired, my master gave orders to direct the fire another 
way, where he soon found the reward of his generosity, one of th& 



318 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

first bombs which was thrown setting fire to the principal maga- 
zine in the whole city, the blowing up of which overturned a con- 
siderable part of the fortifications. Animated by this succesB 
to a degree of frenzy, the besiegers pushed on their attacks with 
such irresistible fury that, in spite of the accumulated havoc of 
war, disease, and want, they at length overcame the obstinacy of 
the besieged, and compelled them to capitulate on terms which 
were readily agreed to on both aides, as they saved the plunder 
from the soldiers for the victorious commanders, at the same time that 
they protected the persons of the vanquished from licentious outrage. 

There is no instance in which the customs of mankind are more 
changed than this. Formerly, when nations waged war everythiag 
the victorious soldier could lay hold on was his own, the persons 
as well as the property of the vanquished ; and this more especi- 
ally at the taking of a town, which was the harvest of his hopes. 
The excesses committed on these occasions most certainly required 
a, remedy ; but it were well if that remedy, as in other cases, had 
not been abused, and the care of restraining the excess of the 
common soldiers made a pretext for depriving them of the reward 
of all their toils and dangers, to emioh their commanders. The 
injustice of making slaves of the people, for the ambition or avarice 
of their prince, is so flagrant, that the practice has been universally 
discontinued among civilized nations, who also affect to show 
moderation in stripping them of their property, particularly in this 
instance of towns taken by capitulation. But at whose expense is 
this moderation ? Why, at that of the inferior officers and soldiers, 
who receive a pittance of their own earnings that only insults 
their necessities, while the bulk is shared between their superiors. 
The injustice of this is evident. Either all such composition 
should be abolished entirely, and the property as well as liberty 
of the vanquished be preserved to them, or the prize be more 
equitably divided with those from whom plunder is taken, who 
struggle with distress, and brave death for a morsel of bread, with- 
out any more hope of mending their condition even by success 
than the ox has of eating the corn for which he labours to plough 
the ground ; and this loss of hope is the reason why soldiers are 
not animated with the same ardour now as in former days. But, 
grating as so flagrant a partiality must be to a generous mind, 
there is one circumstance, not obvious perhaps, to you, that aggra- 
vates the pain of it still higher : this is the necessity which the 
sufferers are under of submitting to the insolence and extortions 
of a set of clerks and agents who fatten on their spoils, without 
even pretending to any merit in the acquisition ; a reflection that 
exasperates them against their commanders, by whose favour 
those wretches are introduced and supported, and on whom they 
father all their villanies. 

Much as the cares of his situation engrossed the attention of 
my master he did not forget his promise to the Spanish youth ; 
but, ordering him a guard of soldiers, bade him go, as soon as the 
gates should be delivered up, and secure the convent where his 
Olivia was confined from any accident which might happen on 
such an occasion in spite of all their care, giving him, at the same 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 319 

time, a purse of gold, in which I was, to answer any present neces- 
sities, with directions to apply to him again if he should have any 
further need of his assistance. 

My new master did not want to have such a commission repeated. 
He kissed the hand of his benefactor in a rapture of gratitude, and 
encouraging the guard, assigned him the most liberal promises, 
flew, the moment the gates of the city were opened, to the convent, 
and demanded his Olivia with the peremptory voice of a conqueror, 
where the sight of the guard removed every objection, and she was 
instantly delivered to him. The meeting of these young lovers 
was most affecting. They flew into each other's arms, and em- 
bracing in ecstacy too big for utterance, gave vent to the fulness 
of their hearts by a flood of tears. Recovering himself at length, 
' Come, my Olivia ', said Alphonso, taking her hand, ' let us leave 
this place. Let us go '. 

' Oh, whither ', interrupted she, starting wildly, ' whither shall 
I go ? I have no home — no father to receive me ' . 

' My home is yours ', answered Alphonso, embracing her most 
tenderly ; ' we will go to the house of my father, who cannot persist 
in his cruelty, when he is informed how signally Heaven has inter- 
fered in our favour, and there we will consult on the means proper 
for procuring the deliverance of Antonio. I have a protector 
among the conquerors, the most generous of mankind, who will 
not refuse his assistance on such an occasion '. 

These words comforted Olivia with a hope, for the accomplish- 
ment of which though she was indebted to another cause. The way 
from the convent to the house of Alphonso's father leading them by 
the prison of the Inquisition, Olivia was so affected at the sight of it, 
that she swooned away in the arms of Alphonso. Such an accident 
naturally threw the whole company into an embarrassment ; while 
they were in the midst of which, a body of English seamen, who 
had slipped away from their officers, and were roving about merely 
from curiosity, and without intention of doing mischief, but ready 
to join in any that should fall in their way, happemng to come by, 
no sooner understood from the guard what was the matter, than 
looking at each other for some moments, as if waiting for the word 
of command. At length one of them cried out, ' Hullo, boys ! 
What say you ? Shall we bail the gentlewoman's father ? Mayhap 
there may be some of our countrymen in the bilboes along with 
him. Danm my eyes and limbs, but it would be good fun to set them 
all free. I fancy the Inquisitors will not refuse our bail ; if they do, 
I should be glad to pick a quarrel with them ; I hate them mortally 
ever since I saw them roast some poor Smouches at Lisbon because 
they would not eat pork. Come ! cheer away, my hearts of oak ! 
All hands aloft, and to work '. 

These words were like fire given to a mine. He had scarce 
finished, when the thoughtless creatures without more ado ran to 
the prison, and, while some of them were forcing in the gates, the 
rest, mounting on each other's shoulders, climbed over the 
walls. The moment Olivia, now recovered from her swoon, saw 
the prison open, ' Now is the time, Alphonso,' said she, ' now is 
the time to set my father free '. 



320 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

The hint waa sufficient. Alphonso turned directly to the guard, 
and perceiving by their looks that they were willing to assist him, 
' I go, my love ! ' said he ; ' but where shall I leave you in safety 
till I return ? Such a place cannot be fit for your delicacy '. 

' Speak not of leaving me ' ! interrupted she eagerly. ' I will go 
with you ! No delicacy shall interfere with such a duty '. 

On her saying this, they all entered the prison, where the seamen 
were shouting and skipping about like so many wild creatures, and 
setting all the prisoners at liberty wherever they went. The secrets 
of this prison-house are too horrid for description. I shall, therefore 
draw a veil over them at this time, especially as another occasion 
will lead me into the same scenes again, when the representation 
will be more interesting. 

No words can convey an idea of the tenderness of the meeting 
between Olivia and her father, whom Alphonso and she readily 
found out. As soon as they had indulged the first transports of 
their joy, she informed him briefly how much they were both in- 
debted to Alphonso for their present happiness. Though her 
father was not at a loss for the motive of such generosity, he thought 
it not proper to take notice of it at that time. He embraced him 
tenderly, and besought Heaven to reward his virtues. 

' The happiness of serving those most dear to us ', said Alphonso, 
who had not the same command of his temper, ' is its own reward. 
Olivia and her father have a right to everything in my power. Let 
us leave this place, the sight of which appals my soul. Let us 
go to the house of my father '- 

' Lead on, my children ', answered Olivia's father, ' I follow 
willingly ; and not without hope of reconciling my friend to our 
general happiness ' 

When they went out of the prison they found the sailors employed 
in executing a piece of justice exactly in their character. They had 
rambled all through the prison, without doing or designing mischief, 
till they came to the chamber in which were kept the instruments 
of torture, the sight of which incensed them to such a degree, that 
they resolved instantly to make the Liquisitors themselves feel the 
force of them in their turn ; but they, apprehensive of what might 
happen, had prudently made their escape by a secret passage as 
soon as the prison had been forced. Disappointed thus in their 
design, the sailors took all the horrid apparatus, with all the habits, 
ensigns, books, etc. of the office, and piling them up in the court, 
set fire to the heap, concluding the exploit with three cheers for the 
honour of Old England ; after which they marched off in quest of 
more fun, as unconcerned as if nothing had happened. 

When Alphonso arrived at his father's house, he found his mother 
just sinking under the weight of alBiotion. On hearing his voice, 
she started up, and running to him, ' Oh, my son ! my son ' ! ex- 
claimed she, clasping him in her arms, and leaning her head upon 
his bosom ; ' Heaven has heard my prayers ! I am not childless, 
though I am a widow ' ! 

'A widow ' ! exclaimed Alphonso. ' Forbid it Heaven ! Oh, 
my father ' ! 

' Yes, Alphonso ' ! continued she, raising her head from his bosom. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 321 

which she had bedewed with tears. ' Your father died, as he 
lived, with honour, fighting valiantly by the side of his general, 
in defence of his country. But what do I see ' ? casting her eyeet 
upon Olivia, her father, and the guard, whom her surprise had pre- 
vented her taking notice of before. ' Olivia ! Antonio ! And who 
are these strange men 1 But, alas, I know too well ! Oh ! my 
son, art thou then a prisoner to the enemies who slew thy father t 
Am I to lose thee again, the moment thou art returned ' ? 

' No, my mother ', answered he, ' I am no prisoner. They are 
our protectors, given by the most generous of men, who has thus 
restored us to each other. Oh that my father were alive to make 
our happiness complete ' ! 

' Since Heaven has appointed otherwise ', said Antonio, going up 
to Alphonso's mother, who was weeping with Olivia, on whose 
neck she had fallen, ' it is our duty to submit to its pleasure. The 
circumstances of our lives make it improper for us to think of 
living any longer here. But that should not discourage us. The 
virtuous find a home everywhere. We will remove to the dominions 
of the English, where I have lodged in honest hands fortune sufficient 
to make our retreat happy. Under the protection of their laws, 
a man's mind is at liberty, and his wealth is secure. Mine was my 
only crime here ; but I was aware of sxich an attack, and had re- 
moved it beyond the reach of those who impiously made religion 
the pretext for depriving me of it. Were my friend, Don Pedro, 
living, I would have removed the objections which his high notions 
of honour made to an alliance with my family, and prevailed upon 
him to accompany us '. 

These words comforted the mother of Alphonso, and made the 
lovers happy. 

Everything being thus settled, the guard was dismissed with 
professions of the highest gratitude to the generous chief, which 
Antonio and Alphonso proposed waiting on him to pay in person 
as soon as he should be more at leisure ; and to reward the soldiers 
for their attendance. Alphonso gave them the purse of gold he 
had received from his benefactor, and in which I was, in the division 
of which I fell to the lot of the sergeant who commanded them, 
who, looking upon me as an earnest of the vast treasures he was 
to receive as his share of the spoil, went away with a happy heart 
to join his fellows, who were now in full possession of the city. 



CHAPTER LIII 

CHRYSAL MAKES SOME STBIKING RE M ARKS ON A STATB OF ABSOLTTTE 
LIBERTY — DISAPPOINTMENT OF THE HOPES OF THE CONQITBRORS, 
WITH THE NATURAL CONSEQUENCES — CHRYSAL's MASTER GOINO 
TO TAKE A TASTE OF THE PLEASURES OF AFFLUENCE, IS FLAMMED 
OUT OF HIS TREASURE BY A SUTLER, INTO WHOSE SERVICE CHRYSAL 
ENTERS 

The conduct of man in such scenes as this, where he thinks himself 
at liberty to follow the instantaneous impulse of his own will. 



322 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

without apprehension of immediate punishment, shows the ground- 
less vanity of those who boast so loudly of the excellency of his 
nature, and deny the necessity of coercive laws. It is true, no 
people ever abused this liberty less than the English, who scorn 
to inflict upon others that oppression from which their laws protect 
themselves ; as, on the other hand, slaves, on a change of fortune, 
always prove the most imperious tyrants ; but still the circumstances 
attending even the most moderate exertion of it are too shocking 
for dispassionate description, wherefore I shall waive the painful 
task. 

As soon as some degree of order was established in the city, the, 
victorious commanders proceeded to divide the spoil,i ^ work for 
which they all showed their capacity in the most remarkable manner, 
the pittance which they thought proper to appoint for the share or 
each of the private men, who had literally borne the heat and 
hurthen of the day, being a trifle beneath the acceptance of any but 
a beggar who wanted a morsel of bread, and not the fifty-thou- 
aandth part of what the chief commanders, who comparatively 
Jiad lived in lusury,^ and issued their orders from places of safety, 
modestly owned to have reserved for each of themselves. Nor 
was the case of tho inferior officers, who executed those orders, 
any better, their shares not being sufficient to defray the extra- 
ordinary expenses which they had been at, to provide for the 
enterprise, much less the extraordinary expense of living, where 
the indispensable necessaries of life were subject to the most ex- 
orbitant impositions of an avaricious and arbitrary will, so that all 
they gained by their conquest was to exchange the dangers of war 
for the miseries of want. 

This disappointment of the hopes which alone had supported 
their spirits through hardships almost beyond the power of nature 
to support, filled up the black list of the calamities which fittended 
this enterprise, aggravating by despair the diseases to which the 
climate subjected the victors to such a degree, that their loss, after 
their conquest, exceeded many times that which they had suffered 
in the siege from so many combined causes. 

To the truth of this representation, which to unexperienced 
speculation may appear too severely drawn, the wretched remains 
of the conquering army which returned to their exhausted country 
bore a melancholy testimony. But to quit these disagreeable 
reflections ! 

Such a treasure as I was (greater much than he had ever been 
possessed of before), raised the spirits of my master, the serjeant, 
so high, that he went directly to a sutler's tent, to take a taste of 

' 'An immense booty was secured, £3,000,000 in money, besides 
merchaudise ' — Hunt, Political History of England, x. The troops and 
seamen fared even worse at Manila, where the inhabitants were allowed 
to rsmsom their property for 4,000,000 dollars, which, through the peace 
that immediately followed, was never paid, and the men, at any rate, 
got nothing. 

' The admiral and the general received £122,697, lOs. 6d. apiece, 
each captain the sum of £1600, 10s, lOd., each potty officer, £17, 53. 3d., 
and each seaman and mariner £3, Hs. OJd. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 323 

the good living which he thought himself secure of for the remainder 
of his days. On his entering the tent, and asldng what entertain- 
ment he could have, the sutler, ignorant of his wealth, answered 
with a curse that he had none for such shabby fellows as he, and 
took him by the shoulders to thrust him out. Provoked at such 
an indignity to a person of his present consequence, my master 
turned upon him, and pulling me out of his pocket, demanded 
haughtily why he might not have what he would pay for, as well as 
another. The sight of the gold instantly changed the sutler's 
whole behaviour. 

' My worthy friend ', said he, shakiag the Serjeant by the hand, 
' I beg your pardon. I actually did not perceive whom I spoke to, 
I am so hurried about. But, come along with me, and I'll make 
you amends. 1 have a nice leg of a fowl, which was bespoke for 
your colonel ; but first come, first served, as the saying is, so here 
it is for you ; and here is a bottle of wine, as cool as if it came but 
this minute from Iceland ' 

My master was not proof against such an invitation. He fell to, 
without more ceremony, and when he had finished his feast, calling 
to know what was to pay, the sutler answered — ' Two guineas '. 

' Two guiaeas ? Two devils ', said the serjeant staring at such a 
demand, ' for a leg of an old hen, as black as hell, and lean as Beelze- 
bub, and a bottle of rot-gut sour cider. No, no, friend, no such 
tricks for me ; I am not to be flammed so neither '. 

' Why, there it is now ', answered the sutler, not much pleased 
with my master's looks. ' The moment a man grows rich, he grows 
covetous. I received the same for the other leg of that fowl this 
moment, from an ensign who, by the same token, left his laced 
waistcoat in pawn for half the money. But I vrill not fall out with 
you for such a trifle, as I expect more of your custom, so even give 
me what you please. You cannot think one guinea too much, I 
am sure, but you shall make it up another time '. 

Such an argument could not be resisted. The serjeant threw me 
down upon the table with an air of grandeur, and went to consider 
how he should lay out to the best advantage the treasures which he 
expected immediately to receive. 



CHAPTER LIV 

-CH.IBACTEK OP CHKYSAL's NEW MASTER — THE EIGHT WAY NOT TO 
SUFFER BY MAKING MISTAKES — A CtnBIOrS CONVERSATION BE- 
TWEEN CHRYSAL's master and TWO PERSONS OF CONSEQUENCE 
LAYS OPEN THE SECRETS OF SOME INTERESTING AFPAIRS — HB 
MAKES TJP A FOOLISH DISPUTE BY A SENSIBLE TOAST 

I WAS now entered into a service, which opened to me so many 
various views of human folly, vice, and wretchedness, as made the 
prospect painful. The manner in which my new master got me 
into his possession, showed his character in a light sufficiently strong. 
But I soon had the satisfaction of seeing that, with all his address 



324 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

at imposition, he was himself no more than the tool of the imposi- 
tions of his superiors, who scarce left him the poorest gleanings to 
pick up, after all the plenteous harvest, the just and constant fate 
of all such wretches. The continual hurry in which he was engaged, 
though he had falsely alleged it as an excuse for the treatment of 
my late master, the serjeant, was really sufficient to excuse any 
inadvertency or blunder, and must have caused many in any one, 
whose ideas were not settled in one certain course, out of which it 
was impossible to divert them. But I soon found that he was in 
no danger of that kind, all his thoughts having such an invariable 
bias to his own interest, that every mistake naturally fell to that 
side, for which, upon detection, his hurry was a ready and probable 
excuse. 

The Serjeant had scarce left him, when two persons entered, 
whom he received with every mark of the most obsequious cere- 
mony and respect. One of them I directly knew to be my old 
master, the admiral's clerk, as I soon found the other to be ia the 
same important station with the general. My master, who was 
not a loss for the occasion of their visit, led them into the most 
private place in the tent, and setting before them a bottle of his 
best, proceeded to business. 

' Mr Admiral, to your good health ! Mr General, my very hearty 
service to you ' ! said he, filling a brimmer, and addressing each by 
the title of his master, as he shook them by the hand. ' Here is a 
good conclusion to the campaign to us. I was impatient for your 
coming, to know how I should go on. Here have been several 
officers with me already, for credit on the score of their prize-money 
for the length of the siege, and the dearness of everything, has not 
left them a penny, nor anything to pawn for one. I have got as 
many clothes and things of all kinds, as would serve to set up_a 
Monmouth Street merchant. If the place had held out but a few 
days longer, the poor devils must have done duty in their buff, 
H.i ! ha ! ha ' ! 

' And the properest dress for them ', retm-ned the admiral. 
' Who wants any clothes in such a climate as this ? I am sure I 
go naked half my time, though I keep under cover, and have nothing 
to do to heat me '. 

' Very true ', answered my master. ' But naked and hungry 
both are not quite so well ; and when their moveables were all 
gone after their money, I don't know who would have supplied 
them '. 

' Then let them live on their allowance ', said the general. ' They 
who can't afford to pay for better should be content with that '. 

' To die upon it, you should say ', iaterrupted my master. ' I 
am sure the stores laid in are such as no one can live upon, that has 
ever luiown what living was. For my part, I wonder the contractors 
were not ashamed to supply such wretched stuff of all kinds. They 
must have no conscience at all who can do such things '. 

' Conscience 7 Ha ! ha ! ha ! Who ever heard a sutler speak 
of conscience before ' ? said the admiral. ' And pray, my con- 
scientious friend, what do you charge a bottle for this most excellent 
wine of yours ' ? 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 325 

' For this wine ' ? answered my master, palating it two or three 
times. ' I charge for this wine only a pistole ; and, let me tell 
you that it is not so much, considering everything. This Burgundy 
cost me five shillings a bottle, prime cost, and, when you compute 
every expense, you'll find that my profit is nothing at all in com- 
parison of what others get '. 

' No, to be sure ', replied the general. ' Your conscience won't 
suffer you to do as they do ; you are too good a man '. 

' Too good a Christian, you should say ', interrupted the admiral, 
' as appears by your baptising your wine so piously. Ha ! ha ! ha ! 
Pray, what did the water cost that is mixed with this same Bur- 
gundy ? I hope that did not stand you in five shillings a bottle 
too. Ha ! ha ! ha ' ! 

' It is very well, gentlemen ', returned my master, with a sneer. 
' You are pleased to be merry. But if I had not some way to make 
out matters, I could never pay the exorbitant taxes which are 
squeezed from me by some people whom I shan't name. And so, 
here's my service to you both once more. When you lower your 
composition, I'll lessen the quantity of water, and mend mine. 
Ha ! ha ! ha ' ! 

' And so you had need ', said the general, ' to make it drinkable ; 
as it is, I wonder it does not poison every one that tastes it. When 
I lived at the Shakespeare, we did not give worse than this to our 
company after they were dead drunk '. 

' Worse than this ' ? added the admiral. ' If you had given me 
half so bad, I should have broken your head with the bottle '. 

' Broken my head ' ? returned the general, ' fine words, truly. 
When you were a blue-nosed journeyman barber, and used to come 
to me to beg broken victuals and bottoms of bottles, you spoke in 
another tone '. 

' And when I was, sir ', replied the admiral, ' I had a good trade, 
and never looked upon myself as upon a level with the pimp of a 
tavern '. 

' And yet that pimping made you what you are now ', retorted 
the general, rising up in a passion. ' You forget, perhaps, how you 
begged of me to introduce your sister to the admiral, by which 
means you got into his service ; this is a fine return, indeed '. 

' And you forget, too ', said the admiral, starting from his seat, 
and catching at the bottle, ' that it was that same sister of mine 
who got you into the general's service, if you go to that, so that I 
think the obligation is equal '- 

' Gentlemen, dear gentlemen ', interrupted my master, clappmg 
a hand to each of their collars. ' Consider what you are doing. 
What will the world say of such a quarrel between gentlemen 
who ought to agree like brothers ? For shame ; everybody will 
laugh at you. Come, sit down, and be good friends, and I'll try if 
I have not one bottle of better wine, over which we'll make up all 
matters '. Then bringing it, and filling his glass — ' Come, gentle- 
men ', continued he, shaking each of them by the hand, ' I'll give 
you a toast that shall drown all animosity ; here is prosperity to 
pimping ! It is the best trade going, and has made us all. Ay, 
and is practised, too, by people in every station, however they may 



326 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

affect to turn up their noaes at it. So let ua attend to our business, 
and not fall together by the ears for nothing, like a parcel of dogs 
about a bare bone. It signifies nothing, what we have been ; 
if we mind our hits now, we shall all be gentlemen, as good as the 
best of them, and as well respected, too '. 

The admiral and general saw the force of what he said, and, 
pledging his toast, shook hands, and were as ciood friends as ever. 



CriArrEB, LV 

CONTINUED : THE MYSTERIES OF AGENCY, AND (JONVENIBNCB OF A 
MILITARY GOVERNMENT, WITH SOME CDBIOTTS MOTIONS OF THE 
GENTEELBST WAYS OF RISING IN LIFE 

' Well, gentlemen ', said my master, who was not pleased at their 
jests upon his liquor, because he could not deny the truth of them, 
' I hope that wine pleases you '. 

' Ay ', answered the admiral, ' this is the right sort ; this is the 
thing. Give us this, and keep the other for officers, and such as are 
not used to better '. 

' And if it poisons them ', added the admiral, ' the public will have 
the fewer to pay. Now they have done the business, let them live 
or die as they can ; we care not. That's nothing to us '. 

' Very true ', said my master. ' All we have to do is to make 
the most of them while they do live ; and therefore I should be 
glad to know, as I said before, how far I may venture to go with 
them, on the credit of their prize-money ; for, as the place was saved 
from being plundered by the articles of capitulation, they must all 
get money on their shares, whether they will or not, their necessities 
are such '. 

' So much the better for us, who can buy their shares ', answered 
the admiral. ' Their necessity is our gain '. 

' Ay ', replied my master. ' But I don't find they intend selling. 
All they propose is, to mortgage '. 

' Then, let them see who'll give them money ', said the general. 
' No, no ; no mortgages for us. An absolute sale or nothing. We'll 
have no after-reckonings, no overhauling accounts. As to their 
being unwilling to sell, we'll manage that matter with them. When 
you have got them sufficiently in your books, call for your money, 
and, as it will be impossible for them to pay, apply to the com- 
mander-in-chief, who will oblige them to do you justice '. 

' Why, to be sure, that must do ', answered my master. ' But 
how far am I to trust them ' ? 

' This will show you ', replied the general. ' Here is the rate of 
all their shares. Look at the sum total. What noble fortunes 
that would have made for half a dozen reasonable men. It went 
to my heart to fritter it away among so many '. 

' This ? This the rate of their shares ' ? said my master, not able 
to conceal his astonishment when he looked at the paper which the 
other gave him. ' It is possible that this should be all ' ? 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 32T 

' ^^* ' returned the admiral, ' and too muoh for them, too. 
More than^moat of them ever had before, or will make a good use 
of now '. 

' Why, they'll mutiny, and cut all our throats ', returned my 
master. ' There are several of them who owe me almost as much 
as this already. I thought they would have had ten times this. 
sum at least. They'll certainly mutiny, and cut all our throats '. 

_' Don't you give yourself any trouble about their mutinying ' 
said the general. ' Do you mind your business, and leave us to- 
take care of that ; their spirits will hardly be so high. If you have 
gone hand over head, and trusted them so far, you must abide by 
the loss. I thought I gave you a friendly caution about that 
before '. 

' And so ', returned my master, ' I am not to go beyond this rate, 
you say ' ? 

' Not a penny ', answered the admiral. ' That is your rule. 
Whatever you can beat down of that shall be your own '. 

' That is deducting five per cent, agency ', interposed the general, 

and five or ten per cent., as you can make your bargain, for prompt 

payment ; for we will not appear to have any hand in the afiair, 

further than pa3?ing you the money. It must not be known that 

we are concerned in the least '. 

' You concerned ' ? replied my master. ' I don't understand 
you. Are you to be concerned with me in what I buy ' ? 

' Not in the least ', returned the admiral, ' any further than by 
emplojring you to act for us. You seem to mistake the matter 
entirely. You are to buy the shares for us, according to this rate, 
for which we will allow you a proper agency, and that is all the 
concern you are to have in the aSair '. 

' But I suppose ', said my master, ' I may buy on my own 
account, if I please ' ? 

' Buy on your own account ' ? interrupted the general. ' Such 
another word, and you shall neither sell nor buy anything here. 
Are not we the commander's agents ? and do you think they will 
suffer us to be interloped upon ? You may be very well content 
with the profits of your own business, without thinking to interfere 
in ours '. 

' I ask your pardon, gentlemen ', said my master, who knew their 
power too well to dispute with them, ' it was only a mistake. I 
by no means presume to interfere with you, and shall be proud to 
execute your orders, on whatever terms you think proper. I 
suppose, though, our former composition is to end. Provisions 
will now come in from every part, so that we can never think of 
keeping them up at their former prices '. 

' Can't you, so ' ? answered the general. ' That shall be your 
own fault, then, and your own loss, too, I can tell you. Let pro- 
visions come in as they will, no one shall sell an ounce here without 
our permission, and that shall be on our own terms, you may be 
assured. Our hands are not tied up by laws. Ours is a military 
government, in which we can do what we please, without being 
accountable to anyone. So you may go on as before '. 

' But, gentlemen ', replied my master, ' you should consider that 



328 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

the '.vhole odium of this will fall upon me, as you do not appear in 
it, so that I shall lose my character for ever '. 

' Your character ? Ha ! ha ! ha ' ! interrupted the general, 
' a sutler's character ! I shall never be able to bear the word again. 
Pray, my good friend, what character had a sutler ever to lose, 
that would not be a greater loss to the finder ? Come, here's my 
service to you. Go on with your business, and make money, and 
never fear suffering by the loss of your character. It is time for 
us to go and settle what taxes we shall lay upon the different kinds 
of merchandise that shall be brought here. Our duties shall be 
paid, as well as those of any king of them all. This is our reign, 
and if we do not make the most of it, we have no one to blame but 
ourselves '. 

' And as rich as so many kings you will be ', said my master, 
' if you can carry off things in the manner you say '. 

' As to our being rich ', returned the admiral, ' that depends 
entirely upon our own management. Our principals, indeed, will 
be rich enough, which is all they care for ; not what becomes of us, 
whom they would have do their business for nothing, or next to it. 
But they shall find themselves mistaken. Everything must 
go through our hands, and gold in handling will stick to the 
fingers, as the song says. We shall feather our nests in spite 
of them. They cannot do without us, and will hardly be fond 
of calling us to too strict an account, for fear of our telling 
tales. To be sure, the great harvest will be their's ; but we will 
take toll '. 

' I don't doubt but you will ', said my master, ' twice over, for 
fear of mistake, as the miller does. Why, you'll make such fortunes 
that you won't know what to do with yourselves '. 

' Never fear that ', answered the general. ' We shall not be at 
a loss. Tor my part, I design to buy a borough, and push my 
fortune in parliament. That's the genteelest business a gentleman 
can follow now, and the readiest way of advancing in life and 
making a family '. 

' Now, I think otherwise ', said the admiral, ' and that it is the 
most ungenteel way ; such dirty jobs are required for everything a 
man gets, that it is iDcneath a gentleman to do them. My scheme 
is to buy an Irish peerage at once, and then live splendidly, without 
troubling myself about anything. Or, if I should grow tired of 
idleness, go into parliament there, and turn patriot, and make 
speeches for the good of my country ' 

' Both your schemes may be very good ', said my master, ' but 
my ambition is not so high as either, at least as yet. I will try to 
get a contract, and then I shall not fear making a fortune sufficient 
to do what you propose, or more if I choose it, without being sneered 
at for my folly. You may say what you will, but there is more, 
to be got by a contract than by every other way, and, therefore, 
it is the genteelest in my opinion. How many contractors have I 
seen buy noblemen's fine houses, and members of parliament's 
estates, with the profits of a single campaign ? And so, my lord, 
and you, most honourable Mr Member, I am your humble servant '. 

' Honest Mr Contractor ', replied both at the same time, ' yours ' I 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 329 



CHAPTER LVI 

AFF35CTING CONSEQUENCES OF CABRYING THE FOKEGOINO SCHEMES 
IJfTO EXECUTION, WITH THE CONCLUSION OF THE CHABACTEE AND 
HISTORY OF CHRYSAL's MASTER — OHBYSAL CHANGES HIS SERVICE 

As soon as this worthy pair had left my master, he set about his 
business of preying upon the necessities of every one who came 
near him, with as much keenness as a vulture tears a carrion, 
and with as little feeling, or he could never have gone through 
with it. 

The transactions I now saw are a pain to memory. For the 
first few days after their success, the officers, under the same in- 
toxication with my late master, the serjeant, gave a loose to every 
kind of extravagance, to compensate to themselves for the wants 
and hardships they had suffered. But no sooner had they advanced 
near the limits prescribed to their credit than the whole scene 
changed. The first mention of the amount of their respective 
shares was like a clap of thunder bursting over their heads. Their 
astonishment for some time deprived them of their senses. But 
when they were able to make a proper inquiry, and foimd the case 
to be but too true, their rage broke through all bounds, and rose 
almost to desperation. The horrors of a jail, the cries of a starving 
family, every aggravation of human misery stared them in the face, 
and made the very thought of returning to their native country 
too terrible to be endured. But there was no other remedy. Those 
from whom alone it could proceed, were too much interested to 
listen to their complaints, and, instead of preventing, permitted 
their authority to be prostituted to complete their ruin, in the 
manner proposed by their agents, so that the unhappy victims 
were forced to submit to the terms imposed upon them. The 
consequence of this, as I have said before, was that, to drown re- 
flection, they spent whatever trifle remained to them on concluding 
the bargains which sealed their ruin in still greater excesses, and so 
precipitated the distress they feared. As for the private men, the 
impositions they suffered were, if possible, still severer (though 
from their insensibility, perhaps, not so severely felt), as the man- 
agement of their affairs went through many more hands, every one 
of whom had a pull at them, down to the very lowest class of the 
harpies which prey upon an army, so that what remained to them 
was too trifling to be of any service, even to the very few who 
struggled with their necessities in order to save it. 

I have not entered minutely into the particulars of this horrid 
scene. This slight sketch will give you a general notion of it, and 
that is as much as a humane heart can bear. Indeed, no descrip- 
tion could reach the truth. I shall, therefore, only just flnish the 
outlines of my master's character, and then pass on to the occur- 
rences in my next service. The extortions to which he was him- 
self forced to submit from those in authority, took off every shadow 
of shame (to conscience he had long been a stranger) and added 
double keenness to his natural propensity to extortion, by giving 



330 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

it what he thought the appearance of justice, and provoking him 
to wreak his resentment upon others, for what he suffered himself 
from those above his reach. The opportunities for exerting his 
talents this way were infinite in a. profession that is a mystery of 
iniquity too complicated to be unravelled, too black to be conceived, 
but upon experience, which he had acquired to the most consum- 
mate degree, in the gradual progression of his life. A natural 
sharpness of genius, which ought to have been curbed, not en- 
couraged, had influenced his parents to bind him, when very young, 
to an attorney, under whom he learned, besides other valuable 
qualifications, the nice distinctions between law and justice, so as 
to know critically how far he could infringe upon the latter, without 
danger of getting within the reach of the former ; but, encouraged 
by much success, he had at length unluckily happened to go too 
near those boundaries, and been obliged to quit that profession, 
after some common steps of descent from which, such as bailiff's 
follower, knight of the post, and bully to a bawdy-house, he stopped 
in that of footman to a beau, from which the necessary arts of pre- 
varicating, lying, and evading disagreeable demands, the qualifica- 
tions of his former character, soon raised him to be his gentleman. 
In this station, he added to his stock of accomplishments, natural 
and acquired, pimping, servility, adulation, and an absolute com- 
mand of countenance, on the strength of all which, together with 
some little money, the fruits of his honest industry, on his master's 
fixing his habitation in jail, he set up a tavern, where his second- 
hand politeness and cringing behaviour soon brought him into 
business that enabled him to live better than he could have any 
right to have expected, and would in time have procured him an 
independence. 

This success, which would have satisfied a reasonable person, 
only raised his ambition, and made him despise his business. Ac- 
cordingly, he commenced wine-merchant, as more suitable to a 
gentleman, in which profession he went on, till his one-horse chaise, 
his country-house, and kept mistress would have brought him back 
to his primitive poverty, had not his knowledge of the world taught 
him how to secrete from his creditors something to try his hand 
upon in some other way, when he pitched upon his present occupa- 
tion of a sutler, in which this account of his life shows he was most 
eminently fitted to make a figure. Thus qualified in himself, and 
supported by his employers, he proceeded making his bargains, 
with a success to which it may be thought no regard to honesty, 
no sense of compassion, was the least impediment. He flattered, 
professed the highest respect and attachment, and pressed his 
goods upon his destined victims with every insinuating art, till he 
got them into his snare, when he directly put on all the insolence 
of power, and made even ruin still more wretched by the cruelty 
with which he drove them to it, the insensibility with which he 
treated them after. How often have I seen him refuse to trust 
for a glass of what he called wine, to cool his raging thirst and 
comfort his fainting heart, the man whom, but a day or two before, 
he had cajoled into the excesses which drew him into that distress.. 
After some days of painful attention to such shocking scenes, I 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 331 

had the pleasure of being paid away to the captain of a merchant 
ship for some liquors, of which he had the address to deceive the 
vigilance of the ruling powers and all their emissaries, and convey 
impost free to my master. 



CHAPTER LVII 

cheysal's master swallows a pill, and pleads an important 
cause without success — a curious method of paerying one 

TALSE OATH BY ANOTHER, WITH THE FIRST OATH TAKEN BY THE 
MASTER OF A MERCHANTMAN — HE SHOWS ANOTHER INSTANCE OF 
HIS SKILL IN STEERING CLEAR OF PERJURY, BUT WITHOUT HIS 
FORMER SUCCESS — CHRYSAL CHANGES HIS SERVICE 

The care which I knew to be taken to detect and punish this kind of 
illicit trade made me wonder at &st that it should even be attempted; 
but I soon found that the danger of such detection, when it depends 
solely on the confession of those concerned, however forceful the 
means made use of to extort that confession, is held at naught by 
a set of people, bred ia the grossest ignorance of every principle of 
moral virtue or religious obligation, and hardened by long habit 
into contempt of whatever clashes with their interest. When I 
came into the possession of my new master, he was going to attend 
two great men, whose conversation with the sutler I have just now 
related, in obedience to a summons sent him the moment he entered 
the harbour. The reception he met with was suited to their im- 
portance. He was obliged to wait a considerable time before they 
were at leisure to see him, when, being admitted to their presence, 
and having delivered in his bill of la£ng, and taken his oath that 
he had no private trade on board, nor anything which was not 
contained in that account, they informed him what duties he 
must pay on every article before he should be permitted to land 
them. 

My master, though he was sufficiently apprised of this before, 
affected surprise, and attempted to expostulate with them on the 
illegality and injustice of such a demand, alleging that the goods 
had been purchased at the highest prices, in order to send a speedy 
and effectual supply to the troops, who were known to want them, 
so that there could be no advance made upon them which could 
defray such additional duties ; that his owners, not in the least 
suspecting any such, had given him no power to pay them, and that 
many of the commodities, being of a perishable nature, must be 
damaged, if not permitted to be landed directly, by which means 
not only the merchants would be great losers, but also the troops 
suffer severely for the want of common necessaries, which they 
could not otherwise be supplied with. But all he could say had 
no effect ; they did not even deign to make him any answer, further 
than that they had authority for what they did, and expected 
obedience, not arguments, which they had not leisure to listen to. 

Such a repulse, however unjust in itself, and personally offensive- 



332 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

in the manner of it, was far from giving my master any concern. 
On the contrary, the difficulties which it threw upon the business 
of his owners afforded him an opportunity of carrying on his own 
private trade to advantage, which no oaths they could devise were 
able to put a stop to, as an instance or two of his conduct will show. 

Some suspicion having arisen of his commerce with the sutler, 
of which no direct proof could be obtained, he was summoned to 
appear before the tax-gatherers, to acquit himself by his oath of 
80 heinous an offence. The sutler, who knew the consequence of 
being convicted, and with all hia knowledge of the world saw no 
possibility of avoiding it, gave himself up as ruined. But my 
master soon showed him the convenience of a conscience trained to 
swearing, for, calling upon him the morning they were to appear at 
the dread tribunal, and seeing him so cast down — ' Cheer up, 
brother ', said he, ' I'll bring you safe through the strait. By the 
virtue and contents of this book ', pulling one out of his pocket, 
and kissing it in form, ' I will never swear that you have bought 
anything from me ; so throw off that sneaking, Tyburn look, and 
come along '. 

Such an assurance naturally gave the sutler some spirits, though 
he could not conceive how he meant to make it good ; but a little 
time cleared up the mystery, and showed him the force of a custom- 
house oath. As soon as the two culprits appeared before their 
judges, the latter, assuming all the dignity of their office, exagger- 
ated the charge in the strongest colours, and administering the oath 
to my master, demanded, in an authoritative tone, whether he had 
not sold uncustomed goods to the sutler, and to what amount, 
who, not in the least disconcerted either by the question or the 
manner in which it was put — ' Why, look you, gentlemen ', an- 
swered he, turning the quid in his clieek, and pulling up his breeches 
at the hips with both his hands, ' as to that affair, by the virtue of 
my oath, if I should swear that I sold liim any, I should be forsworn, 
and I'll always try to weather that point if I can '- 

As there was no more than a general suspicion against the criminals, 
this answer satisfied the sagacity of their judges, and they were 
dismissed with flying colours. 

When they were alone — ' Well ', said my master, shaking his 
friend by the hand, ' I told you I would bring you off. Let that be 
an example to you for the future. None but fools convict them- 
selves, and none but greater fools expect it. I should have little 
business in the merchant's service if I scrupled to swallow such a 
pin as that every day of my life. No, no ; they must be cunning 
if they can make an oath that will stick in the throat of the captain 
of a merchantman, even if he can't find an opening to steer through, 
as was the case here. We have a salvo for such things. The first 
oath we take, as soon as we get into employment is, never to swear 
the truth to a custom-house officer while we live, so that all the oaths 
they give us go for nothing '. 

But with all this cleverness, he sometimes failed of success. A 
lieutenant of a man-of-war happening, as he was rowing guard 
one night, to see «. boat put off from our ship, pursued it, as he 
knew it must be a smuggler. The crew, observing the lieutenant's 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 33S- 

boat gain fast upon them, and knowing it was impossible to escape, 
threw their cargo overboard, and ran the boat ashore, to save 
themselves from being taken, leaving her to the captors, who towed 
her away in triumph. 

The chief of the smugglers was my master's son, who, in the ac- 
count he gave him of the affair on his return, was proceeding to 
tell him the names of those that were with him, but the father, 
stopping him, cried, ' Avast ! coil up your tongue ; I desire to hear 
no more of them. Have you a mind to make me forswear myself 
when I go to recover my boat ? for have her again you know I 
must, as I cannot get another here, nor carry on any business 
without one '. 

Accordingly, next morning he made public inquiry after his boat, 
which he pretended had been stolen from his ship's side, and finding 
her in the possession of the lieutenant, demanded to have her 
restored directly, and, on his refusal, had him summoned before 
the officers of the customs, who were judges in such affairs. As he 
grounded his claim on her having been taken away without ids 
privity, and by persons unknown to him, he was put to the common 
test of an oath, whether he knew who was in her when she was^ 
pursued by the captors. 

' By the virtue of my oath, gentlemen ', answered he, without the 
least hesitation, ' I do not know one of them '. 

So direct an answer satisfied the judges, who were noways con- 
cerned in the afiair, but that was not the case with the lieutenant. 

' Hold, sir ', said he to my master, who was sheering off, laughing 
in his sleeve. ' What is that you say ' ? 

' I say ', answered my master, nothing disconcerted, ' that I don't 
know one of them '. 

' One of them ' ? returned the lieutenant, who instantly saw 
through the evasion. ' But do you know any of them ? Take 
care what you say. Perhaps I know more than you think I do '. 

' Why, as to that ', replied my master, laughing, ' I cannot say 
80 much. Perhaps I may know some of them '. 

' How ' ? interposed the judge, offended at an answer which he 
thought showed a alight of his authority. ' Did not you swear this 
moment that you did not know one of them ' ? 

' Nor do I ', answered my master. ' There were twelve in the 
boat, of whom I know only eleven, and sure, in that case, I can safely 
swear I do not know one, that is, the twelfth of them. Ha ! ha ! ha ' 1 

' Take care, sir ', replied the judge, ' how you trifie before ua 
again. You know the punishment of perjury if you should be 
caught tripping '. 

' Never fear ', said my master, ' I know the compass of my con- 
science too well for that. Thus, thus, and no nearer, is my trim. 
I'll never break an oath ; but if I can give it the go-by at the leeside 
thus by a double meaning, I hope that's no offence '. Then, turn- 
ing to the lieutenent — ' Well, sir,' continued he, ' it seems you have 
carried too much sail for me this trip, but if I meet you upon a- 
wind again, mind your helm, or I may chance to fall aboard you. 
However, since I cannot have my boat cheaper, I must e'en come- 
to your terms, so what do you ask for it ' ? 



334 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

To this proposal the lieutenant made no objection. Setting, 
therefore, his price, my master paid him for the boat, and then 
walked off without concern or shame. I here quitted his service, 
of which I was heartily tired, and entered into that of the 
lieutenant. 



CHAPTER LVin 

CHKYSAL MAKES SOME REFLECTIONS ON THE POLICY OF IMPOSING 
OATHS OF EXCULPATION — THE PKOPEE METHOD OP PBESEKVINO 
THE VALIDITY OP OATHS, WITH THE CONSEQUENCES OP THEIB 
BEING ADMINISTBKED INDISCEIMLNATELY TO ALL PERSONS, AND 
ON ALL OCCASIONS — AN UNCOMMON LECTURE PROM A CAPTAIN 
OP A MAN-OP-WAR TO HIS OFFICERS REPRESENTS SOME POLITB 
AMUSEMENTS IN AN ODD LIGHT 

I SEE you are shocked at such flagrant instances of profligacy, of 
barefaced contempt of everything most sacred and important. 
They certainly are a reproach to human nature, but that reproach 
must not be confined to those alone who obviously incur it. They 
who, from false principles of policy, gave the occasion against the 
conviction of reason and experience, are at least equally guilty. 

The impotency of man to resist temptation is such, that he is 
taught to pray against it. ^Vhy, then, should those who are en- 
trusted with the care of directing his actions in the common inter- 
course of life, lay snares to lead him into it, which there is no prob- 
ability of his avoiding ? Appealing to the attestation of the Deity 
is most certainly the highest assurance possible to be given by any 
being, who has a sense of his dependence on that Deity, nor should 
ever be given, but on the most important occasions, and in the 
most solemn manner, nor accepted but from such as may be pre- 
sumed to understand the nature of it. In such circumstances, 
it would never be violated. Man is not so desperately abandoned 
as to run with his eyes open into inexplicable perdition. But when 
that attestation is given lightly for every trifle, when it is placed 
in opposition to interest, and demanded from such as cannot be 
supposed to know its consequence, the reverence which should be 
its guard is taken off, the violation becomes familiar, and, of course, 
the end, for which it is thus impiously and injudiciously prostituted, 
disappointed, and by that means the most sacred assurance of life 
rendered void, the bond of social confidence and safety broken. 

The effects of this absurd policy of making the obligations of 
religion the common test of truth on trivial occasions, and where 
interest is concerned, are more extensive than is generally imagined. 
The immediate wants of nature engross the attention of the greater 
part of mankind too much to let them see the congruity of moral 
virtue, however evident to exerted reason ; wherefore, the threats 
and promises of religion were found necessary to enforce the prac- 
tice of it ; but as the accomplishment of tho.se is placed at a dis- 
tance, when they interfere with present enjoyments, their force 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 335 

■wears ofi, the threats lose their terrors, and the promises are slighted 
by those who look no farther than the instant moment. And this 
is the great source of that immorality and irreligion so prevalent 
in life, and which will never be corrected till legislators make oaths 
less common, prevent their interfering with the swearer's own 
interest, as in the instances which gave occasion to these reflections, 
explain their nature before they are administered, and inflict 
instant punishment on their violation. 

My new master had but just returned on board, when the captain 
received orders to go and assist the operations of the war in another 
part of the world. The news raised everyone's spirits. The sight 
of a place in which most of them had been guilty of excesses which 
drew them into distress, and where all had been so wretchedly 
disappointed, was necessarily disagreeable, and consequently a 
removal to another, where a new object attracted their attention 
from such reflections, and awoke new hopes, however likely to end 
in the same manner as the former, gave them pleasure. 

There was a decency in the behaviour of both men and oiBcers 
in this ship so very different from what I had seen in others, as to 
strike me with an agreeable surprise. But I was not long at a loss 
for the reason. As soon as the ship was im.der sail, the captain 
summoned all his officers into the great cabin, and after some 
general instructions about their duty — ' Gentlemen ', said he, 
addressing himself to my master and another, who had been but 
lately appointed to his ship, ' as we have never sailed together 
before, I must desire your attention to a few hints, which I always 
take the liberty to give in such circumstances. We are now shut 
up together in a prison, where the unavoidable inconveniences of 
our situation make all our care necessary to prevent its becoming 
insupportable to us. For this reason, the first thing I recommend 
to you is, not to game. Beside the danger of disagreement when 
the passions are agitated by the vicissitudes of play, our pay is 
scarce sufficient for our support, so that the least loss must be dis- 
tressing, the consequence of which must be general unhappiness, 
for who can see his companion miserable, without sharing in his 
misery ? There is another thing, against which, though not com- 
monly considered in this light, I must earnestly caution you, as 
inevitably throwing a gloom over that cheerfulness of mind, which 
is the greatest happiness of life, and to us must supply the place of 
every other happiness, and this is the vice of profane cursing and 
swearing, to the reproach of our service, too prevalent among 
us'. 

' There is no man, however hardened in this detestable habit, 
but knows it to be a crime, and feels a check from within every 
time he is guilty of it, the repetition of which self -accusation sours 
his temper, and makes him dissatisfied with himself, and every 
person and thing about him. For the truth of this, I appeal to 
unvaried experience. Who ever saw a man serenely cheerful, 
that was addicted to this vice (I might say indeed, to any vice, 
but as our situation precludes us from the practice of most others, 
I mention these only into which we may fall) ; for occasional mirth 
is a very different thing, and too often leads into consequences 



336 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

destructive of serenity of mind, especially when it is raised by 
means inconsistent with virtue. 

' I do not speak of the effect which the practice of virtue has upon 
our resolution. The courage of a Briton can never be doubted ; 
but still there is as much difference between that of a virtuous and 
a vicious man, as of the same person when sober, or intoxicated 
with liquor. The former is uniform, steady, and attentive to 
improve every advantage or remedy any misfortune, the other, 
boisterous, headlong, and blinded with passion ; for passion only 
can make a man face death, who, in the cool moment of reflection, 
is afraid to die. In a word, one is the courage of a man, the other, 
the rashness of a brute. Against these two things, therefore gaming 
and swearing, I take the liberty to caution you, as a friend, who is 
sincerely desirous of your welfare. But there is another vice, in 
respect to which I do not think myself obliged to observe the same 
delicacy, and this is drunkenness, which is liable to be attended 
with such dangerous consequences in our situation in particular — 
for I think it unnecessary to mention any other — that I shall ever 
exert all the authority entrusted to me to suppress it, and therefore 
it is but just for me to declare that no officer, who is once guilty 
of it under my command, shall ever do duty under me more. 

' This, gentlemen, is wlaat I had to say to you. The observation 
of these few hints will make us happy among ourselves, and re- 
spected by our men, without which it is impossible for us to be 
well obeyed by them ; for, heedless and profligate as they may 
appear, they are the severest critics on the conduct of their officers, 
and not only like people in higher stations revere the virtues which 
they have not resolution to imitate, but also actually do imitate 
them in a great degree '. 



END OF THE SECOND VOLtTME 



VOLUME III 



CHAPTER I 

THE FOLLY OF A PERSON PEOSTITTTTING HIS CHARACTER TO PLEASE 
HIS COMPANY AGGRAVATED BY THE DANGEROITS MISTAKE OF 
RIDICULE FOR APPLAUSE — CHRYSAL'S MASTER CHANGES PLACE 
WITH THE CHAPLAIN, AND PREACHES HIM AN INTERESTING SERMON, 
IN WHICH, AMONG REMARKS MORE JUST THAN POLITE, HE GIVES 
AN UNCOMMON REASON FOR THE PARTICULAR DEFORMITY OF VICE 
IN WOMEN 

I HAVE already taken notice of the efEeot whicli the advice and 
example of the captain had upon every one in the ship. The officers 
lived like a family of brothers, and the men did their duty with 
regularity and pleasure ; but, though all paid due respect to what 
he said, it was impossible to work such an instantaneous reforma- 
tion ; but that some of them would now and then jest among 
themselves upon his conduct, as, from comparison with that of 
others of his rank, inconsistent with his character ; and in other 
respects indulge in the levities of discourse and behaviour too 
general among persons not much accustomed to the rules of rational 
conversation. 

But, whatever allowances the circumstances of their education 
might claim for such sallies in the officers, the person who trans- 
gressed most was certainly entitled to none. This was the chaplain, 
who, to avoid the imputation of being hypocritically sanctified, 
ran into the opposite extreme. The selfish vanity of man always 
takes pleasure in seeing any person debase himself by acting 
beneath his character, especially if that character is such as appears 
to be placed in a more respectable point of view than their 
own. The officers, who in general look upon a chaplain as no better 
than lumber in a ship, and think he is placed as a kind of check 
upon them, were pleased with his prostitution, which he, by a 
common mistake of ridicule for applause, gave still further into, 
imagining they laughed with him, when, in reality, they laughed 
at him. 

But my master beheld the matter in another light, and, taking 
an opportunity one day, when the chaplain and he were by them- 
selves in the ward-room, ' I have observed with much concern, sir ', 
said he, ' that you are falling into an error, which I have knowu 
prove fatal to many gentlemen of your profession. This is depart- 
ing from your character in order to accommodate yourself to what 
you thinli the humour of your company. Believe me, sir, no man 
ever did so who did not immediately fall into contempt with the 
very people whose approbation he strove to purchase at so dear 
a rate. The greatest libertine despises a clergyman who is a liber- 
tine ; and the reason is plain. You are set apart from the rest of 



338 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

mankind to perform the rites of religion, and inculcate virtue by 
your precepts and example ; and for thia you are paid by the 
public, who expect that you should earn your wages, by doing 
your duty ; and look upon those who do not as no better than 
cheats. This may appear an odd way of speaking, but it is true 
nevertheless. On the other hand, where a clergyman fulfils his 
duty, and enforces his preaching by his practice, though he may 
not absolutely reform all those with whom he converses, yet he 
will certainly work this good effect, that he will keep them 
in awe, and prevent their running into outrageous lengths of 
wickedness, at least in his presence. For, whatever people may 
inconsiderately imagine, no man ever acted in character, who was 
not respected ; no man ever acted out of character who was not 
despised. 

' Do but reflect a moment in what light you yourself would look 
upon a lady who should speak obscenely, swear, drink, and talk 
of fighting, and it will show you the justice of this remark. For 
what makes these vices so particularly hateful in a woman, is not 
anything in their nature particularly contradictory to the sex 
more than ours, but because they are contrary to her character. 
I beg your pardon, sir, for talking to you in this free manner, in 
respect to your conduct, which I am sensible concerns only yourself ; 
but as the errors you too have fallen into appear to have arisen merely 
from inadvertency and mistake, I think it my duty to caution you 
against the danger of them, particularly in your present situation, 
with which I have had the opportunity of being much better ac- 
quainted than you possibly can be. I was in the service long, very 
long, before you were born, and have been intimate with many 
chaplains, but never one who prostituted his character to humour 
his company, who was not neglected by them when they had it 
in their power to have served him ; as, on the contrary, I have 
known many instances of those who have reaped the happy fruits 
of a regular and virtuous conduct, by which they acquired an 
esteem that proved the foundation of their fortune ; and if all 
have not been equally successful, their disappointment must be 
attributed to some other cause. I would not by this be under- 
stood to advise you to a morose distance and stiffness of behaviour, 
or asperity of reproof upon every occasion. They seldom, if ever, 
do good in any situation ; in yours they will certainly do hurt, by 
piquing false pride to act in opposition to them, without regard to 
the consequences. An obliging temper, and a uniformly decent 
conduct, lead insensibly to imitation, where contradiction or direct 
admonition would be held impertinent. These hints are so obvious 
that they may seem unnecessary ; but it is want of attention to 
them which has made so many chaplains miscarry in life, and 
indeed has brought the very character into disrepute '. 
ij^ The chaplain, who wanted neither natural good sense, nor virtu- 
ous inclination, was struck with the justice and force of this rebuke. 
He thanked my master in the most ingenuous manner, and promised 
to regulate his future conduct by his advice. Such a change at first 
naturally exposed him to the merriment of his companions ; but as 
my master took his part, and showed them the injustice of such 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 339 

behaviour, it soon wore off, and he had the heartfelt satisfaction 
to find himself treated with friendly respect and confidence by 
those whose gross familiarity had before often given him pain, 
as it evidently implied contempt. 



CHAPTER II 

CHEYSAL DESCRIBES TBTTE COMPASSION ; AND SHOWS THE GENERAL 
CONSEQUENCE 01' A MAN's ACKNOWLEDGING DISTRESS, WITH THE 
REASONS OF IT — CHBYSAL's MASTER IS PREVAILED UPON BT HIS 
CAPTAIN TO TELL HIM THE CAUSE OF HIS MELANCHOLY, WHICH 
IS REMOVED BY AN ACT OP UNCOMMON GENEROSITY — CHEYSAL 
ENTERS INTO A NEW SERVICE 

As the captain maintained the most friendly intercourse with 
his officers, he soon observed that my master laboured under some 
heavy distress of mind. This naturally raised his compassion ; 
and as real compassion never sees distress which it is not desirous 
of alleviating, he frequently took occasion, when they were by 
themselves, to turn his discourse upon such subjects as he thought 
might lead him to open himself ; but finding that modesty or 
reserve, contracted from long acquaintance with misfortune, 
and observation that the knowledge of a man's being in distress 
always sinks him in the esteem of his companions, by cutting 
off their hopes of service from him, and alarming their appre- 
hensions of his expecting assistance from them, prevented his 
taking the hint, he resolved to break through forms and ask him 
directly. 

Seeing him, therefore, one day walking the quarter-deck in a 
mood of deepest melancholy, he called him into the great cabin, 
and desiring him to sit down, after a little general chat, ' I fear, 
sir ', said he, ' that something hangs upon your spirits. If it is 
proper to be communicated, let me know what it is, and depend 
upon every assistance in my power to make you easy. I ask not 
from idle or impertinent curiosity ' 

' Sir ', answered my master, struck with the manner in which 
he spoke, ' I believe you above the influence of such motives, and 
shall therefore obey your kind commands without scruple. It is 
too true that I am unhappy ; and I fear my unhappiness is too 
common. I have devoted my life to a profession in which I have 
served my country above forty years with fidelity ; and I will take 
the liberty to say with some success. And now when my constitu- 
tion is broken with wounds, fatigue, and change of climates, when 
nature calls for rest and refreshment, the only reward I have to 
expect is poverty, and its inseparable attendant, contempt. This, 
sir, is the cause of my unhappiness ; and such a cause as I believe 
you will think to be a just one '. 

' Very true, sir ', replied the captain, ' it is a just one ; and what 
must affect every man of spirit, and a generous way of thinking. 
But you should not yield to it too far. You are still in the vigour 



340 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

of life ; and, while the war continues, should look forward with 
hope. Though you have been unsuccessful hitherto, fortune may 
prove more kind '. 

' Alas, sir ', returned my master, ' I have been so long cheated 
by hope, that I now detest it. When I came out upon this last 
expedition, our force made me so confident of success, and I was 
so well acquainted with the wealth in the place, that I, unhappily, 
gave way to hope, and ran into expenses, which, though far from 
being unnecessary, were imprudent, and threaten now to involve 
me in ruin on my return home, as it had been thought proper by 
our superiors to rate our service in the conquest at so low a 
price '. 

' If that is the case, then ', said the captain, ' do not return till 
matters mend. Whenever I am ordered home, I'll take care to get 
you removed into another ship. Your staying abroad on such 
nn account is not inconsistent with the strictest honour, as you do 
it with an intention truly honest ' 

' Dear sir ', answered my master, ' that is very true. But I am 
precluded even from the wretched relief of a voluntary exile. I 
have a wife and children at home, the apprehension of whose dis- 
tresses drives me to despair. It was to clothe and settle them in 
f. little habitation, where they might enjoy the indispensable neces- 
saries of life with some degree of comfort, that I anticipated my 
success in the manner I mentioned ; and now, as the success has 
fallen so far short of what I thought just expectation, all the former 
savings of my life — savings from the very necessities of nature — 
will be torn away by the rapacious hands of merciless creditors, to 
make up the deficiency in the articles bought of themselves to 
discharge their demands, and my wretched family thrown upon 
the unfriendly world, without its being in my power to assist them. 
I must, therefore, return, and go into jail to prevent their starving 
in the streets. What affected myself only, honest indignation 
enabled me to support. I have seen boys whose ignorance I de- 
spised, and men whose principles I detested, preferred to command, 
while my services were overlooked ; but, as I had not the interest 
of the former, nor the modish merit of the latter, I bore my fate 
with patience. But to have those dearer to me than life exposed 
to misery, is more than I can bear ' 

' Nor shall you bear it ' ! replied the captain, who had feigned 
to cough to hide the sjrmpathetio tear that glistened in his eye. 
' Nor shall you bear it ! How much is the debt that alarms you ? 
I will advance it for you directly ; and not that only, I will 
take upon me to make your merit — to which I am no stranger — 
known to your superiors, in such » light as shall not fail of just 
reward '. 

' Oh, sir ' ! returned my master, as soon as the fulness of his heart 
gave him utterance, ' how can I submit to obligations to which it 
is impossible I should ever make any return ' 

' All the return I desire ', answered the captain, ' is your friend- 
ship. Speak ! how much do you want ? The packet is yet in 
sight. I will order a signal to be made for her, and give you a draft 
upon my agent '. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 341 

' Good Heaven ! ' exclaimed my master, ' can there be such 
virtue in man '. 

' Come ! what is the sum ' ? interrupted the captain, who wanted 
to shorten a conversation that began to be too affecting to him. 
' I shall think you doubt my sincerity if you hesitate to accept my 
friendship '. 

' Such a doubt ', returned my master, whose heart a gush of tears 
had lightened, ' would be a blacker crime than ever stained my soul. 
No ; I receive your beneficemoe with humble gratitude, as from the 
hand of Heaven, nor will mention any other return but what 
must be made to that, till it shall be pleased to bless me with 
better ability '. Then pulling out his pocket-book, ' Here is the 
account of what I owe ', continued he, giving him some papers and 
a purse containing little more than his share of the price of the 
smuggler's boat ; ' and here is all my worldly wealth, which is 
no more than an assignment of my miserable prize-money, and 
these few pieces of gold, thrown by fortune in my way, mostly 
since our hands were tied up by the capitulation. For the balance 
I miist be your debtor '. 

' For the balance ', answered the captain, returning the purse 
and the assignment. ' No, you shall be my debtor, if you will call 
it so, for the whole. It would be strange friendship to strip you 
of everything. You may want yourself '. 

' Excuse me, sir ', interrupted my master, unable to suppress 
the delicacy, the dignity of honour ; ' I am not so low a wretch 
as to accept of more than I indispensably want ; and that for persons 
dearer to me than myself. If you will not permit me to make 
the debt as light as I can, it is impossible for me to receive your 
friendship, however essential to the happiness of my heart. I 
am sorry you should have entertained so mean an opinion of me '. 
' I have the highest opinion of you ', replied the captain, who 
saw what pain he had given him ; ' and spoke in the warmth of 
my regard, without the most distant design of giving you offence. 
But you shalll make your own terms, on this condition, though, 
that if you have any occasion for money, you will apply to me with 
the freedom of a friend '. 

To such a proposal it was impossible to refuse assenting. My 
master complied, and the captain taking the money, etc., from him, 
desired that he would order a signal to be made for the packet, 
and write his letters, while he himself should draw a bill upon his 
agent. The sentiments expressed by the captain made it a pleasure 
to me to pass into his service on this occasion. As soon as the 
lieutenant went out, my new master walked a turn or two about 
his cabin, in the exalted happiness of conscious virtue ; and then 
drawing a bill for considerably more than the lieutenant was to 
pay, he desired that he should be called, and when he entered, 
' I beg yoiu- pardon ', said he, ' for interrupting you, but it is to 
desire that you will present my compliments to your wife, and tell 
her I beg she will accept of a trifling present from me, which I have 
taken the liberty to include in the bill. Come ! no words I In 
this I will not be contradicted '. 

' Oh, sir ' ! answered the lieutenant, catching his hand, as he 



3i2 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

reached him the bill, and kissing it eagerly, ' this is too much ! 
my heart -wdll burst '. Saying -which he went out of the cabin in 
a silence more expressive of his soul than all the flights of eloquence. 



CHAPTER III 

HISTORY or A LIEUTENANT OF A MAN-OF-WAE — A COMPAEISOK 
BETWEEN THE EEWAEDS OF MEEIT IN THE LAND AND SEA SER- 
VICES ; WITH A EEMAEILiBLE INSTANCE OF A GEEAT MAN's 
REMEMBERING AN OLD FRIEND — THE CONSEQUENCE OP ATTEMPTING 
TO SET UP FOR A MENDBK OF MANNERS, AND OF A MAN'S NOT 
MEETING AN OPPOETUNITY OF MAKING HIMSELF EEMAEKABLE 

When everything was settled, and the packet sailed, the lieutenant 
desired leave to wait upon my master ; and as soon as he entered, 
' I come, sir ', said he, ' to pay you the thanks which the fulness of 
my heart would not let me utter before. You have raised me to 
happiness from the lowest state of despair '. 

' Hold, my friend ' ! answered my master, taking his hand, and 
squeezing it tenderly. ' Speak no more of it, I conjure you. I am 
abundantly overpaid for what I have done, by the pleasure of 
having served a man of merit ; and shall think you repine at my 
happiness in being able to purchase that pleasure, if I ever hear 
the affair mentioned more. ' 

To relieve the lieutenant, whom he saw oppressed with gratitude, 
he then changed the conversation to another subject, when the 
lieutenant showed so much good sense, and solid judgment, that 
my master could not forbear expressing his astonishment that 
such a man should have been so long unpromoted in the service. 

' If you can have patience to hear the story of my Ufe ', answered 
the lieutenant, ' it will soon explain that difficulty to you. My 
father was an officer in the army, who was rewarded for the loss of 
a leg and thirty years' service with the half -pay of a captain of 
foot. As he had a wife and children to maintain and provide for, 
he retired to a cheap country, where he lived in the most rigid 
economy, in the hopes of saving, for he could not make anything, 
being precluded from every kind of industry by the profession to 
which he had devoted his youth. The first acquaintance a stranger 
gets in a country place is the parson of the parish. It was my 
father's happiness to fix his habitation where there was a clergyman' 
who would have been a valuable acquaintance in any place, and 
who was equally happy in the acquisition of a rational acquaint- 
ance in him. The common intercourse of neighbourhood was, 
therefore, soon improved between them into the strongest friendship, 
in the intimacy of which, as my father would often naturally men- 
tion his anxiety for his children, his friend persuaded him to breed 
me, the eldest, to the sea service, in which he thought he himself 
might be able to serve me, by his interest with several commanders, 

• Bishop of Derry [Davis's Olio]. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 243 

with whom he had been acquainted formerly, when chaplain to 
a man-of-war. " That is the service " ! would the good man say, 
with pleasure sparkling in his eyes. " That is the service in which 
merit is never disregarded. You would not have been laid aside 
after thirty years to pine upon five shillings a day, if you had been 
bred to the sea. No ! no ! merit is all that is necessary there ". 

' Such an argument was too flattering to my father's hopes to 
be resisted. Though he felt the evil of not having been bred to 
a business himself, he was charmed at the thought of his son's being 
placed in the way of rising to a higher sphere ; and readily assented 
to the advice of his friend, who, not content with mere advice, 
insisted on taking me home with him, and giving me such an educa- 
tion as should qualify me to make a figure in the profession to 
which he had directed me. " If ever a man of merit in the sea 
service ", would he often say, " fails of rising, it is for want of having 
had a good education to found his hopes upon. A mere seaman 
may work a ship, but an admiral should be a scholar ". 

' How well this reasoning was founded experience daily shows ; 
though it would be ingratitude in me to arraign it, as the little 
taste for letters which I acquired from his care, if it has not 
contributed to my advancement, has at least, enabled me to support 
the shook of disappointment, as well as to avoid many evils, into 
which I have seen others, who had not the same advantage, fall. 
At sixteen — for he insisted that it was most wretched policy 
to turn a boy loose upon the world before he had come to the use 
of reason, and as well instructed in the principles of morality and 
religion, for the sake of gaining a couple of years advance — at 
sixteen, I say, I was sent to sea, provided with a chest of books, 
and mathematical instruments, and a good suit of clothes, not to 
discredit the recommendation which my best friend gave me to an 
admiral ', with whom he had been most intimate when a lieuten- 
ant ; and whose readiness to serve him in anything he would not 
admit a doubt of. On my presenting my letter, the admiral at 
first had forgot the name, but recollecting himself at length on my 
mentiom'ng some circumstances which I had often heard my friend 
dwell upon with pleasure, " Very true ", said he ; "I remember 
him now. He made the best bowl of punch of any man in the navy ". 
' This was all the notice the great man took of him, or of me on 
his account, except, I should add, that on his captain's obser'^'ing 
I should make a good figure on the quarter-deck, I was directly 
rated a midshipman — a favour for which I soon found I was indebted 
to his caution of sending me well dressed, much more than to his 
interest. Though I felt this disappointment of my first hopes very 

' Admiral Thomas Mathews [1676-1751], described by Mr J. K. 
Laughton as a choleric old man of the traditional John Bull type. He 
virtually retired from the service in 1724, but in 1742 was sent as com- 
mander-in-chief to the Mediterranean, to watch the Spanish and French 
fleets. Through his long absence from the navy, he was out of touch 
with any of his officers, and the result was disastrous. The enemy 
got away after inflicting damage on the British fleet, and Mathews 
was court-martialed and disgraced. 



344 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

severely, on my friend's account as well as my own, I could not 
think of shocking him with the news, but saying in general terms 
that I had been well received, resolved to apply myself to my 
business, and try whether I could not deserve that favour which 
he had failed to procure me. As I had been accustomed to con- 
versation very different from that of those with whom alone I could 
now converse, I took every opportunity, when off duty, of running 
to my books. But the relief I found from this was for the present 
over-balanced by the general ridicule into which it drew me ; 
especially as I not only avoided obscenity, swearing, and drinking 
myself, but had also been so imprudent as to rebuke others for them, 
I was immediately nicknamed the parson, and avoided by everyone 
in the ship. I need not describe to you the situation of a petit 
officer, insulted by those below him, ridiculed bj his equals, and 
looked down upon with contempt by his superiors, who forgot they 
ever were in his station themselves. I bore it for fifteen years, at 
the end of which time, having the good fortune to be sent to London 
with a press-gang, on purpose to mortify me — for I always disliked 
that particular duty more than any other in the service — on seeing 
an advertisement in the newspapers, that all who were qualified 
by their standing to be lieutenants in the navy, should attend to 
pass their examination, I offered myself without any other intro- 
duction, or interest, and was appointed to a ship. In this station 
I have now done my duty for five and twenty years, without repre- 
hension ; but as I have no corporation interest to push me at 
liome ; none of the modern polite accomplishments to recommend 
me to the favourites of fortune, whom 1 occasionally meet in the 
ser\'ioe, nor have ever had the good luck to find an opportunity 
of making myself remarkable, by any action of iclat, though in 
itself no more than a successful blunder, my uniform conduct and 
care have passed unnoticed, and I remain a lieutenant still '. 

Tlie circumstances of this story affected my master in the strongest 
manner. He took the lieutenant by the hand, and desiring him 
not to despair, repeated his promise of using all his interest to serve 
him, of the success of which he had no reason to doubt. 

Nothing particular happened during our voyage. One instance, 
though, of my master's conduct in his military capacity I cannot 
forbear mentioning, as it shows his character in the strongest light, 
which was, that he never interfered in the business of his officers ; 
but if he happened to see anything which he disapproved, instead 
of interposing his own authority publicly, and gi^^ng contrary 
orders, he always spoke privately to the officer on duty and giving 
him directions under the appearance of advice, let the alteration 
proceed as immediately from him, by which means he spared him 
the pain of being found fault with before the men, and consequently 
lessened in their opinion. This delicacy not only endeared him 
to them all, but also contributed greatly to advance the service. 
For as every officer knew that he should have the credit or bear the 
blame of his o-wn actions, they all exerted themselves vsdth the utmost 
ardour ; whereas, on the contrary, where a captain is continually 
onterfering, and leaving nothing for his officers to do, they grow 
iareless, of course, and do nothing, as they know he will arrogate 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 345 

to himself the merit of success ; if they do not even take a malig- 
nant pleasure in any miscarriage, the blame of which they have so 
just an opportunity of throwing upon him. 



CHAPTER IV 

AN UITCOMMON METHOD OF CABEYING ON A WAE, WITH THE DANOEB 
OE SPEAKING THE TBUTH TOO PLAINLY AT AN IMPBOPEB TIME — 
CHEYSAL's MASTBE meets his BBOTHBR — SOME ACCOUNT OE 
HIM — HE BEPEESENTS CEETAIN MATTERS IN AN ODD LIGHT — 
CHEYSAL ENTEBS INTO HIS SEEVICE — CONCLUSION OP HIS CHAE- 
ACTEB — CHBYSAL QUITS HIS SEBVICB ON AN UNCOMMON OCCASION, 
FOE ONE PEOM 'VnilCH HE PASSES, IN THE USUAL COUBSE OP BUSI- 
NESS, INTO THAT OP THE GENERAL 

When we arrived at the place of our destination i, we found the 
shore covered with an extensive encampment, and everything 
wearing the appearance of the most active war. The first thing 
my master 2 did was of course to wait upon the general 3, whose 
operations he was sent to assist. He met him viewing an occa- 
sional fortification, which he had caused to be raised to train his 
army to the method of making regular sieges and attacks, and 
marking out a piece of ground to be sowed with vegetables, to 
correct the bad effects of the salt provisions which his men had 
lived upon in their passage thither, and preserve them in health. 
The account he received from my master of the heavy loss sustained 
in the expedition from which he had just come, gave him visible 
pleasure, as it seemed to set his own conduct, which was diametric- 
ally the reverse of that observed there, in the most advantageous 
light. 

' I wonder ', said he, looking around him with an air of conscious 
exultation, ' how officers can reconcile it to themselves to throw 
away the lives of their men in such a manner. For my part, I act 
upon very different principles. I take care not only to give my 
troops an insight into all the various branches of the military art, 
but also to keep them in such health as may enable them to reap 
the advantage of their experience. There is nothing so bad in 
war as precipitation ; it was the sole cause of the late general's 
defeat and death '. 

^ Nova Scotia, where forces were gathering under Lord Loudoun 
against the French. The date is the early part of 1757. 

^ The character is now changed to William Howe (afterwards Viscount 
Howe), brother of the third Viscount, who fell at Tioouderoga, and of 
Earl Howe, the admiral. He was a brilliant officer, and a personal 
friend of Wolfe. At Quebec, he led the forlorn hope that seized the 
path to the heights of Abraham. 

' The fourth Earl of Loudoun [1705-82]. His dilatoriness in pre- 
paring to attack the French, and the embargo he laid on all outward- 
bound vessels, in order to keep his plans secret, led to his recall. General 
Amherst succeeded him. 



346 ADVENTVRM OF A GUINEA 

' Yea ', interrupted an officer^ who stood near, and had hearkened 
to him with evident impatience. ' Delay is full as bad. Your 
troops want neither health nor experience to conquer every opposi- 
tion they can possibly meet, and will accomplish the end they 
were sent upon before your cabbages are fit for them to eat, if you 
will but lead them against their enemies, and not give them time 
to retire with their effects into places whither it is impossible for 
an army to pursue them, while your men waste their time and 
spirits in the foolish parade of mock battles and sieges, till they 
lose their ardour with delays which can answer no end but 
that of protracting the war, and thereby lengthening a lucrative 
command '. 

Such an attack was quite unexpected, and struck the general 
with equal surprise and indignation, as it touched him in the ten- 
derest part ; however, dissembling his passion, of which he had an 
absolute command — ' I would have you to know, sir ', said he, 
' that I think it the highest assurance in you to attempt censuring 
my conduct, who are sent merely to execute my orders. When I 
ask your opinion, it will be time enough for you to give it, till then, 
obedience, not advice, is what I expect from you. If I did not 
hold it beneath me to show resentment to one so absolutely subject 
to my power, you should instantly find the effect of this insolence. 
But presume not on that protection any further, as you regard your 
safety. No man provokes me with impunity '. 

' N — n — ^nor me ', sputtered the officer, whose temper, hot as 
that of the general was cool, caught iire at the faintest shadow of 
offence, and inflamed almost to madness, as soon as rage permitted 
him to articulate a word. ' Nor m — m — me. I seek no p — p — 
protection but my sword, with which I will v — v — vindicate my 
own honour, and make good what I say. Talk to m — m — me of 
safety and im — p — p — punity ' ! 

The affair now became serious, these words striking at the general's 
safety as well as his honour, and convincing him that he must 
support his dignity by a vigorous effort. 

' What ' ? retorted he, therefore, with a tone and air of offended 
authority. ' Do you menace me, too ? I suppose you design to 
raise a mutiny in the army, but I'll prevent that '. Then, turning 
to an officer who attended — ' Take that madman away ', continued 
he, ' and put him under a guard till he recovers his reason. Such 
behaviour must not go unpunished '. Then addressing himself to 
my master with an affected unconcern, as above being moved by 
what had happened, while the other was led away speechless 
and convulsed with rage, he politely invited him to dinner, an 
honour, however, which my master declined accepting that day, 
as he was most impatient to see his brother ^, who bore a principal 

■^ Lord Charles Hay, the gallant officer who at Fontenoy came un- 
expectedly face to face with the French Guards, and politely invited them 
to fire first. He was sent home from Nova Scotia, and court-mar- 
tialed for declaring his opinion, as quoted above. 

^ His eldest brother, George Augustus, third Viscount Howe, killed 
at Tioonderoga in 1758. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 347 

command in the army under the general. The meeting of these 
brothers was truly affecting. The instinctive connection of nature 
had been indissolubly cemented between them by the sacred bond 
of friendship, founded on a sense of mutual virtue. 

Actuated by the same principles, they had both devoted them- 
selves to the profession of arms, in the different services of the land 
and sea, aa if to avoid the jealousy of rivalship, each being deter- 
mined to let no competitor take the lead of him in the road to 
honour. Undebauched by afQuence, and disdaining to waste his 
youth at home in luxury, when the cause of his country called for 
his assistance, the elder bravely came to seek for glory in these 
inhospitable wilds, with as much ardour as my master pursued it 
on his proper element, in order to earn honours, which he might 
transmit to his ovni posterity, equal to those which his brother 
inherited from his illustrious ancestors. When the tender inquiries 
of affection were reciprocally answered, my master gratified the 
curiosity of his brother with a particular account of his late dearly- 
bought success, closing the black detail with some remarks on the 
different conduct of the general of this army, which were much to 
his advantage. 

' Your reflections, my dearest brother ', answered the oifioer, 
' are most just, as things appear to you. But when you have had an 
opportunity of seeing further, I fear you will find reason to change 
your sentiments, and that the delay here proceeds at bottom from 
the same principle with the precipitation which produced such 
terrible effects with you, and Heaven grant it produces not as bad '. 
Interest is the object everywhere, and whether that is pursued by 
sacrificing the forces in rash and ill-conducted attempts to gain 
an immediate prize, or by letting them melt away in inaction, to 
accumulate the profits of command, makes no difference in the end. 
I would not be miderstood from this to justify the officer for arraign- 
ing the general's conduct in so public and personal a manner. 
Such ungoverned warmth is inexcusable. Proper respect must be 
paid to those who bear that authority, or the effect of that authority 
ceases ; indeed, it is not to them, but to him who delegates the 
authority, the respect is paid. A general at the head of an army 
represents his sovereign in the plenitude of his power, and to suffer 
any slight to be shown to his delegated character were to betray 
the trust of that delegation. For this reason, I think his punish- 
ment was necessary, and therefore just ; I wish I could add that it 
was equally so from the injustice as from the circumstances of the 
accusation which occasioned it ; but to anyone who will not shut 
his eyes, it must appear beyond a doubt that his great crime was 
speaking too much, and too plain truth, for, with all our boasted 
care for the preservation of the men, their distresses are such as 
have not left me a penny in my pocket, for I cannot shut my hand 
where my heart is opened. In short, I am so sick of the whole 
scene, that I have solicited the command of a detached party, with 
which I hope to show that the native bravery of Britons, when led 
with spirit, requires but little experience to enable them to conquer 
more formidable foes than naked savages, led by a few wretched 
Frenchmen, in a condition not much better. I set out to-morrow 



348 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

morning, and think it a particular happiness that you have arrived 
time enough for me to have this interview with you '. 

The rest of their conversation is not necessary to be repeated, 
as it turned upon their own domestic concerns. This much only 
it is but just for me to observe, that it showed their conduct in the 
intercourse and relations of private life to be as amiable as that in 
their public capacities was exalted, and proved that moral virtue 
is the best foundation for true heroism. My master's brother 
having, in the course of their conversation, intimated his having 
some present occasion for money, I here entered into his service. 
You may judge I remained not long in the possession of my new 
master. His brother had no sooner left him, than he paid me 
away, among a large number of my fellows, to a merchant, for 
some additions which he thought it necessary to make, at his own 
expense, to the provisions made by the public for the support and 
comfort of his men, through the fatigues and inconveniences of a 
campaign in an uninhabited coimtry. The sentiments expressed 
by my master in the effusion of his soul to his brother, showed his 
character in the justest light ; I shall, therefore, only add, that as 
he acted from principles firmly established on the invariable basis 
of reason, there was no danger of his deviating from the path in 
which he set out. 

So bright a prospect made it a pain for me to quit his service so 
suddenly ; but I have since met many mortifications of the same 
kind, my stay being always shortest in the best hands. My con- 
tinuance, though from another motive, was not much longer with 
my next master, the merchant, who, in the common course of 
soliciting permission for a ship of his to sail with a cargo that must 
be ruined by delay, an embargo having been laid on all the shipping 
in the place, in the unfathomable wisdom of the ruling powers, to 
promote some unintelligible plan of service, gave me to the general's 
clerk, from whom, in the same course of business, I came into the 
service of the general. 



CHAPTER V 

CHBYSAL's master makes some CHABACTEEISTIC KEFLECTIOjrS — 
HE IS STJKPRISED AT THE OEFICEr'S REFUSING TO MAKE UP MATTERS, 
AND GIVES A PARTICULAR REASON FOE SOME PEOPLE'S RISING IN 
THE WORLD — AN EXTRAORDINARY PERSONAGE ENTERS TO HIM — 
DESCRIPTION OP HIM — HE GIVES A CHAEACTEE OE THE NATIVE 
AMERICANS, AND OFFERS SOME INTERESTING REMARKS ON THE 
RETURN THEY MAKE TO THE TREATMENT THEY MEET WITH, AND 
ON THE PRACTICE OF FORMING IN THE CLOSET PLANS OF OPERA- 
TIONS FOR ARMIES IN THE FIELD — ODD REASONS WHY THE AMERI- 
CANS ARE DESIROUS OF GOLD — CHRYSAL CHANGES HIS SERVICE 

When I entered into the possession of my new master, he was 
waiting in his tent, with the most anxious impatience, for the 
return of a person whom he had employed to mediate, as of him- 
self, between him and the officer, whose presumption, in daring to 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 34» 

find fault with his measures, lie had thought proper to punish in 
the manner I juat now mentioned. 

His reflections on an affair that struck so dangerously at his 
pride and avarice, the ruling passions of his heart, could not be 
very agreeable, but the sight of the money gave them a pleasing 
turn. Having asked the clerk a few questions in the way of busi- 
ness, and dismissed him, he took the purse, and weighing it in his 
hand — ' Ay ', said he, with delight glistening in his eyes, ' this will 
do. This embargo was a lucky thought. Let who will complain 
of the hindrance it is to the business of the public, it advances mine, 
and that is all I care for. I came here to serve myself, and not the 
public, and as there is neither plunder nor contributions to be got 
by activity, I must try what I can do another way. I showed 
my dexterity at hunting savages in the mountains of my own 
country, and have no desire to renew the chase here. It was neces- 
sary for me then to do something that should make me remarkable, 
and gain favour with those who I saw must prevail in the end, and. 
therefore I spared no trouble or fatigue, neither friend nor foe, 
to convince them of my attachment ; and in reward, they have now 
given me this command, in conducting which, I must use delay to 
reap the advantages of my former activity. Fabius saved Rome 
by delay ; let me but make my fortune by it, and I envy not his 
fame. I prefer this sound ', chinking the purse, ' to the empty 
noise of public acclamation, the shouts of a giddy mob, who bless 
and curse with the same breath, and without knowing why they do 
either. No, no, this is music that charms my ear '. 

His meditations were broken off here by the gentleman he waited 
for, who informed him that the officer would come to no terms of 
accommodation, nor even accept of his liberty tiU he should be 
acquitted by a court-martial, and have justice done him for the 
affront offered to his honour. Such an account was far from being 
agreeable to my master, who, for obvious reasons, wished to have 
everything to go as quietly as possible. After some pause — ' This 
is a damned affair ', said he, ' but we must now e'en make the best 
we can of it. Who could have thought that a countryman of my 
own would have proved so refractory ? We have always been 
remarkable for hanging well together. One and all, was the word, 
or we could never have done such great matters. If it is once 
found out that we can be divided, we shall soon lose our conse- 
quence, and every man be reduced to the poor prospect of depending 
on his own merit. However, since he will not accept of his liberty 
here, he shall e'en go home a prisoner, and recover it there as well 
as he can. I am on the right side, and don't fear but my friends 
will bring me through more than this, especially as it is a national 
concern to us all alike. In the meantime, we must double our 
diligence to make hay while the sun shines ' 

lie gentleman, who was in all his secrets, acknowledged the 
force of his reasoning, and was going to communicate to him some 
new strokes of management, when word was brought my master 
that a person, to whom he could not properly be denied,^ desired 

'This remarkable person was Sii' William Jo'iinson [1715-74], who 



350 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

to see him. There was something ia the whole appearance of this 
person that struck me with the strongest curiosity the moment I 
saw him. His stature, above the common size of man, was formed 
with the justest proportion, and denoted ability to execute the 
most difficult attempts, which the determined and enterprising 
spirit that animated his looks could urge him to. His open coun- 
tenance, in which humanity and reason attempered resolution, 
showed the genuine workings of his soul, and his whole deportment 
was in the unaffected ease of natural liberty, above the hypocritical 
formality of studied rules of behaviour, devised only to deceive. 

As soon as he entered — ' I am come, sir ', said he, throwing 
himself carelessly into a chair, and cutting short all that parade of 
ceremony, on the punctilious observation of which my master 
prided himself not a little, ' to receive your orders. It is time I 
should join my people, who groV impatient, as the enemy have 
begun to stir, and I never choose to baulk their first ardour. There 
is nothing like taking men in the humour to fight, and before they 
have time to consider too much about it '. 

' I design, sir ', answered my master, with a solemnity and affecta- 
tion of politeness, which made the strongest contrast to the blunt 
freedom of the other, ' to call a council of war very soon, at which I 
shall be glad of your assistance, to form a plan of operations for the 
campaign. When that is done, and all proper measures concerted, 
you shall set out. Precipitation is very dangerous, and directly 
contrary to the principles of the regular art of war, by which I 
mean to proceed. The savages shall find some difference between 
my conduct and that of my predecessors. They shan't surprise 
me on my march, nor draw me into an ambush among woods and 
mountains '. 

' As to the art of war, sir ', replied the other, ' I know no more of 
it than what Heaven and common sense have taught me, which is, 
to find out the enemy, and beat them as soon as I can, my plan for 
which is always directed by present circumstances ; nor do I 
know how one can be formed to effect any other way '. 

' Your exploits have always been well executed ', returned my 
master, with an air and tone of importance, as designing to say 
something that should raise him in the opinion of the other ; ' but 
you have hitherto acted rather in the low sphere of a partisan, 
than as a general. The duty of a general comprehends much more 
than what you mention, as you shall have an opportunity of learn- 
ing before we take the field. I intend to go through a regular course 
of military operations, to instruct my officers, and discipline the 
men. Your Heaven-taught generals may beat the enemy, but 
that is the least part of the care and duty of a general nowadays, 
the very least part '. 

had been living in the Mohawk A'alley since 1738, and had acquired 
such an ascendency over the Indians that they chose him for their 
sachem, and he was employed by both the colonial and the home govern- 
ment to manage all affairs with them. At this time he had been ap- 
pointed colonel, agent, and sole superintendent of the affairs of the 
six united nations, and was in command of the Indians who assisted 
the English expedition to relieve Oswego and Fort William Henry. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 351 

' And pray, sir, how much time will this course of operations 
take up ' ? 

' I cannot exactly say ; but not above a month or two, I 
imagine '. 

' A month or two ? Why, sir, I hope we shall have done the 
most troublesome part of our work by that time, or else I do not 
know what may be the consequence. For to be plain with you, 
these delays will never do with the uncivilized Americans, who 
judge of things only by common sense, and cannot be made to 
comprehend this way of carrying on a war, by l3dng still in a camp, 
and doing nothing. They have formed very disadvantageous 
notions of the delays already made, and think a man who does 
not advance to fight his enemy is afraid of him ; and, therefore, 
if they are not led to action directly, they will desert ; so that, if 
I stay a month or two here at school, to learn a lesson I may never 
have occasion for, I must find other forces to put it in practice 
with '. 

' Cannot you devise any reason that may account for your stay- 
ing, to their satisfaction ' ? 

' Really, sir, not I. I never was good at devising reasons desti- 
tute of truth, in my life, and have entirely forgot the practice since 
I have conversed with the Americans, who are far from being such 
fools as they are too generally thought to be. Though they have 
not the advantages of learning, they see, by the light of natural 
reason, through all the boasted wiles of policy, and, as they never 
mean deceit themselves, detest it in others, however speciously 
disguised, nor ever place confidence a second time where it has been 
once abused '. 

' How ? The Americans never mean deceit ? Surely you must 
know better. They are the most perfidious, deceitful savages that 
burthen the earth, and it would be an advantage to the world if the 
whole race of them was exterminated '. 

' Such as them as converse much with civilized Europeans, it is 
too true, learn many things from them, which are a disgrace to 
their own savage nature, as you call it. But I speak of the general 
disposition of the people. Treat them with candour, probity, 
and tenderness, and they will return them tenfold, in all their 
intercourse with you, as, on the other hand, they seldom fail to 
retort the contrary treatment with severe usury. Nor are they to 
be blamed. In all their dealings with the Europeans, they find 
themselves imposed upon in the grossest maimer, in a manner not 
fit to be practised, even with brutes. Their sensibility is quick, 
and their passions ungovemed, perhaps ungovernable ; how, then, 
can it be wondered at that they make returns in kind, whenever 
they find opportunity, and become the most dangerous enemies ? 
Whereas, if those passions were attached by good treatment, 
they would be the most affectionate, steady, and careful friends. 
I speak from experience. I treat them as rational creatures, and 
they behave as such to me. I never deceive them, and they never 
deceive me. I do them all the good offices in my power, and they 
return them manifold. In short, I practice to them the behaviour 
which I wish to meet from them, and am never disappointed. 



352 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

All the evils which have been suffered from them have proceeded 
from the unhappy error of thinking ourselves possessed of a superi- 
ority over them, which Nature, that is, Heaven, has not given us. 
They are our fellow-creatures, and, in general, above our level in 
the virtues which give real pre-eminence, however despicably we 
think of, and injuriously we treat them '. 

' They are much obliged to your character of them, at least, 
whatever others may do. And pray, sir, what is it you would 
have me do to preserve the good opinion of these most virtuous 
people ' ? 

' I presume not, sir, to say what is proper for you to do. All my 
desire is, that you will dismiss me directly, in a capacity of making 
good my promises to my friends, and, by the time you say you shall 
be ready to move with your army, I hope to give a good account 
of the enemy '. 

' That, sir, I have no thought of. However, as you are so desirous 
of going, I shall not delay you. I'll form a plan of operations for 
you this very day '. 

' For me, sir ? I do not understand you. How can you know 
what will be proper or possible for me to do, at the distance of 
many hundred miles, in a country you are an utter stranger to. 
In Europe, where war, like a game of chess, is played, as I may 
say, entirely by art, that method of planning in the closet the opera- 
tions of the field may do, perhaps ; but then it is necessary that 
each side should play the game by the same rules. A body of 
Americans, who know nothing of the art of war but fighting, might 
be apt to move so irregularly as to disconcert the whole scheme 
of the game. Indeed, by what I can judge of the matter, that very 
method of planning the operations of a campaign is advantageous 
only to the general, as it prolongs the war, and consequently the 
emoluments of command, by tying up his hand from avaihng 
himself of any unforeseen circumstances in his favour. Whereas, 
if armies were sent out only to fight, an formerly, before the im- 
provements in the art of war, the dispute would soon be decided, 
and even the vanquished better off than the victors are at present, 
whose riches and strength are so exhausted by this dilatory way of 
proceeding, that they are not the better for their success. I hope, 
sir, you do not talre offence at the plainness of my speech. I have 
so long been accustomed to converse with savages, who speak just 
what they thinli, that I am become quite a stranger to that dis- 
simulation which is called politeness among civilized nations, and 
must make use of words in their original intention of conveying 
my thoughts '. 

' Not in the least, sir. I like your free manner much ; it is in the 
character of a soldier. I will order eveiything to be got ready for 
you directly, and you shall go as soon as you please, at full liberty 
to act as you shall see proper '. 

' I hope, sir, I shall not make a bad use of that liberty. And 
pray, among the other things, do not forget to order me some 
money '. 

' Money, sir ? What occasion can you possibly have for money 
among savages, who do not know the value of it ' 7 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 353 

' Why, really, sir, that question is natural. But the matter is, 
the savages, who come among Europeans, see everything governed 
by gold, in such a manner that they have taken it into their heads 
we worship it, and therefore are become as eager for it as ourselves, 
in hopes of gaining an ascendency over us, when they have got our 
god in their possession '. 

A conscious heart takes to itself more than was ever meant. 
The dry maimer in which this was said touched my master to the 
quick, and made him not desire to pursue the conversation any 
further with such a free speaker, nor have so nice an observer longer 
about him, to pry into the motives of his actions. Giving him, 
therefore, the money he required, he wished him success, with a 
forced politeness, and dismissed him to prepare for his departure. 

It was a pleasure to me to change my service on this occasion, 
as the idea I had conceived of my new master, both from his appear- 
ance and conversation, promised me some variety, and my curiosity 
was heartily surfeited with the regular art of war. 



CHAPTER VI 

THE MANNER IN WHICH CHBYSAL'S MASTEB WAS RECEIVED BY HIS 
SUBJECTS — ANTIQUATED PRINCIPLES ON WHICH HIS AUTHORITY 
WAS EOUNDED — HIS ODD OPINIONS AND CONDUCT IN SOME IM- 
PORTANT MATTERS, WITH THE CONSEQUENCES 

As soon as everything was ready, my master set out for home, 
where he arrived without meeting anything remarkable in his 
jonrney, as you may suppose, through uninhabited deserts. The 
reception he met with from his people was the very reverse of what 
sovereings usually meet. They welcomed him with sincere joy 
and respect, which they expressed in the overflowing of their hearts, 
without ceremony or parade. I say ' sovereigns ', as he really 
enjoyed that power in its most rational sense, his will being a law 
to all around him, because they always found it just and advan- 
tageous to them. Though the account which he gave my late 
master of his manner of treating his people showed a just foundation 
for his power over them, I found that it depended not on that 
alone. His authority, like that of the first rulers of the earth, 
was founded also on the relations of nature, and supported by its 
strongest ties, he being literally the father of his subjects, the king 
of his own family. To explain this, it is necessary to inform you, 
that on his fixing his residence among these uncivilized nations 
in order to gain an influence over them the more readily, he had 
laid aside all such rules of conduct as seemed to him to be cour 
tradictory to natural reason and the public good, however forcibly 
enjoined for particular convenience. Among these, the chief was 
the custom of restraining the commerce between the sexes, and 
confining individuals to each other, after the desire which first 
brought them together had ceased. As he saw that the strongest 
passion which governs the human heart is that desire (for his philo- 



354 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

sophy was not refined enough to suggest one thought of governing 
the passions), and as the continuation of the species depends en- 
tirely on the gratification of it, he held every opposition to it to be 
most criminal in itself, and detrimental to the public good (properly 
the first object of every civil institution, and which can be promoted 
no wav so effectually as by promoting population), and therefore 
exerted all his influence to encourage that commerce, under such 
restrictions only as were evidently necessary to procure the great 
end of it, the propagation of the species. He gave liberty to every 
man to converse with as many females as he pleased, and to quit 
them whenever he thought proper, provided they were not pregnant 
To the women the former liberty could not be extended, as the use 
of it would defeat the design ; or, where it had not immediately 
that effect, cause confusion, and prevent both paternal care and 
filial duty, by the uncertainty of descent. But the latter instance 
they enjoyed equally with the men, being allowed to choose whom 
they liked, and if not pregnant, quit them at pleasure, for others, 
without reproach or shame, the offspring of all which connections 
were to remain with the fathers. 

I shall not say whether reason originally suggested this system 
to him, or, as is often the case, whether he sought for reasons to 
support the dictates of inclination. Be it which it would, the 
efl^ect was the same. His subjects increased in an uncommon 
degree, and he founded, like the patriarchs of old, an authority 
on the justest of all principles, voluntary consent, over a, people 
inseparably linked to him and to each other, by the strongest ties 
of nature, as being, by this complicated commerce, in the strictest 
sense of one family ; for, disdaining to make laws for others which 
he would not observe himself (like too many of his brother legis- 
lators), he had enforced his precepts so powerfully by his example, 
that there was scarce a house in any of the tribes around him from 
which he had not taken a temporary mate, and added a child of his 
to their number. That his reception, as I observed, should be most 
cordial from such subjects, is not to be wondered at. They flocked 
about him on his arrival, and hailed him with one voice by every 
tender relation of nature ; brother, father, son, husband, showed 
an affection too sublime to be expressed by formal rules, and im- 
possible to be seen without sympathizing in it. A^Tien this tribute 
was paid to nature, he called the elders of the people together, 
and distributing among them the presents which he had received 
for that purpose, gave them an account of the mighty army sent 
by his sovereign against the enemy, and proposed to them to assist 
its operations. 

There required not many arguments to confirm their confidence 
in one who had never deceived them. They readily and sincerely 
assented to his proposal, and sending to invite all their neighbours 
to join them, separated to make the very little preparations neces- 
sary for persons who were strangers to luxury, and knew no wants 
but those of nature. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 355 



CHAPTER VII 

CHBYSAL DESCEIBES HIS MASTBK's HABITATION AND FAMILY — HE 
MAKES AN UNCOMMON PROGRESS — THE MANNER IN WHICH HE 
rOTJND THE FEMALES OF HIS HOrSEHOLD ENGAGED — REMARKS 
ON FINERY — ACCOUNT OF THEIR AMUSEMENTS, WITH THE MANNER 
IN WHICH THEY USUALLY ENDED — THE METHOD BY WHICH CHRY- 
SAL's MASTER KEPT PEACE IN HIS FAMILY 

As soon as my master had thus concluded the business of his public 
character he retired to devote a few minutes to his domestic 
concerns. 

His habitation was built on an eminence by the side of a rivulet, 
the banks of which were covered with a number of neat little cot- 
tages, inhabited by the females of his present family ; for, instead 
of attempting to prevent their quitting him for other men, as 
inclination led them, he not only always dismissed them with pre- 
sents in the most friendly manner, but also kept up an intercourse of 
regard with them and their successive husbands, every one of 
whom he attached to himself in the strongest manner, being par- 
ticularly ready, on all occasions, to do them every good office in 
his power, fii these cottages they bred up their children, and 
enjoyed from his care all the necessaries of life with more conveni- 
ence and comfort than they could possibly have experienced among 
their own people, unembittered by any of those jealousies and feuds 
which such a situation might seem to threaten, so equally did he 
dispense his favours among them. When he had giren some 
orders in his house, he walked out to visit his family, and enjoy the 
sublimest instance of the happiness of power, in making all who 
wore subject to it happy, by the unaffected tenderness with which 
he inquired after their welfare, and returned their caresses on his 
entering every cottage. 

The appearance of these females was most different from the 
delicate sensibility that softened the beauties of Amelia', the fire 
which animated the charms of Olivia^ ; but custom, that reconciles 
all things, had made them agreeable to him, especially as no com- 
parison could there be made to their disadvantage, and the honest 
readiness with which they met his addresses, the warmth with 
which they shared his joy, amply overbalanced any imaginary 
defect in feature or complexion, any ignorance of those afEected 
arts of coyness, which, overacted, often pall the taste for long- 
expected pleasure. 

As his women did not expect his visit so soon he found them 
engaged according to their different inclinations, either in the 
management of their domestic economy or in such amusements 
as custom had made pleasing to them. The occupations of the 
former kind were necessarily confined within a narrow circle from 
the circumstances of their lives ; but in the latter, fancy, sole 
sovereign of the scene, asserted her unbounded rule, and sported 

'SeelO. ^  313. 



356 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

in variety of forms, many of which I soon had the opportunity of 
seeing. As my master proceeded in his patriarchal progress, he 
met a considerable number of the females of his family, with such 
of the neighbouring men, as from age or idleness were ujifit for more 
useful employments, assembled together under a spreading tree 
that grew before the door of one of their cottages, Pressed out in 
their gayest apparel, and engaged in different kinds of diversions. 
At the sight of him they all arose, and would have desisted, but h» 
prevented them, and not only made them resume their sports, but 
also sat down himself in the midst of the company, to be a spectator 
of them. 

It seem.s it was a custom among them to meet frequently thus, 
at each other's cottages, for the pleasure of enjoying their favourite 
amusements to more advantage together, and displaying their finery, 
to set ofi which, no art nor care was neglected on these occasions. 
They dressed themselves in their best blankets, which were covered 
all over with patches of various colours, to make them look more 
gaudy. Their heads were adorned with plumes of feathers ; strings 
of glass beads were rolled round their arms and legs. Their toes 
were loaded with rings of pewter and brass, and their necks and 
faces were carved with figures of birds and flowers, and painted 
of various hues. I see your laughter moved at this description,, 
but that proceeds from narrow prejudice and want of rational 
reflection, on which it would appear that all useless ornaments are 
equally just objects of ridicule, whether made of silfa and laces,, 
or parti-coloured rags, whether bits of glass, or pearls and diamonds. 
Think, I say, but for a moment, and you will see that in reality 
there is nothing more absurd in wearing one kind of metal, or- 
upon one part of the body than another ; rings of brass, for in- 
stance on the toes, than golden on the fingers ; in carving the skin, 
than boring the ears, or in painting the face blue and green, than, 
white and red. The same vanity is the motive of all, and all pro- 
duce the same effect of admiration ; as, in things equally unsup- 
ported by reason, custom and caprice bear equal sway. The differ- 
ence in the means, therefore, makes none in the end, at least, none 
to the disadvantage of the persons of whom I speak, as it certainly 
is more absurd to lavish treasures, that might be so much better 
employed, to a worthless purpose, while cheaper baubles would 
answer as well. 

The amusements in which they were engaged were as whimsical 
as their dresses. Some skipped about, describing various figures. 
in their motions, till want of breath and weariness obliged them 
to sit down. Others, and these the greatest number, were employed, 
in chucldng shells or pebbles from the brook into holes dug in the 
sand, for prizes of bits of tin or brass, which game they applied, 
themselves to with the greatest eagerness and anxiety, and many 
were so expert at it as to strip their antagonists of all their hoards, 
often, indeed, not without the assistance of chicanery and deceit. 
And a few of the eldest, and those who had nothing to stake at play, 
gathered up and down into little sets, and entertained themselves- 
with making remarks upon the rest, not always dictated by good, 
nature or truth, while the mistress of the cottage busied herself in 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 351 

adjuBting Mremonials, settling her company at their several amuse- 
ments, and serving them with milk, or broth and tobacco, the 
tatigue of which office she never repined at, as her consequence 
was established by the number of her guests. Though mere amuse- 
ment was the obvious end of these meetings, other objects were 
generally pursued, and other consequences produced by them, 
intngues were commenced, and often completed, and, triffing as 
the prizes were for which they contended, emulation and avarice 
agitated the passions, and set the competitors together by the ears, 
till they almost clawed out each other's eyes. 

Their sports were at length beginning to take their usual turn. 
The tempers of the losers became soured, and the detection of some 
deep strokes of play gave rise to altercations, which would soon 
have been followed by blows ; but my master interposed his auth- 
ority, and put an end to their disputes, when the party broke up, 
some retiring to keep the assignations they had made in the warmth 
of their inclinations, and the rest to calculate their winnings, and 
devise schemes for retrieving their losses at their next meeting ; 
and my master, having singled out the happy favourite of that 
night, repaired with her to his own habitation, without any of the 
rest taking offence or even particular notice of the preference, as 
they had it in their power to supply their loss elsewhere. 

I have observed your astonishment at this whole scene, especially 
at my master's hardiness in expecting to be happy among a number 
of women, and attempting to keep them in order together, when 
one, in your opinion, is more than any man can manage ; but what 
will it be when I tell you that that number often amounted to 
hundreds, and that he had never recourse to any kind of severity 
in his conduct to them ? To comprehend this it is necessary for 
you to consider that most of, if not all, the uneasinesses which 
embitter the life of man, arise from an officious intrusion into the 
uneasinesses of others, or an overweening partiality to himself that 
makes him expect treatment which he does not give, and take 
offence where none is meant him, for matter not worth his being 
offended at, an observation that will hold in every state, public 
and private, among governors as well as governed. His rule, then, 
was never to take part in their disputes among themselves, nor 
offence at their infidelity to his bed, of which he himself set the 
example. This disarmed them of that perverseness which is the 
sex's most offensive weapon. They remained constant to him, 
because they were not restrained from being otherwise, whenever 
they pleased, nor did they trouble him with their disputes, because 
they saw he would not be troubled at them. 



358 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 



CHAPTER VIII 

ohbysal's master is honoubably bewakdbd foe his seevicbs 

an i7nbxpe0tbd mbbting with one of his cotlntkrwomen 
intboducbs an uncommon ebmabk on a common mattbb — 

. the lady gives an odd instance of conjitgal love, and 
befusbs the civil offer of chbysax's master fob a natubal 

l^ reason — chbysal changes his sebvice 

The very next morning his people assembled before his door, in 
readiness to obey his commands, when he led them directly in quest 
of the enemy, sharing himself in all their fatigues, and teaching 
them to despise danger by his example, so little did he know of 
the duty of a general. It would be tiresome to enter into a par- 
ticular description of an expedition carried on among wildernesses 
and deserts, and consisting chiefly of ambuscades and surprises. 
It is sufficient to say that he was successful in all his enterprises,, 
reason and presence of mind serving him instead of experience in 
the regular art of war, and courage well supplying the place of 
discipline in his men. Such services could not miss of reward 
from a just and judicious sovereign. His power was enlarged, 
and he received those marks of favour and distinction which were 
originally instituted to excite virtuous emulation, and set the seal 
of honour on successful merit, though, like most other human 
institutions, they too often produce the contrary effect, and reflect 
only disgrace from being bestowed contrary to their intention, 
and on unworthy objects. 

As he was preparing the way thus for the motions of the main 
army, whenever the general should think proper to let it move, 
some of his people brought before him a European lady, whom they 
found wandering in those unfrequented wilds, her guide having 
mistaken his way. 

Such a situation necessarily entitled her to his compassion and 
assistance ; but he soon found himself still further interested in 
her favour, when he found she was a native of his own country, 
and of a family not entirely unknown to him, before he came to 
fix his abode in this distant part of the world. 

There is not a stronger instance of the force of that attachment, 
called, in a larger sense, patriotism, than the instinctive affection 
which persons of the same country, though utterly unacquainted 
before, feel for each other the moment they meet in a strange place. 
My master instantly called her his dear countrywoman, and embracing 
her with the tenderness of a brother, led her away to his own tent, 
which he resigned to her, as the best accommodation he could give 
her, and then went and ordered everything that had belonged to 
her, which his men, looking upon as a fair prize, had taken and 
divided among themselves, to be restored, promising to recompense 
the captors himself. 

As soon as she had adjusted her appearance in some better manner, 
she sent to desire my master's company, for he had told her 
that he should not come without permission, for fear of intruding 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 359 

improperly upon her; and on his expressing wonder what could 
have brought her thus into the midst of these deserts, so far away 
from every European settlement, she gratified his curiosity with 
the following account, which was often interrupted by sighs, tears, 
and every expression of the most poignant grief. 

Her husband, she said, who had been an officer of distinguished 
rank in the English forces, and had fallen in one of the defeats they 
suffered in the beginning of the war, before England had exerted 
herself in such a manner as to entitle her to success, the news of 
whose death affected her so extraordinarily that she resolved to 
brave aU the fatigues and dangers of so long a voyage by sea, and 
journey through uninhabited deserts in time of war, for the melan- 
choly pleasure of one last view of his dear remains, which she had 
accordingly obtained, though not so much to her satisfaction as 
she could have wished, the body being in a state of putrefaction, 
not possible to be approached without disgust and abhorrence, 
nor to be distinguished from any other mass of corruption, when 
she had caused it to be dug out of the grave in which it had been 
buried, on the spot where he had been killed, among the other 
victims of the day, and was now returning home, when she had 
happily been foTind by his people. 

Though my master was as much unversed in the regular rules of 
politeness as of war, good nature taught him the essentials of one, 
as reason had of the other. He heard out her story, though not 
without pity and contempt at the extravagance and folly of it, 
and, consoling her with some general remarks on the error of in- 
dulging immoderate grief for things not to be remedied, offered to 
send her, under a sufficient escort, to his own habitation, where 
she might remain in safety, and have the conversation and attend- 
ance of his women, till the conclusion of the campaign, when he 
would convey her himself to the next seaport, in order to her 
returning to her own country. 

Though she would have looked upon any attempt to console her 
as the highest affront in another situation, her present circumstances 
made her think it not proper to show any resentemnt of it to him ; 
besides, there was something in his appearance that somehow made 
it less disagreeable from him than it would have been from any 
other person, and would possibly have influenced her to accept 
of his offer, had not the mention of his women alarmed her delicacy, 
and set her virtue on its guard. 

Resolving, therefore, to have this cleared up before she would 
give any direct answer to his offer, she expressed her high sense of 
his kindness in the politest terms, and entering into a general 
conversation, among other questions of mere curiosity, asked him, 
in a careless manner, whom he meant by his women, and in what 
capacity they served him. 

Such a question was more than he desired, though he had in- 
considerately laid himself open to it. However, as he thought no 
delicacy could justify deceit, he answered her directly, and without 
preface, that they served him in the natural capacity of women, 
while they pleased to continue with him, nor did he desire any 
other service from them. 



360 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

Though she was a good deal disconcerted at this answer, she 
had the address not to seem to understand it, in hopes that he 
would take the hint, and explain himself into a meaning less offen- 
sive to her modesty, to give an opportunity for which — ' I presume, 
sir ', replied she, ' you mean that they wait upon your lady, or 
perform the other domestic offices of your family, in which women- 
servants only are employed ' ? 

'No, really, madam ', answered he, ' that was not my meaning. 
I have no lady for them to wait upon ; nor do they live so immedi- 
ately in my own family, as to have any domestic employment 
in it'. 

' How, sir ? Are you not married ' ? 

' Not particularly to any one person, madam '. 

' That's very strange ', said she, pleased at having gained so 
material a piece of intelligence, and resolving to pursue the con- 
versation. ' That is really very strange. And pray, sir, are these 
ladies Europeans ? I suppose ', sighing heavily and wiping her 
eyes, ' they are the unhappy widows of such officers as are fallen in 
the service, to whom you have shown the same politeness and 
humanity as I now experience from you '. 

' I am sorry, madam ', answered he, to satisfy her curiosity at 
once, and put a stop to questions which began to be troublesome, 
' to be obliged to undeceive you in an opinion so favourable to me. 
They are all native Americans, by whom I have bad children, and 
in whose unfeigned affection and easy complying tempers I find 
such satisfaction, that I never shall quit them to attach myself 
solely to any one woman, however superior to them in the advan- 
tages of beauty and education ; not, indeed, that they want qualifi- 
cations to raise both love and esteem, which you will find when you 
have been some time among them ' 

This, which was too plain for her to affect not to \mderstand, 
instantly put an end to the pleasure she had begun to find in his 
conversation, and determined her as to his proposal. 

' I am much obliged to you for your civil offer, sir ', said she, 
bridling up her chin, and making him a formal courtesy, ' but I 
cannot accept of it. I have not the least desire for the conversation 
of squaws, and am in haste to leave this savage place, for which 
reason I shall take it as a favour if you will send some of your 
people to guard me to the next English settlement to-morrow 
morning. At present, I am quite exhausted with fatigue, and want 
some rest, if the distress of my heart will permit me to take any '. 

This thought recalled the remembrance of her loss. She burst 
into a flood of t«ars, and my master withdrew, after finding that his 
attempts to console her only aggravated her grief, and gave offence 
to her delicacy. 

Unversed as he was in the arts of the polite world, he was too 
well acquainted with the ruling principles of the sex, which in every 
state are the same, not to see through this change in her behaviour ; 
but the discovery had no other effect than to confirm him in his 
contempt for such hypocritical levity. Accordingly, finding she 
continued in the same mind the next morning, he made the best 
provision he could for her journey, and sent her away with a 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 361 

sufficient guard, forcing upon her a purse of gold, in which I was, to 
defray any accidental expense, for which she might be unprovided, 
in case she should not directly meet a ship, ready to carry her to 
Europe. 



CHAPTER IX 

CHKYSAL's mistress gives some STEIKXNa INSTANCES OF FEMALE 
CONSISTENCY — SHE IS CTTEBD OF HER GRIEF BY A PERSON OF 
ACCOMPLISHMENTS AS EXTRAORDINARY AS HER OWN — THE AD- 
VANTAGES OF COMPARATIVE EXCELLENCE — CHEYSAL's MISTRESS 
MARRIES, AND HE CHANGES HIS SERVICE FOR THAT OF AN OLD 
MASTER 

As soon as my mistress found herself out of the sight of my late 
master, she gave vent to that indignation and rage of disappointment 
■which she had thought proper to suppress while in his presence. 

' Insensible brute ', said she. ' Not quit his odious squaws for 
any woman, and to have the rudeness to tell me so to my face ? 
It shows his gross, low taste, for which such animals are fittest '. 
Then, pausing for some moments — ' What a charming figiure ', 
continued she, sighing softly. ' Such a size ; such strength and 
«ase in every motion. And then the manly beauty in his looks. 
Had I but the polishing of him ! I was too hasty ; I should have 
waited to insinuate myself into his heart by degrees. I could not 
have failed of success. My husband was as strongly attached to 
another when first I undertook him. Oh, dearest, best of men, 
never shall I meet your fellow ! Never shall another possess your 
place in this faithful, vtretched heart '. 

A flood of tears here interrupted her meditations, which were 
often renewed in the same strain during her journey, and always 
ended the same way. On her arrival at the seaport, she had the 
mortification to find that she must wait some time for a passage 
home, all the ships which were there having sailed a few days 
before. But her vexation at this disappointment was considerably 
lightened by the conversation of several companions in it, particu- 
larly that of a chaplain of a regiment, who had taken such offence 
at the immorality of the army, and the uncomfortable way of living 
in those savage countries, that he had hired a substitute, at a cheap 
rate, to do his duty, and was returning home to enjoy a life more 
agreeable to the delicacy of his character and inclinations, and 
exert his talents to more advantage in paying court to his patrons, 
than in reforming soldiers or converting savages. Extremes are 
never lasting. The violence of my mistress's grief had been too 
much for nature to support, and was beginning to abate of itself, 
vrhen my late master awoke another passion, that would soon have 
supplanted it ; and though he did not pursue his advantage as 
far as he might have done, he had opened her heart, and inspired a 
warmth ready to receive any other impression. As the chaplain's 
function and her rank, not to omit the accomplishments of both; 



362 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

seemed to point them to each other as the most proper companions, 
it was not strange that they should soon grow intimate, nor that 
their intimacy should be insensibly improved into a tenderer passion. 
They made tHe-d-t&e parties at games which no one else ia the place 
knew how to play with them. They talked of all the places of 
pleasurable resort in England, and of the amusements pursued at 
them, and they raised their own consequence in the eyes of each other, 
by boasting of acquaintances with persons they knew only by name. 

Such uncommon accomplishments were not without effect. Each 
took the tales of the other upon credit, because their own met the 
same complaisance, and found a pleasure in being deceived by 
one whom it was an equal pleasure to deceive. But this was not 
the only thing that advanced their mutual influence upon each 
other. All human excellence is but comparative. Though far 
from being beautiful, they were the nearest to being so ; though 
far from being well-bred, they knew most of the common ceremonies 
in which good-breeding is by many thought to consist, but which 
really are the enciimbrances of it, of any persons there, and conse- 
quently appeared to enjoy those advantages in the highest degree. 
They regulated the assemblies, they laid down the rules of play, 
they made fashions ; in a word, their opinion was the law in every 
matter of polite amusement and concern. 

Thus cut out for each other, it was impossible for this accom- 
plished pair not to come together. They were accordingly married, 
not more to the grief of their respective admirers than the joy of 
their rivals, the bride forgetting her grief for a dead, in the arms of 
a living husband, and the happy bridegroom pleasing himself with 
the thought that the high accomplishments of his lady would in- 
crease his interest with his noble patrons. To crown their happi- 
ness, a few days after they were married, an English man-of-war 
put in there, on its way home, the captain of which politely offered 
them their passage. Such an opportunity was not to be missed ; 
they accepted his offer with the greatest joy, and in return, made 
a party and entertainment for him, when he won me from my 
mistress at a game of brag, the only game, indeed, at which he 
thought himself a match for her. 

Though I had no reason to regret leaving her service, my present 
change gave me no great pleasure, as it wanted even the recom- 
mendation of novelty, my new master being the captain with 
whom I had the last time left the Spanish coast, and who had at 
length been made so happy as to be ordered home. 



CHAPTER X 

OHEYSAL AGAIN ARRIVES IN ENGLAND — HIS MASTER IS SALUTED 
BY A SIGHT NOT VERY PLEASING — THE HISTORY OF THE tTNFOR- 

TUNATB HEBO OF THE DAY OPENS SOME MYSTERIOTTS SCENES 

THE OBVTOtrS tT.SE GIT COUNCILS OF WAR 

The arrival of my master in. England presented him with a scene 
that made him wish he had not been in such hast« to return. On 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 363 

his entering the harbour, he found the boats of all the men-of-war 
there drawn up around one ship, in which was displayed the dread- 
ful signal of the execution of the commander k The sight appalled 
his soul, conscience anticipating the stroke of justice, and taking 
this as an omen of his own fate. He had not time to brood over 
these gloomy reflections long, when an officer came on board him, 
■with an order to attend the execution in his boat, along with the 
other captains ; which he obeyed in a state of mind scarce less 
unhappy than that of the criminal. As soon as the bloody work 
was done, he waited on the chief commander, where the melancholy 
in every face he met was far from relieving the anxiety of his mind. 
He could have no pleasure in such company. When he had ans- 
wered a few general questions, of course, he went away to the ship 
of a captain of his intimate acquaintance to learn some account 
of this shocking scene, for he had not had resolution to make 
an inquiry about it ; nor even to attend to the conversation of 
everyone around him, which would have explained the whole. 

After mutual congratulations on their meeting, my master signi- 
fied his curiosity, which his friend promised to gratify over their 
bottle, as soon as they should be alone after dinner. Accordingly, 
when the coast was clear, ' You desire information in an affair ', 
said he, ' that has given our corps the deepest wound we have ever 
received. The circumstances are many, and mysterious ; but I 
will strive to give you a notion of it in as few words as possible, 
for it can be no pleasure to either of us to dwell upon such a subject. 
In the beginning of the war, soon after you went to America, the 
unfortunate man who has this day fallen a sacrifice to the humour of 
the times, was sent out with a fleet to counteract the schemes of 
the enemy, and relieve a fortress of ours ^ which they were then 
besieging. This was the purport of his public orders ; but it will 
appear to you presently, that he must have received private ones, 
of a very different nature, from those, who, at that time, had the 
conduct of affairs. Instead of making the expedition necessary 
to have carried his orders into execution with effect, he trifled away 
the time here in such a shameful manner, using every frivolous excuse 
he could devise to delay his departure, that the voice of the public 
was raised against him ; and it was found necessary to appoint 
another to the command in his place, in order to silence their 
clamours ; but, unfortunately for him, he sailed the very day 
before his appointed successor was to have set out to supersede 
him. The same (iilatory conduct threw a damp upon everything 
he attempted to do. He seemed resolved upon nothing ; but 
though he was invested with the fullest powers to act as he saw 

1 Admiral Byng, executed January 27, 1757, at Portsmouth, for neglect 
of duty. 

^ Byng was sent in 1756 to relieve Minorca, a French attack being 
anticipated. His squadron was hastily fitted out, wretchedly manned, 
and inferior in every way to the French. He had been ordered to 
take troops on board at Gibraltar, but General Fowke was unable to 
spare a man without endangering the fortress. After an indecisive 
action, a council was held and the decision arrived at unanimously to 
leave Minorca to its fate. 



364 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

proper himself, called councils of war to deliberate upon every 
the post trifling occasion, that he might have the sanction of their 
advice to excuse his neglect, and often direct disobedience of hia 
orders ; for you well know that a coimcil of war always speaks the 
sense of the commander. 

' One instance of his proceeding in this manner will be sufBcient 
to justify this remark. He had been ordered to call at another 
fortress ^ in his way, and take from thence a reinforcement for the 
garrison of that which he was sent to relieve. On his arrival there, 
instead of demanding that reinforcement peremptorily, as his 
•orders empowered him, and making the expedition which the 
urgency of the occasion required, he showed such indifference to 
the enterprise by his delays, and expressed such diffidence of his 
success, that the commanding officer ^ took the alarm ; and, follow- 
ing his example, called a council of war, to consider whether he 
should send it ; -n-hich, on mature deliberation, he absolutely 
refused, on account of the danger of weakening his own garrison, 
in case it should be attacked ; whereas, it was notorious, that could 
never happen, if this unhappy man did his duty, as the force he 
had was sufficient to keep the command of the sea, and prevent 
any such attempt. But, far from urging this, he qmetly acquiesced 
in the officer's excuse, and sailed away without the reinforcement, 
for which alone he had been ordered to stop there. On the same 
principles, when at length he came in sight of the place — the siege 
of which was pushed with the greatest vigour — he excused his 
sending any relief to it, on a pretence of the danger of entering the 
harbour — as if any military operations could be free from danger — 
a,nd sailed away to seek a fleet of the enemy's, which was coming 
to assist the siege, and which he came up with sooner than he 
wished. 

' An engagement now was unavoidable ; but still he had it in 
his power to prevent any effect from it, which he notoriously did, 
by trifling away his time in vain unnecessary manoeuvres, and pre- 
tending to come to action at a distance too great for him to do 
anything ^ The enemy, whose interest it was to avoid an engage- 
ment, in which their most sanguine hopes could not promise them 
success, availed themselves of this conduct, and made their escape, 
after having, from the superiority which his keeping aloof in this 
manner gave them, treated very roughly a part of his fleet that had 
advanced with caution, and come really to action. This served 
him as a pretence for calling a council of war next day, by the 
advice of which, instead of pursuing the enemy, who had evidently 
fled from him, or making any attempt to relieve the fortress which 
was besieged, obviously the first object of his being sent out, he 

1 Gibraltar. 

^ General Fowke. He was broken for his failure to supply the re- 
inforcement demanded, and for other mistakes in the government 
of the fortress, having taken on his own shoulders the blame properly 
due to the Secretary of War and the Ministry. 

^ Byng failed to get to close quarters with the French, but cautiously 
held aloof, although Rear-Admiral West attacked them vigorously 
■with considerable success. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 365- 

returned directly to the other, from which he was to have taken 
the reinforcement, as I mentioned before, to defend that from 
the danger brought upon it solely by his own conduct, leaving the 
former, deprived thus of every prospect of relief, to take its fate ; 
and giving up the honour of his country, by flying from an enemy 
whom he might have vanquished, and who had fled from him. 
before '. 



CHAPTER XI 

CONTINTTED : CONSEQTTEJSICB OF THE EOKEGOINO CONDUCT — AN" 
EXTRAOEDINABY SENTENCE ATTEMPTED TO BE EBVEESED IN AN 
EXTRAORDINARY MANNER, AND BY AS EXTRAORDINARY PERSONS 
— THE REASON OF THIS AND WHY IT MISCARRIED — MORE MYS- 
TERIES — JlrST FATE OF THE BUNGLERS, WHO LEFT THEIR POOR 
TOOL IN THE LURCH ; WITH THE CONSEQUENCE OF THIS AFFAIR 
TO A CERTAIN CORPS 

' The consequence of so strange a conduct was — the nation took 
fire ; and -with one voice demanded satisfaction for such a sacrifice 
of their interest and honour. He was, therefore, not only deprived 
of his command, but also sent home a prisoner ; and after sufiering 
every indignity and abuse which the rage of a licentious populace, 
broken loose from all bounds, could suggest, brought to his trial, 
found guilty of neglecting to do all in his power to destroy the 
enemy, and for that crime has this day suffered the sentence of the 
law — a sentence not more unexpected by him, and extraordinary 
in itself, than in the manner it was passed ; and afterwards at- 
tempted to be reversed by those who had passed it, when they re- 
flected on the danger of establishing a precedent, that might one 
day come home to themselves. For, persuaded, perhaps, by their 
knowledge of the true motives of his conduct, that nothing more 
was meant by the trial than to amuse the public, they resolved to 
act their parts in the farce, and found him guilty, as I have said, 
of such a part only of the charge against him, as common sense 
could never conceive punishable with death ^ ; it being impossible 
to acquit him absolutely of the whole, without involving themselves- 
in his guilt, by which means they expected to save both his life 
and their own credit. But such trimming seldom answers ; the 
tables were now turned ; and it was resolved to carry even this 
lame sentence into execution with the utmost severity. 

' Alarmed at a measure so contrary to their expectations, his 
judges were driven to their wit's end ; and, from a provident regard 
to themselves, left nothing unattempted to save him. Ihey- 
retracted, as far as was in their power, their own judgment. They 

1 Byng was acquitted of every charge save that of neglect of duty, which 
brought him under the Twelfth Article of War. Three years earlier, the^ 
Articles had been revised, and, instead of leaving the penalty to the 
discretion of the judges, this Article prescribed the punishment of. 
death, without alternative. 



366 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

petitioned the ministry. They applied to the whole body of the 
legislature. They prayed. They expostulated. They wept, but 
all was in vain. His fate was determined ; and they only drew 
upon themselves that contempt which such inconsistency deserved. 
5¥om this general account of his conduct it must have appeared 
to you that he acted by secret orders, directly opposite to his public 
ones ; as no man, however prostituted in principle, however in- 
fatuated by fear — neither of which, it was well known, was his 
case — could otherwise possibly have acted in such a manner, the 
inevitable consequences of which were disgrace and death. But 
if any doubt should remain in your mind, from the inconsistency of 
man's actions at different times, the least attention to the following 
circumstances will efiectually remove it. Repeated informations 
of the enemy's design upon that place had been sent to those in 
power, for a considerable time before ; but no notice was taken 
of them to reinforce the garrison nor even order the officers, 
regularly belonging to it, to attend their duty, till the siege was 
actually begun ; when this unfortunate man was sent, but so late, 
that the common impediments of contrary winds might very 
possibly have delayed him so long as to defeat the design of his 
going even had he exerted himself with the greatest ardour. Had 
it also been really intended that he should reinforce the garrison, 
a force proper for that purpose would have been sent directly from 
home, without subjecting him to the further delay of stopping 
for it at another place, where it might not be to be spared, as proved 
to be the case. And, lastly, had he not secret reasons, which he 
thought sufficient to justify his conduct, it is not to be imagined 
that he would have wasted the time before he sailed ; that he 
would have accepted the refusal of the commanding officer of the 
fortress, from which he was to have taken the reinforcement ; that 
he would not have attempted at least to throw some relief into 
the place ; and that he would not have fought the enemy's fleet, 
when he had the fairest prospect of defeating it ; for the tenour of 
his former life acquitted him, as I have observed, of all siispicion 
of cowardice, or traitorous correspondence with the foes of his 
country. 

' His conduct at and after his trial confirmed these remarks. 
Depending on support from those in power ^, he neglected the only 
measure prudence could have suggested for his defence, which was to 
have retort-ed the charge of his miscarriage upon his very accusers, 
and perplexed the cause with such ajVariety of matter about disobedi- 
ence to .signals, and breach of discipline, as to blind the world, and 
bewilder his judges, so that they should be glad to have acquitted 
him, if only to get rid of the plague of the inquiry ; a method which 
experience had shown to be efiectual in as flagrant a case as 
—^ 

' The Duke o£ Newcastle had been premier at the time of Byng's 
expedition ; Fox, Secretary of State ; Anson, First Lord of the Admir- 
alty ; but Pitt was now in power. The old administration was scared 
to death by the popular clamour, and the King was averse from remitting 
the death penalty, which was duly carried out, in spite of the opposition 
of Pitt, Temple, and other sensible men. 



ADVENTURES OP A GUINEA 367 

hisi. And, even after he was condemned, his behaviour proved that he 
expected a pardon to the last moment, for a crime which he had 
committed in obedience to their orders. Why he did not produce 
those orders in his vindication must have been that they were only 
verbal ones ; which, in the blind lust of ministerial confidence 
and favour, he had been weak enough to take. The reason of his 
being so basely deserted is too obvious. The administration of 
those who had employed him had been such a series of blunders 
— not to call it by a severer name ! — that they had not only been sup- 
planted by another set 2, who promised better things, but were also 
obliged to give him up as a sin-offering to the rage of the people ; 
as protecting or pardoning him would have implied a participation 
of his guilt. And in this light the other party viewed it so strongly, 
that they exerted all their strength to have saved him, in hopes of 
being able by his means to gain a clue to guide them through some 
of those labyrinths of iniquitous and false policy, which they sus- 
pected, but could not otherwise detect, to the entire overthrow of 
their rivals. This so absolutely reversed the whole scene, that 
they who should have supported, now found themselves obliged 
to crush him, in their own defence ; which, as it was the most 
popular measure, they were still able to do. 

' There is but one thing more necessary for me to add, and that 
is, the motive for their giving him such secret orders ; which, as 
far as reason can judge in such dark confused mysteries, must have 
been this : Provoked at the repeated insults and injustice of the 
IVench, the ministry here had precipitately plunged themselves 
into war ^, without being prepared, or even determined to pursue 
it ; and then, like a parcel of children who have exhausted all their 
strength and resolution in one spiteful assault, stood in a state of 
stupefaction, utterly at a loss how to proceed, or retreat ; till, roused 
at length by the preparations and menaces of the enemy, they 
unluckily blundered in their fright upon the wretched expedient 
of letting them take this fortress, that, for the recovery of it, they 
might have a pretence for giving up to them those places about 
which the dispute began ; and so botch up a peace anyway, to get 
rid of a war they found themselves unable to manage. The conse- 
quence of this notable stroke of policy was, the spirit of the people 
was inflamed to such a degree, by this disgrace upon their arms, 
that they pushed on the war with a resolution little short of mad- 
ness ; and the scheme, which the ministers had so wisely laid for 
their escape, only sealed their ruin. 

' This, my friend, is a short but just sketch of this unfortunate 
affair, to which I shall add one circumstance to prove what I said 
of his being sacrificed to the humour of the times. The officer who 

' Alluding to the case of Admiral Lestock, who, in the battle of Toulon, 
1744, failed to bring his part of the fleet into action, in spite of Admiral 
Mathews' repeated signals. A court-martial was held, but Lestock 
was acquitted on a technical point. 

2 Pitt's ministry, which came into power in December 1756. 

"Alludes to the large captures of French shipping made by the British 
before the declaration of war in 1757. 



368 - ■■ ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

commanded in the fortress ' which was besieged, and who in the 
defence of it had betrayed a want of every qualification necessary 
for such an office, but courage ; and had even let that be overruled 
by the instances of his officers, who were tired of fatigues and 
dangers from which they saw no prospect of relief, to surrender 
it at last ; without any absolute necessity, was loaded with honours- 
of every kind, in reward of a merit merely negative at best ; that 
is, for not having done the very worst in his power, and surrendered 
it at first, without making any defence. 

' I have thus gratified your curiosity in the best manner in my 
power. If I have made any mistakes, they are not those of inten- 
tion ; but have proceeded from the inabDity of reason to trace such. 
mysterious actions to their real motives. One observation, though, 
I know I cannot be mistaken in, which is, that this affair has given 
a wound to our corps — as I observed before — which it can never 
recover. For, after such an example, what officer of any rank can 
expect to escape, should he neglect to do his duty in the fullest 
manner, however powerful his private motives to the contrary 
may be ! For my own part, I cannot say it yet affects me much. 
I am poor, and therefore must push. If I ever have the good luck 
to be otherwise, I know the consequence ; and will rather quit 
the service, than hazard being shot, as I know must be any man's 
fate, who shall hereafter be found to fail in the performance of his 
duty, from a prudential regard to the preservation of his life or 
fortune, however great that fortune, or powerful his family. And 
so, here's to you, neck or nothing is now the word ' ! 

ITie effect which this whole account had upon my master may 
be easily conceived. He pledged his friend, though without naming 
the toast ; and assenting to his remarks by a heavy sigh, took hia 
leave, without saying a word. 



CHAPTER XII 

OHKYSAL CHANGES HIS SEKVIOE — HE GETS A VIEW OF A COTTET OP 
CIVIL JtrDICATTTRB, ON AN BXTBAOBDINABY OCCASION — SOME 
BEFLECTIONS OUT OF THE COMMON CANT ON THE DELAYS OP THE 
T.AW — A WHIMSICAL APPLICATION OF AN OLD STOEY PEODUCES 
THE STEANGE EFFECT OP PUTTING A COmSTSBLLOE OUT OF COUN- 
TENANCE — THE NECESSITY OF ABSOLUTE POWEE IN SOMB GOVEEN- 
MBNTS WITH A COMMON DECISION BY WHICH NOTHING IS DECIDED 

I NEXT passed from the hands of my old master into the possession 
of the purser, who, travelling through a city where a matter of great 

1 A very unjust attack on General Blakeney, the gallant veteran 
who defended an ' almost indefensible fortress ' for seventy days, and 
surrendered on the most honourable terms only when resistance was 
no longer possible. Blakeney was a signal example of the difficulty 
of rising in the service by simple merit, so often animadverted upon 
In these s. He was not made a colonel until he was sisty-five. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 369 

moment was under judicial determination, he waited for the event, 
to gratify a natural curiosity. 

The affair was this : A foremast-man in a guardship, lying in 
one of the neighbouring harbours, had by repeated misbehaviour, 
in going clandestinely on shore, contrary to the express orders of 
his captain^, provoked him at length to give him a dozen at the 
gangway, in order to terrify others from following his example. 
Instead of being reclaimed by this punishment, the fellow persisted 
to misbehave in such a manner, that the captain, who was remark- 
ably humane in his disposition, discharged him from the ship, to 
avoid the pain of punishing him any more. This was just what 
the wretch wanted. Accordingly, he went directly to a prostituted, 
pettifogging attorney, who had before set him on the scheme, and 
employed him to sue the captain at law for an assault, in punishing 
him in the harbour, where he had no power so to do. 

In a country governed by laws, they must regularly take their 
course in every instance, however flagrant in its particular circum- 
stances. After all the preliminary delays of practice, which, 
grievous as they may in some circumstances be to an individual, 
are yet the safety of the public, the affair was now brought to a 
legal decision. You are too well acquainted with the forms of law 
to require a minute account of all which were observed in this case. 
But there was one incident which I cannot pass over. As this was 
a matter that importantly concerned the interest of the navy, the 
rulers of it had ordered all the captains of the guardships, in the 
harbour where it had happened, to attend the trial, in order to 
inform the court, in the usages of their service. One of those^, 
who had never seen a court of ci-^dl judicature before, but was a 
man of natural good sense, and some reading, having listened to the 
unintelligible pleadings, and gross exaggerations of the counsel on 
both sides of the question, especially those hired in the prosecution, 
till his patience was quite exhausted, at length arose, and having 
obtained permission from the judge to speak, addressed himself 
to the court in these words : — 

' I am sent here by those to whom the king has entrusted the 
conduct of his navy, to explain the nature and rules of our service 
to this court, in case I see any danger of their forming a wrong judg- 
ment of it from inexperience in a matter so much out of their way. 
The little gentleman " yonder has spent so much breath, and shown 
so much great reading on the subject, that I imagine it is proper for 
me to make some answer, which I shall do in as few words as possible, 
being not half so long--«'inded as he. But first I must beg leave to 
tell him a story, to conform to rule. 

' I have readin a book — for I perceive that common sense signifies 
nothing here, if not supported by a quotation, it matters not whether 
to the purpose or not — that a certain philosopher having declaimed 
one day for a considerable length of time before Alexander the 
Great, at the head of his army, on the duties of a general, the 

1 Captain Hamilton [Davis's Olio]. 

2 Lorrl Colville of Culross [Davis's Olio]. 

'' Mr Pratt, afterwards Lord Camden, Lord Chief Justice of England. 

2a 



370 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

eniperor turned about to Parmenio, one of his generals who stood 
near him, and asked him what he thought of his speech ? " Sire ", 
aiLswered Parmenio, " my opinion is, that I never heard a fool talk 
so learnedly ". 

' I make no applications. All that I say on this occasion is, that 
I am sure that gentleman has never been at sea ; and consequently 
knows nothing of the service, on which he has been haranguing 
with such vehemence and elocution. He has expatiated most 
pathetically on the injustice of inflicting corporal punishment, 
without a legal trial and condemnation ; and flourished on the 
dfinger of such an invasion of liberty. ITiese, to be sure, are fine 
words ; but I much doubt whether they are properly applied on 
this occasion. The most perfect form of government is allowed 
to be absolute despotism, as best calculated to work its effects 
without delay. In all the communities in this world, I doubt if 
there is one where immediate obedience to the command of the 
governor is so indispensably necessary to the safety of the whole, 
or where individuals are so insensible to every other motive to 
obedience but fear, as in a man-of-war. I have myself the honour 
to command a ship, in which I have five hundred men under me, 
the greatest part of whom, I am sorry to say it, are the outcasts 
of human nature, as from some unhappy circumstances is, and 
perhaps must always be, the imiversal ease in our service. Now, 
as instances daily occur, in which a moment's delay or hesitation 
to execute my orders, though attended with the greatest difficulty, 
or most imminent danger, mast evidently hazard the loss of the 
ship, and every life in her, T desire that gentleman to inform me 
how I am to act, should one of the men, whom I order, suppose, 
to cut away a yard that is broken in the slings, refuse to go aloft, 
and tell me I have no right to punish him, till he is regularly tried 
and found guilty ! Shall I admit of such an answer to be an example 
to the rest ? Or shall I punish him with such severity on the spot, 
by my own mere authority, as to terrify any other from imitating 
him ? The answer to this plain question will determine the aSair 
Tinder consideration. If it is said that in the present case the ship's 
being in the harbour makes a difference ; let us suppose her on fire 
there, and the difference will vanish. In a word, if the absolute 
authority indispensably necessary for carrying on our service in 
some instances is attempted to be abridged in any, it will of course 
be at length disputed in all, and the service ruined. All that can 
be done is to be cautious not to trust it in improper hands '- 

This method of reasoning changed the face of the affair. The 
counsellor hung down his head, and slunk out of the court. The 
fears which had been entertained for the public liberty vanished ; 
and the jury simply found the fact, but left the point of law to be 
determined by the judges ; so that after all this expense and trouble, 
matters remained in the same state of uncertainty as before, to the 
great joy of the lawyers. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 371 



CHAPTER Xm 

CHBYSAL CHANGES HIS SERTICE, AND GETS INTO THE POSSESSION OF 
A PHYSICIAN AND AITTHOR — HIS MASTER JOINS IN A BEMAEKABLE 
SET OF COMPANY— THEIE CHARACTERS —CHBYSAL CHANGES HI3 
SERVICE — ACCOUNT OE THE ENTERPRISE ON WHICH HIS LATE 
master's COMPANIONS WERE ROING, WITH THE CONVINCINO 
ARGUMENTS THEY USED TO PROCURE OBEDIENCE TO THEIR 
COMMANDS 

My master, on his arrival in. London, paid me away at a cofiee- 
house, from whence I got into the possession of a physician and 
author^, who, having shown me many of the mysteries of the latter 
profession, proceeded to introduce me into new scenes. Happy in 
the contemplation of his own abilities, and the pleasing prospects 
they opened to him, he proceeded to figure as usual in his varie- 
gated sphere. Accordingly, he descended from his aerial citadel, 
and going out to visit his patients, repaired directly to a tavern, 
to join a set of critics and choice spirits — souls of sentiments and 
fire — ^who were going that evening upon an expedition that was to 
immortalize their names. This was no less than to assume the 
modest power of making laws that should affect the property of a 
number of their fellow-subjects, the execution of which they were 
resolved to enforce by the mild and equitable means which the 
respectable legislature of the mob always use to enforce obedience 
to their decrees. 

Those who were honoured by being taken thus under their im- 
mediate command were the actors of plays and interludes, of which, 
as the works of genius, and calculated for the entertainment of 
the idle, they claimed the sole and absolute rule. You conclude 
from this that they must have been persons of learning and large 
fortune, whose affluence gave them leisure to attend to subjects 
wliich their education qualified them to judge of ; but the contrary 
was the fact. They were either blanks in the creation, whom a 
superficial smattering of letters^ had filled with such an opinion 
of themselves, as to make them look with contempt upon every 
exertion of industry, as beneath their dignity, though, at the same 
time, they were barely able to subsist without it, by all the little 
shifts of economy, or tradesmen ', almost absolutely illiterate, who, 
from a preposterous ambition of hiding an ignorance that was not 

' Dr Hill, physician, journalist, and charlatan {see Introduction). 

2 An allusion, according to Davis's Olio, to Richard Fitzpatrick, the 
life-long friend of Charles James Fox. He was noted as much as Fox 
for his wit and scholarship, and his love of gambling and fashionable 
life. Two of his literary effusions, vers de socUU, were printed at 
Horace Walpole's press at Strawberry Hill. Later on he was one of 
the principal authors of the Rolliad. 

3 Mr Bourke, says Davis's Olio. Possibly a sUly reference to Edmund 
Burke, who had published his Enquiry into the Sublime and the Beautiful, 
m 1756, and added his Discourse concerning Taste to the second 
edition the next year. 



372 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

any reproach to their station, set up for the arbiters of taste, on 
the strength of a set of phrases picked up at random, and of which 
they knew not even the meaning, and neglected the business by 
which they were to earn their bread, in order to make a show of 
knowledge, that could be of no use to them. 

When this illustrious set had sufficiently conned their several 
parts in the great enterprise which they were going to undertake, 
and raised their resolutions to a proper pitch by wine, they pre- 
pared to adjoiirn to the scene of action, the theatre, and calling for 
a bill, I was changed by my master to pay his club, and directly 
borrowed from the landlord by one of the leaders of the party, who 
changed me again at the door of the theatre, to pay for his admission. 
ITiese changes of my service, however, did not prevent my seeing 
the process of this extraordinary affair. On the contrary, as I 
now belonged to the whole theatrical community in general, I had 
an opportunity of getting a full insight into the nature and mysteries 
of every part of that profession. I see you desire to know my 
sentiments on a subject that has been canvassed by the ingenious 
of all ages. Such a curiosity is natural, and shall be gratified at a 
proper time, but at present I must not interrupt the account of this 
transaction. From the manner in which those self-made legislators 
had talked, when together, of every circumstance in the management 
of a theatre and profession of an actor, you would have concluded 
that they were going to overturn the whole present system of the 
stage, and institute another on principles directly opposite, accord- 
ing to their own ideas of perfection. Bvit that was not the case. 
Among all the errors and abuses against which they declaimed 
with such vehemence, they thought proper to attack only one, 
which they thought most interesting to themselves in particular. 
This was the right which reason and law gave the performers to 
fix the price of their own labours. 

In the infancy of the stage in London, before it had been brought, 
by much labour and expense, to such a degree of perfection as to 
attract the attention of the public, it had been the custom, after a 
certain part of the representation was over, to admit persons for 
less than was paid at the beginning. The obvious reason of this 
was to allure company of any kind thither, and take the most they 
could get, rather than keep the house empty. But when the passion 
for seeing plays arose to its present height, this expedient appeared 
no longer necessary, and therefore was disused, a change which 
those who conducted the entertainments of the theatre justified, 
by alleging the enhanced salaries of the actors, and the improve- 
ments made in the machinery and decorations of the stage since 
the time when that custom was introduced, which they said re- 
quired reimbursement, by a method that could not justly be taken 
offence at, as none were obliged to go who did not approve of the 
terms. 

Such a measiire was most alarming to these men of taste, some 
of whom denied themselves the pleasure of going to the beginning 
of the performance, because they were not able to pay the full 
price, as the others could not get from behind their counters before 
it was half ended ; and for these good reasons both thought it the- 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 373 

highest grievance to have a custom abolished that had been so 
convenient to them. Accordingly, as soon as the performance 
began, they all arose, and without any respect to the rest of the 
audience, interrupted the players in the most outrageous manner, 
nor would desist till the managers ' should promise to redress the 
grievance which affected them so severely, and take half-prices as 
before. This was too flagrant a violation of justice to be submitted 
to so suddenly. The managers, therefore, refused, upon which these 
redressers of grievances gave a loose to their resentment, at such an 
instance of disobedience to their authority, and tore the house to 
pieces, doing more damage to the proprietors than their own entire 
worldly substance could repair. 



CHAPTER XIV 

THE RUINOUS APPEAEANCE OP THE SCENE OF ACTION SUPPLIES 
MATTEE FOR MIRTH TO THOSE \^'HOSE TRADE IS TO L&.VOB. AT 
EVERYTHING— TUE POINT CARRIED AGAINST LAW AND REASON — 
INQUIRY INTO THE CAUSE OP THIS — THE RISE OP THE PREJUDICE 
AGAINST THE PROFESSION OF AN ACTOR 

When these men of genius and public spirit had thus gallantly 
accomplished their enterprise, they marched off in triumph, de- 
nouncing a repetition of their resentment, should their orders not 
be obeyed. The appearance of the house after this ravage, and 
the looks of the actors when they ventured to creep out of their 
hiding-holes, seemed to realize the mimic scenes usually exhibited 
there. All was havoc, desolation, amazement, and affright. Crowns, 
sceptres, candlesticks, and broken benches were jumbled together. 
Sovereigns and sweepers, lords, link-boys, duchesses, and cinder- 
wenches joined in one common lamentation of their fate. This, 
however, lasted not long. Their hearts were not formed of stuff 
for grief to make a deep impression on, nor were they so unaccus- 
tomed to the rubs of life as to be dejected at any mischance. Their 
concern, therefore, wore off with their fright, and one of them, 
resuming his character of turning everything into ridicule, marched 
with solemn pace and rueful countenance up to the motley ruins now 
collected into a heap, and with some droll variations, apt to the 
occasion, spouted over them a tragic speech in all the emphasis 
and trick of woe. The humour instantly ran through them all. 
Mirth grinned on every face, and they vied in cracking villainouf 
jests on each other's undoing. But the managers had siiffered too 

' Garrick, at Drury Lane, and Beard, at Covent Garden. The incident 
occurred in February 1763. A gang of rioters succeeded in forcing 
Garrick to grant admission at half-price after the third act of any per- 
formance. Beard resisted the demand, and some of the ringleaders 
were brought before the Lord Chief Justice. In the end, after having 
his property destroyed, and the theatre closed for some time. Beard 
had to submit. 



374 ADVENTURES OF A OVINE A 

severely in their property to be in so merry a mood. They con- 
sulted among themselves, and with the sages of the law, what was 
proper for them to do, to obtain redress for such injustice, and 
prevent the menaced repetition of it. But all was to no purpose. 
Law gave way to Kcentiousness, and they were obliged to submit 
to the most intolerable of all tyrannies, that of the mob. 

You are surprised that such things should be, in a country, 
governed by equal and established laws. In speculation it must 
seem strange ; but the least acquaintance with life would reconcile 
you to inconsistencies still grosser. There is something, however, 
in the circumstances of this case which deserves attention, and 
makes it not improper to trace to their origin the prejudices from 
which such injustice could proceed. S'^ 

When the system of divine worship, which is now professed in 
these parts of the world, was first proposed to mankind the human 
mind was a slave to superstitions, which were a disgrace to that 
portion of reason given for its direction. By a perversion, of which 
man alone is capable, the celebration of those superstitions, though 
professedly designed in honour of the Deity, was attended with 
games and scenical interludes, in which the grossest immoralities 
received the sanction of religion, and were practised openly as 
pleasing to Him. This was done to attach the passions of the 
multitude, and satisfy their curiosity with sensible representations, 
in order to prevent their making rational inquiries into the grounds 
of those superstitions, the principles of which were subservient to 
the policy of the ruling powers. A religion instituted on purpose 
to reclaim man from immoralities and superstitions, and restore 
him to the dignity of hia nature, necessarily stnick at everything 
that conduced to their support ; accordingly, the persons appointed 
to propagate it exerted all their endeavours against those games 
and interludes, both as a part of the superstitious worship which 
they wanted to abolish, and as in themselves subversive of moral 
virtue, by the vices which they exhibited to imitation, heightened 
and made still more alluring by every incentive of art and pomp of 
expense. For this purpose, reason, as well as religion, supplied 
ready and powerful arguments ; but, not content to wait for the 
slow effect of these, they strove to prejudice those whom they could 
not persuade, and, to obviate the imitation of their example, raised 
an abhorrence to the persons of all concerned in such representa- 
tions, casting them o3 from the rites of religion, and declaring them 
unworthy, both of the protection of the laws, and the common 
privileges of society, a method that, in one respect, defeated its. 
own design, as it could never reclaim the offenders, however it 
might deter others from following their example. Nor did they 
stop here. By an error too common in the heat of argumentation, 
they concluded from the abuse, against the use of the stage, and 
branded with the mark of reprobation all future actors, for the 
faults of the present. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 375 



CHAPTER XV 

CONTINUED : THE COMMON CONSBQUBNCB Or EXCESS OF ZEAL — 
THE PROFESSED INTENT OF THE THBATBICAL EBPEBSENTATIONS 
DEFEATED BY THIS ABSURD PREJUDICE AGAINST ACTORS — THE 
VICES AGAINST WHICH THIS PREJUDICE IS LEVELLED, IN REALITY 
THE EFFECTS OF IT, WITH THE MEANS OF REMEDYING THIS AND 
OTHER ABUSES 

However the occasion might then seem to justify this excess of 
zeal, when the cause ceased, the efieot should in reason have ceased 
also, and these general censures have been repealed. The supersti- 
tions which were the foundation of the first charge against the 
stage have been long abolished, nor are the absurdities and im- 
moralities which gave offence to reason and virtue any longer 
practised there. On the contrary, the professed intent of thea- 
trical representations at present is to insinuate instruction under 
the pleasing appearance of entertainment, to encourage virtue by 
example, and inculcate the practice of it, by showing the evils 
inseparably attendant on vice, to regulate the passions, by dis- 
playing the danger of indulging them too far, and to put folly out 
of countenance, by holding it up to ridicule. Now, as experience 
has proved the stage capable of answering these great ends, what 
can be more injudicious than to attempt to bring it into disrepute; 
what more unjust than to consign to infamy those who exert the 
finest powers of the human mind and body to accomplish this end 
in the most pleasing manner ? Yet, such is the absurdity of man, 
that while persons of the most exalted rank and sacred characters 
not only frequent the theatre, but also compose works to be repre- 
sented on it, and evidently value themselves more on possessing 
the abilities requisite to compose them, than oq all their other 
distinctions in life, those from whose action such compositions 
receive their force and beauty are held in disrepute, and subject 
to the severest disadvantages only for acting them. If it is no 
disgrace to write a play, why should it be any to act it ? It is 
true, the consequences of this prejudice are not so severe here as in 
other countries, but still they are such as reason is ashamed of. 
If actors are not literally excluded from the protection of the laws, 
they want support to avail themselves of that protection, as in the 
case which gave rise to these reflections. If they are not actually 
(for literally they are) excluded from the rites of religion, they want 
encouragement to participate in them. I see you are ready to 
object to the utility of the stage, the faults in many of the perform- 
ances exhibited upon it, and to justify the disrepute affixed to the 
character of an actor, from the general immorality of their conduct 
in private life, as if it arose solely from their profession. But a 
moment's reflection would suggest answers to both these objections. 
If there is any improper exhibition upon the stage, surely the blame 
should fall on those who have a legal power to prevent such abuse of 
the institution of it. If the actors are immoral in their lives, should 
it not be considered that they are prejudiced from their profession. 



376 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

and deprived of one of the strongest mducements of virtue, that is, 
reputation, before they are proved to be guilty of vice. The con- 
sequence of this is, that too few enter into the profession till aft«r 
they have lost their reputation, or are driven by mere necessity, by 
which means they reflect that disgrace upon it, which they are 
thought to suffer from it ; and as they are sensible that they are 
precluded by this prejudice from all possibility of recovering or 
preserving it by the most careful deportment, they become desperate, 
and proceed till they even lose the sense of imavailing shame. 
Whereas, if a different conduct was observed to them, if the brand 
of reputation was taken off, and the profession established in that 
credit which the abilities indispensably necessary to eminence in 
it deserves, genius would be no longer damped by apprehension of 
reproach ; more persons of good character would not scruple going 
on the stage, as they could preserve it there, nor vice seem to receive 
encouragement from public favour, because from this circumstance 
unhappily too often entangled vpith merit ; but the life of the actor 
would reflect the sentiments of the poet, and enforce them to imita- 
tion by example. Nor would it be difficult to work this important 
effect. All necessary would be to refuse admission on the stage to 
all notorious for vice of any kind, to banish from it such as should 
become so after, however eminent in their merits, and to support 
the profession by the civil power against the tyranny of the mob, 
so that the lives and properties of all concerned in it should be 
secure from suffering such licentious outrage and injustice as no 
other subjects are exposed to, and as are equally a reproach and 
insult to good government and common sense. Nor need it be 
apprehended that this would make them insolent, or slacken their 
endeavours to please. Their very being depends on public favour, 
the bare withholding of which is punishment sufBciently severe, 
as ambition to acquire it will make them exert their utmost abilities, 
and always observe proper humility to the arbiters of their fate. 
They know that if they are neglected they cannot live. On the 
contrary, it would enable them to rise to greater merit in their art, 
as they would no longer he under the wretched necessity of prosti- 
tuting their own judgment to please the gross taste of their tyrants. 
Many other arguments might be alleged against this grievous and 
shameful abuse ; but what I have said is sufficient to convince 
candid reason, and vrith prejudice it is in vain to argue. 



CHAPTER XVI 

THE SYSTEM OF POLIOY BY WHICH CHRYSAL's MASTEK GOVERNED 
HIS STATE — ACCOTJNT OP HIS METHOD OP PARRYING POETS — THE 
REASON WHY SO PEW NEW PLAYS ARE ACTED — INQUIEY INTO THE 
PRESENT STATE OP GENIUS — THE GENERAL MOTIVES FOR WRITING 
PLAYS PRECLUDE THEM PROM SUCCESS — MANAGERS AND POETS 
EQUALLY IN FAULT IN THEIR DEALINGS WITH EACH OTHER 

The day after this great affair was thus equitably settled, on the 
treasurer's making up his week's accoimt, 1 came into the possession 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 377 

of the manager', who, having some occasion for money, put me into 
his pocket. 

The measures of my new master's government in this little empire 
were the strongest burlesque on the policy of the world, the greatest 
sovereign in which had not more intrigues of state to manage, than 
were continually carrying on about him, from the ambition, envy, 
and jealousy of the several candidates for his royal favoxir. But 
all this bustle did not embarass him in the least. He had the address 
to play off one party against another, and, by never engaging him- 
self particularly to any, was able to manage all, a method, by the 
bye, that might suggest a hint not unuseful to politicians in a higher 
sphere. But the part of his conduct that was most curious, and 
gave me the greatest pleasure, was his manner of parrying the 
attacks of the authors who were continually bringing lum their 
works for representation on the stage, of which I had an opportunity 
of seeing many strildng instances. 

As it is evidently the interest of the manager of a theatre to 
exhibit those performances whose merit is most likely to gain the 
approbation of the public, and as no man who is capable of writing 
a piece proper for exhibition can be supposed to want judgment 
to know whether it has that merit, you may naturally think tliat 
there could not be much difficulty in the intercourse between them ; 
but human actions are not always to be judged of from the strongest 
appearances of reason. The representation of a new piece neces- 
sarily puts the manager to some expense and much trouble. If 
you add to this the natural anxiety about success, for merit is 
often rejected by caprice or personal prejudice, you will not wonder 
that he should be cautious what he brings upon the stage, and prefer 
acting old ones, unattended with these inconveniences, while the 
public will bear the repetition, and does not peremptorily demand 
new. 

This is the real reason why so few new pieces are performed, and 
not any decline of poetical gem'us to produce them, it being certain 
that there are as many good plays written now as at any former 
point of time. But the matter is this. .■^11 the good ones of those 
times lie together before you, and raise your opinion to the happy 
days which produced them ; but if you consider the long intervals 
between, and the innumerable bad ones which appeared along wdth 
them, but are now lost in the wreck of time, you will find that you 
have not so great reason to complain of the present decline of genius 
as you may have imagined. I do not, by this, mean that every one 
who pretends to write is possessed of that genius, or that all the 
pieces offered to the stage are proper for representation. On the 

' Apparently this is intended for John Beard [1716 ?-91], actor and 
manager of Covent Garden, fiom 1761-1767. Beard was also a noted 
singer. ChurchUl says in the Bosciad — 

' Let slavish minstrels pour the enervate lay ; 
To Britons far more noble pleasures spring ; 
In native notes, whilst Beard and Vincent sing '- 

Garrick may, however, be the individual referred to ; as already ob- 
served, he made common cause with Beard against the agitators. 



378 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

contrary, many who want every qualification indispensable to 
success in such attempts make them every day in defiance of reason, 
and strive to obtrude upon the public works which are a reproach 
to common sense. The motives of this are obvious. Whenever 
a man is at a loss how to spend his time, or wants to raise a little 
money, down he sits and writes a play. The consequence of this 
is, that the very reasons which made him turn poet necessarily 
preclude him from success. Idleness prevents that care — that 
limoe labor — which alone can make a performance proper for public 
representation, and distress depresses the imagination, and hinders 
its rising to that happy boldness which is the essence of poetry. 

It appears from hence, that if the managers of theatres from 
interested motives are often to blame for rejecting good pieces, 
poets (or those who would be thought such), are much oftener cul- 
pable for offering them bad ones. The difference of opinion un- 
avoidable on this account occasions the difficulty in their inter- 
course. But in this the contest is not equal. The word of a manager 
is decisive, while the poet has nothing left but to vent his resent- 
ment in unavailing, and often unjust, complaints and abuse, in 
which those who have least right are always loudest, for, enamoured 
with the beauty of their own offspring, like the ape in the fable, 
they throw dirt at all who presume to find fault with it. But severe 
as it mxist be to suffer this, it is not the greatest difficulty the manager 
has to encounter with them. Not satisfied with the civil refusal of 
affected delays and excuses, they mu-st have a direct answer, which 
they controvert with all their power, and oblige him to support by 
such arguments as must give him pain, if he has either politeness 
or good nature ; though, after all, instead of convincing them, he 
only gets theirs and their friends' ill-will, and arms all their tongues 
against him. 

It is not to be doubted but the evasions which managers use to 
shift off good pieces are as grossly offensive to moral propriety, 
truth, and candour, as the arguments of authors in defence of bad 
ones can possibly be to reason ; but as I did not happen to be 
witness to any instances of them, I shall confine my account to 
the latter. 



CH.4.PTER X^^I 

chrysal's master sits in judgment on some pieces ofpebed to 
him — a poet of fashion enters — the aeottments by which 

HE SUPPORTS HIS WORK AGAINST THE OBJECTIONS OF CHRYSAL's 
MASTER, WHO MAKES SOME CUEIOUS DRAMATICAL STRICTURES — 
THE POET, DRIVEN FROM HIS LAST RETREAT, THE INTEREST OF HIS 
OEEAT FRIENDS, BY THE COMMON CANT OF THE HOUSE's EEINa 
FULL FOR THE SEASON, DEPARTS IN A RAGE, DENOUNCING THEIB 
RESENTMENT, WHICH CHEYSAL's MASTER SHOWS HIS REASON NOT 
TO FEAR THE EFFECTS OF 

The important morning after I came into the possession of the 
manager was big with the fate of many a poetical performance, the 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 379 

authors of which were appointed to come there for his decisive 
answer. Accordingly, as soon as he had breaJifasted, he repaired 
to his tribunal, where he had been waited for for some time, by 
one of those aspiring geniuses, who sacrifice the solid happiness of 
independence to the vain ambition of being -Kell with the great, 
submitting to their capricious humours for the honour of a nod 
in public places, or an invitation to their tables, to enhance their 
welcome at which, and consume time they know not how to make 
better use of, they fall upon this wise expedient of turning poet. 

When they had gone through all the formalities of polite address, 
and taken their seats with proper ceremony, the poet opened the 
business. 

' Well, sir ', said he, with a smile of self-complaisance, ' you 
have perused that trifle ; what is your opinion ? Heh ! don't you 
think it will do ' ? 

' Sir ', answered my master, with the smooth simper of a courtier, 
' you do it injustice by calling it a trifle. The piece has a great deal 
of merit, and reads very prettily in many places ; but I fear it is 
not quite so proper for the stage '. 

' How, sir ? Not proper for the stage ? Pray, sir, where does 
the impropriety lie ? Several persons of the first rank have read 
it, and found no such thing. His grace said it abounded with the 
vis comica ; Lord Tastly was charmed with the Attic salt, and Sir 
Peter Courtly admired the elegance of the diction. Pray, sir, 
where then can the impropriety lie ? They are allowed to be good 
judges '. 

' Pardon me, sir, I did not presume to call their judgment in 
question in the least. But — a ' 

' And why, then, should you hesitate to receive it ? They will 
support it with all their interest '- 

' That, sir, I do not doubt. But — still, sir — the town '. 

' The town, sir ? And pray, what of the town ? Is the judg- 
ment of the town to be put in competition with theirs ' ? 

' No, sir, by no means. But still the town is a very formidable 
and arbitrary judge, and will not admit its authority to be disputed 
in such matters as this '. 

' And pray, good sir, what objections can the judicious town, 
or you, its learned advocate, make ' ? 

' Sir, you impose a very disagreeable task upon me ; I had much 
rather be excused '. 

' I do not in the least doubt that, sir, but my friends insist upon a 
direct answer. Either receive the play, or say you will not '. 

' Sir, I should be very sorry to give offence to any gentleman ; 
but since you insist upon my opinion, do not you think, sir, the 
plot is too — too — too domestic ? Aie not the intrigues and tricks 
of servants too low a subject for polite entertainment ' ? 

' How, sir ? Have you any objection to servants ? Do not they 
make a principal part in all our modem comedies ? Are the Jeremy's 
and Scrub's and Phillis's, and a thousand others to be rejected 
because they are servants ' ? 

' No, sir. But consider they are not the principal characters, 
nor does the plot return upon them. They come in, as it were, 



380 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

by accident ; and indeed, except in the instances you have men- 
tioned, and perhaps a very few more, they had much better be left 
out. It shows a grossnesa of taste to stoop to them for enter- 
tainment '. 

' And do I not introduce the masters and mistresses too, as well 
as the servants ? Are there not country squires, and town fops 
and fine ladies ' ? 

' Yes, sir, you do introduce them, but in a subordinate light, 
and merely to be the dupes of their servants, without any business 
or importance of their own '. 

' And pray, sir, in what other light do most masters appear ? 
Ha ! ha ! ha. Well, then, it seems all your objections are to the 
fable. You have nothing to say against the sentiments and 
diction ' ? 

' The sentiments, sir, may be very proper, and the diction suited 
to them, but you must be sensible that the former objection affects 
them all equally. The characters are too low, and the sentiments 
and diction consequently too coarse '. 

' Sir — sir — sir — I shall not enter into any further arguments with 
you. His grace bids me tell you he insists upon your receiving it, 
or giving him such reasons as he shall think satisfactory, which 
must be very different from those insignificant cavils '. 

' His grace need not exert his authority to influence my obedience. 
The least hint of his pleasure were sufficient ; but unluckily I am 
engaged for the whole season — quite full '. 

' Pull ? Why did you not tell me so at first ' ? 

' Because you insisted on having my opinion '. 

' Very well, sir, I shall let his grace and all my friends know how 
you have behaved. Let me have the play ! impertinent, insolent, 
ignorant puppy ', muttered he, as he went out. 

' So ', said my master, as soon as he was gone, ' I have now made 
him my enemy for ever. As for his noble friends, they are above 
troubling themselves about anything of the kind, and give him 
leave to mention their names only to get rid of his importunity '. 



CHAPTER XVIII 

CONTINUATION : CHEYSAL's MASTER REJECTS THE WORK OF A POET 
POK HIS IGNORANCE OE THE LAWS OF THE DRAMA — MORE DRAMA- 
TICAL STRICTURES — THE POET MODESTLY INSISTS THAT HIS PLAT 
IS REFUSED ONLY BECAUSE IT WANTS THE INTEREST OF THE 
GREAT, AND GOES OFF IN A HUFF — ANOTHER POET REPULSED FOB 
HIS ATTACHMENT TO THE LAWS OF THE DRAMA — ARGUMENTS 
AGAINST THESE LAWS — THE POET REFUSES TO CONFORM TO THE 
PRESENT TASTE, AND MAKES AN APPEAL — ONE MORE POET RE- 
FUSED, ONLY FOR WANTING EVERY POETICAL TALENT — REMARKS 
ON SOMETHING THAT AFFECTS MORE THAN CARE TO OWN IT 

The last poet was scarce downstairs when a footman announced 
the entrance of another. My master did not think it necessary 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 381 

to observe so much ceremony with him as he had done with the 
former, but told him directly that he could not receive his piece. 
Such a sentence struck the poet all of a heap. He was unable to 
epeak for some moments, but recovering himself at length — ' Not 
receive it, sir ' ? said he. ' You surprise me. Pray, sir, why so ' ? 

' I am very loath to find fault, sir ', answered my master, ' but 
you seem to be utterly unacquainted with all the laws of the drama '- 

' The laws of the drama 1 They are but art. I write from 
nature. These laws have been long laid aside. Shakespeare wrote 
without laws '. 

' So much the worse. But he is a dangerous example to imitate. 
The local temporary laws of the ancient drama are laid aside, it is 
true, but not the immutable, general laws of propriety and reason. 
Your fable is unconnected, improbable, and unaffecting '- 

' How, sir, unaffecting ? Can the fall of a mighty empire be 
said to be unaffecting ' ? 

' No, sir ; but the description of it most certainly may, if not 
drawn with judgment and force. And then your characters are 
ill-supported, and your sentiments and language lost in the clouds '. 

' What, sir ? Can the sentiments of kings and princes be too 
sublime ' ? 

' There is a wide difference between being sublime and swollen 
out of nature '. 

' But what objection can you make to the language ? Is it not 
raised with epithets and metaphors, and all the figures of poetry ' ? 

' Good sir, poetical figures in poor language look like embroidery 
on a blanket ; they only make its poverty ridiculous. Beside 
your stalking in their stilts betrays you into many a stumble in the 
dirt. Your figures frequently fly in the face of common sense, 
and break through every rule of grammar '- 

' Well, sir, I shall consider of these particulars. The great 
objection I have heard made to modern plays is their want of 
business ; but this can never be charged to mine. There is a ghost 
and a battle, and a king dethroned. Business enough, and enough, 
I am sure ' 

' Ghosts and battles, sir, it is true, are sometimes introduced 
■with success ; but then it must be a master in the art, else they 
have a contrary effect '. 

' I apprehend that the aim of tragedy is to work upon the passions. 
In this, I believe, you cannot say I have failed ; the distress is truly 
great '. 

' Distress, when out of character, loses the appearance of reality, 
and becomes ridiculous. A king in an almshouse, and a queen 
begging from door to door, are images which sink into a burlesque '. 

' It is very well, sir ; you may say what you please, but I am 
satisfied it is not want of merit in my play that makes you refuse 
it. You daily act much worse. If it had been recommended to 
you by some lord, you would have found none of these faults ; 
but merit may starve without interest to support it nowadays. 
This ia fine encouragement to genius, truly, and the public is like 
to be well entertained while such men have it in their power to 
refuse everything that does not happen to please themselves '. 



382 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

Saying this, he snatched up his play, leaving my master to please 
himself with the prospect of being criticised upon La a newspaper, 
and pulled to pieces in a scurrilous pamphlet. He had not time to 
indulge these reflections long, when another of his clients attended 
his levee. As soon as he was seated — ' I have read over your work 
with great care ', said my master, ' and am sorry to say I think it 
improper for the stage '. 

' Pray, sir, why so ' ? answered the poet with an air of importance. 

' It is written strictly according to the rules of the drama, and 
enriched with the sublimest sentiments of the ancients '. 

' Sir, I am sensible of its merits as well as of the great learning 
of the author, but the taste of the times requires entertainment of 
a difierent kind '. 

' Surely compliance with a vitiated taste will not justify the 
breach of rules, taken originally from nature, and established for 
so many ages '. 

' I neither dispute the original justice, nor the antiquity of them ; 
but I apprehend that the latter, in a great measure, destroys the 
present force of the former. The customs of mankind — the part of 
nature which comes within the province of the drama — are so 
changed since the establishment of those rules, that it would be 
most absurd to exact obedience to them now. Besides, may it 
not be said, without violation to the respect due to antiquity, 
that experience, in a great length of time, may have made many 
improvements in those rules. The infancy of every art is 
weak '. 

' But whatever changes may have happened in the customs of the 
world, truth still remains the same, and the genuine sentiments of 
nature cannot displease '. 

' Very true. But still they may not always be received with 
equal pleasure in the same garb. Unimpassioned sentiment, how- 
ever just and sublime, works not the effects designed by the drama, 
whose aim is to convey instruction and pleasure at the same time, 
by an immediate address to the passions '. 

' Is it possible that you can be an advocate for the irregular 
monsters which at present dishonour the stage ' ? 

' As for irregularity, I look upon it to be but an imaginary defect, 
though, even if it were otherwise, I am the servant of the pubUc, 
and obliged to find entertainment for their taste, be it what it wiU. 
If you would but conform '. 

' No, sir, that I never will, against reason and the ancients. I 
see you are prejudiced, and, therefore, I shall not argue with you 
any longer. But I shall not acquiesce in silence. I will publish 
the performance, without being discouraged by your refusal, and 
appeal to the judgment of the learned '. 

He then marched off, with a stately pace, and my master, looking 
after him — ' There again ', said he, shrugging his shoulders, ' I 
shall now have the ghosts of Sophocles and Aristotle, and all the 
doughty ancients raised to haunt me '. 

As he said this, a person entered, whose whole appearance spoke 
distress. He approached my master, bowing lowly, and trembling 
with anxiety as he spoke. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 383 

' I have made bold to wait upon you, sir ', said he, ' but if you are 
not at leisure, wiU call another time '. 

' Pray, sir, sit down ', replied my master, with a smile of en- 
couragement. ' I have looked over your work, and am concerned 
that it is not in my power to receive it, as I should be sincerely 
glad to serve you. But in this it is not possible. I must be plain 
with you ; you seem to want every poetical talent '. 

' I though*^^. sir ', returned the poet, scarce able to collect spirits 
enough to speak to him, ' that the business of tragedy was to work 
upon the passions. I depended entirely on the distress ' 

' Very true, air ; but there are other passions besides pity to be 
appealed to ; nor is poverty a proper distress to work upon them. 
Severe as it is to be felt, it affects but little in representation. The 
upper ranks of Ufe know not what it is, and those who do are desirous 
to keep the thought at a distance, and conceal a knowledge they 
are ashamed of. The mind must be properly prepared to feel for 
another. The description of a famine would affect but little after a 
feast '. 

This came too home to the unhappy poet. He burst into tears, 
and was departing without being able to make a reply. My master 
felt his distress, though he could not receive his play, as he knew 
that an audience would pay no regard to his circumstances, nor 
give up an evening's entertainment to relieve an author's indigence, 
and waiting on him to the door, shpped a couple of guineas into 
his hand, when it fell to my lot to change my service. I had never 
experienced my own influence on the human heart so strongly aa 
on this occasion. The poet kissed the hand of his benefactor in 
a rapture too big for utterance, and forgetting for a moment all hia 
distresses, went to a cofiee-house and changed me to pay for his 
breakfast. 



CHAPTER XIX 

CHEYSAIi CHANGES HIS SEEVICE — HIS MASTEK GOBS TO BE ADMITTED 
INTO AN EXTKAOEDINAEY SOCIETY^SOMB EBFLECTIONS NOT 
SUITED TO THE TASTE OF THE TIMES — EISB OF THIS SOCIETY — A 
DESCEIPTION OF A MONASTEEY, WITH AN ACCOUNT OF ITS MEMBERS 
AND SOME OF ITS KULES 

On the same day that I entered into the service of the master of the 
coffee-house, he paid me away in cashing a bill for a man of fashion^, 
who, the next morning, set out upon a party of pleasure of a most 
extraordinary nature. This was, to be admitted into a society, 
formed of a number of persons of the first distinction, in burlesque 
imitation of religious societies, which are instituted in other countries. 
I have already told you that I shall not give any opinion in reli- 
gious matters. But, whether the original institution of such societies 
-was right or not, as the motive of them was the worship of the 
Deity, any attempt to turn them into ridicule most certainly must 

^ Lord Sandwich [see Introduotion]. 



384 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

be wrong, the mind of man seldom being acute or attentive enough 
to distinguish between matters which to appearance are so intimately 
connected as the mode of worship, and the object of it, but generally 
involving either in the disregard affecting the other. In the present 
instance, indeed, the disregard was designedly levelled at both 
alike. 

To give you a proper notion of the scene in which my master was 
going to act a capital part, it is necessary to trace thp whole from 
the original. A person of a flighty imagination', and who possessed 
a fortune that enabled him to pursue those flights, cloyed with 
common pleasures, and ambitious of distinguishing himself among 
his companions, had resolved to try if he could not strike out some- 
thing new, that should at the same time please his own taste, and 
do honour to his genius. The mere gratifications of sense, in their 
utmost extent, not answering his design, he had recourse to the 
assistance of imagination to enhance them. The great butt, against 
which men of pleasure play off all their wit, is religion ; their reasons 
for a practice so gross are obvious. As the voice of conscience 
will sometimes intrude upon them so as to pall their highest plea- 
sure in the very moment of enjoyment, their first endeavour is to 
silence it, which they find by experience cannot be done so effectu- 
ally by any other method as by this of taking off the respect paid to 
religion, from which conscience borrows the terrors that make its 
admonitions so unwelcome. Besides, they think it shows their 
superiority over the rest of mankind to laugh at what they are 
afraid of, as it is also convenient for their character of wit to exert 
it on topics where it is safe from being rivalled by men of real 
understanding. 

These weighty considerations determined him to season his 
scheme as high as he could with impiety, in order to make it the 
better relished. Accordingly, after due deliberation on a matter 
of such moment, he at length hit upon a plan that pleased him. 

In the middle of a large lake upon his estate there was an island, 
the natural beauties of whose situation had been heightened by 
every improvement of art. On this island he erected a building^, 
exactly on the model of the monasteries which he had seen in other 
countries, and, to make the resemblance complete, there was not a 
vice that he had ever heard imputed to the inhabitants of them, 
for practising which he did not make provision in his. The cellars 
were stored with the choicest wines, the larders with the delicacies 
of every climate, and the cells were fitted up for all the purposes 
of lasciviousness, for which proper objects were also provided. 
Thus far the ridicule, however criminal in itself, may seem to have 
been designed only against those societies of human institution j 
but it was beneath his genius and spirit to stop here. Nothing less 
would satisfy him than to attack the very essentials of the religion 
established by the laws of his country, and acknowledged by every 
serious person in it to be divine. For this pious purpose, when 
everything was prepared for their reception, his next care was to 

^ Sir Francis Dashwood [see Introduction]. 
^ Medmenham Abbey [see, Introduction]. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 385 

find a fraternity proper for the place. But in this his rank and 
course of life made him not long at a loss. He selected from among 
his intimates a number equal to that of those who had been at the 
first chosen to inculcate the religion which he designed to ridicule, 
whose names they assumed, as he, with equal modesty and piety 
did that of the Divine Author of it ; and, to supply any decrease 
in this number by death, or desertion from the terrors of reflection, 
he instituted an inferior order of as many more, chosen also with 
the greatest caution and regard to the latitude of their principles, 
their fortunes, and mirthful accomplishments. The probationary 
office of these latter was to attend upon their superiors in the cele- 
bration of their mysteries, which were all performed in the chapel 
of the monastery, where no other servants were ever permitted to 
enter, on the most common occasion, as the very decorations of it 
would, in a great measure, have betrayed their secrets, the ceiling 
being covered with the emblems and devices too gross to require 
explanation to the meanest capacity, and the walls painted with 
the portraits of those whose names and characters they assumed, 
represented in attitudes and actions horrible to imagination. Nor 
was their care to keep their mysteries impenetrably secret confined 
to this exclusion of common servants. The diffidence of conscious 
guilt made them even distrust each other, till bound to secrecy 
by oaths and imprecations, receiving their force from the religion 
thus abused by them, an absurdity common among men associated 
for the most flagitious purposes. But, strong as the power of 
superstition is over weak and wicked minds (for nothing but the 
grossest superstition could make them think oaths in such circum- 
stances binding), their secrecy was secured by a still stronger motive, 
which was fear. They were sensible that even suspicion of such 
vices would for ever exclude them from the society of all those 
whom, in despite of themselves, they could not help holding in 
respect, and that so outrageous an insult upon the laws was liable 
to punishment from the secular power, though they might, by their 
interest, evade the direct effects of which ; yet the imputation 
would make them so obnoxious to the people in general, that they 
could no longer hope to enjoy any of the lucrative employments of 
the state, if their resentment did not arise still higher, and make 
them take that punishment into their own hands. And these fears 
prevented their secrets being divulged even by such as had resolu- 
tion enough to desert the society, as they imagined the stain could 
never be so effectually expunged as to secure them from those 
consequences. 

The rites of the society, and the ceremonies observed upon the 
admission into it, will be best explained by the account of what I 
saw my master perform on this occasion, when he was a candidate 
for the higher order, having already served his noviciate in the 
lower. 



2b 



386 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 



CHAPTER XX 

CHEYSAl's master AKEIVBS at the monastery — THE MANNER OF 
HIS BEING ADMITTED INTO THE SOCIETY — CHABACTBB OF HIS 
COMPBTITOB — THE METHOD HE TOOK TO REVENGE THE SOCIETY'S 
INJUSTICE IN PREFERRING GHRYSAL's MASTER TO HIM — THE 
MIRTH OF THE COMPANY DISTtTEBED BY THE ENTRANCE OF THE 
DEVIL, JtrST AS HE WAS INVOKED BY CHRYSAL'S MASTER — THE 
EFFECT OF SUCH A VISITOR UPON THE COMPANY — THE DEVIL 
FIXES UPON CHEYSAL's MASTER IN PARTICULAR, AND MAKES HTM 
SQUEAK 

It was about four o'clock in the afternoon when my master ' 
arrived at the verge of the lake, where he no sooner made the con- 
certed signal, than a boat was sent to ferry him over. On his land- 
ing on the island, he went to the monastery, where he found the 
society just sitting down to dinner, at which he took his place 
among them. When they had made a short meal, and di'ank their 
spirits up to a proper pitch, they retired to their respective cells, 
to prepare for the solemnity they were going to celebrate. My 
master, then clad in a milk-white robe of the finest linen, that 
flowed loosely round him, repaired, at the tolling of the bell, to the 
chapel, the scene of all their mysterious rites, and knocking gently 
thrice at the door, it was opened to him, to the soimd of soft and 
solemn music. On his entrance he made a most profound obeisance ; 
and, advancing slowly towards a table that stood against the wall 
in the upper end of the chapel, as soon as he came to the rails by 
which it was surrounded, he fell upon his knees, and making a pro- 
fession of his principles nearly in the words, but with the most gross 
perversion of the sense of the articles of faith of the religion estab- 
lished in the country, demanded admission within the rails, the 
peculiar station of the upper order, where the superior and eleven 
of the fraternity — the twelfth place was vacant, and now to be filled 
up — stood arrayed in the habits of those whose names and char- 
acters they profaned by their assumption. 

When he had finished, another candidate ^ advanced in the Hke 
manner, and making his profession, also preferred the same claim ; 
as there were more who had a right to do, but, discouraged by the 
superior merit of these two, they had declined their pretensions 
for this time. 

The brotherhood, having heard the competitors with attention, 
retired to the table, and kneeling around it, the superior repeated 
a prayer, in the same strain and manner with the profession of the 
candidates, to the Being whom they served, to direct their choice 

1 John Montagu, Lord Sandwich [1718-92], perhaps the most infamous 
and flagrantly immoral of all this infamous crew. At this time he 
held the office of treasurer and receiver of the revenues of IreJaud. At 
a later period he distinguished himself as First Lord of the Admiralty 
by his wholesale embezzlements and criminal neglect of the navy. 

^ John Wilkes [see Introduction]. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 387 

to him of the two most worthy of his service. The superior then 
proceeded to take the suffrages of the rest, with the same mimio 
solemoity ; when my master being found to have the majority, 
his election was exultingly attributed to immediate inspiration ; 
and he was accordiagly admitted withia the rails, where he received 
the name and character which he was to bear in the society, in a 
manner not proper to be described, every the most sacred rite and 
ceremony of religion being profaned ; aU the prayers and hymna 
of praise appointed for the worship of the Deity burlesqued by a 
perversion to the horrid occasion. In this manner the evening 
was wasted till supper-time, when they sat down to a banquet in 
the chapel, in honour of the occasion, at which nothing that the 
most refined luxury, the most lascivious imagination coiSd suggest 
to kindle loose desire, and provoke and gratify appetite was wanting ; 
both the superiors and inferiors — who were permitted to take their 
places at the lower end of the table, as soon as they had served in 
the banquet, vying with each other in loose songs, and disserta- 
tions of such gross lewdness and daring impiety, as despair may be 
supposed to dictate to the damned ; ia both which my master 
shone so unrivalled, as to bear down the superior sprightliness, wit, 
and humour, of all the rest ; and compensate for the want of every 
companionable merit. But while they were in the height of their 
festivity, an afiair happened that interrupted it for a time, and 
showed their resolution, particularly that of my master, m a proper 
light. 

The person who had that day been his competitor ' for the honour 
of admission iuto the higher order of society, possessed the qualifica- 
tions which he wanted in the most eminent degree. He had such 
a flow of spirits that it was impossible ever to be a moment dull in 
his company. His wit gave charms to every subject he spoke upon ; 
and his humour displayed the foibles of mankiiad in such colours, 
as to put folly even out of countenance. But the same vanity 
which had first made him ambitious of entering into this society, 
only because it was composed of persons of a rank superior to has 
own in life, and still kept him in it, though upon acquaintance he 
despised them, suUied all these advantages. His spirits were often 
stretched to extravagance, to overpower competition. His humour 
was debased into bufioonery ; and his wit was so prostituted to the 
lust of applause, that he would sacrifice his best friend for a scurvy 
jest ; and wound the heart of him whom he would at that very 
moment hazard his life and fortune to serve, only to raise a laugh ; 
in which he was also assisted by a peculiar archness of disposition, 
and an unlucky expertness at carrying his jests into practice, as he 
proved upon this occasion. Though he disdained to decline the 
late competition, as the others did, he had been well aware that 
my master's higher rank in life would carry the point in dispute 
against him ; for which injustice he resolved to revenge himself 
in the most signal manner. Por this purpose, he had contrived 
the night before to bring into his cell a great baboon, which he had 
provided for the occasion. When the brotherhood retired to their 

' i.e. Wilkes. 



388 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

cells after dinner, aa I have told you, to prepare for the ceremony, 
he availed himself of the office of keeper of the chapel, which he 
then filled, to convey this creature, dressed up in the fantastic garb, 
in which childish imagination clothes devils, into the chapel ; where 
he shut him up in a large chest that stood there to hold the orna- 
ments and utensils of the table; when the society was away. To 
the spring of the look of this chest he fastened a cord, which he drew 
under the carpet that was on the floor to his own seat, and there 
brought the end of it through a hole made for that purpose, in such 
a manner that he could readily find it ; and, by giving it a pull, 
open the chest, and let the baboon loose whenever he pleased, 
without being perceived by any of the rest of the company. Ac- 
cordingly, when they were all in the height of their mirth, on my 
master's kneeling down, and with hands and eyes raised towarito 
heaven, repeating an invocation, in the perverted phraseof Holy Writ, 
to the Being whom they served, to come among them, and receive 
their adorations in person, he pulled the cord, and let the animal 
loose, who, glad to be delivered from his confinement, gave a sudden 
spring upon the middle of the table. 

The efiect which the sight of such a visitor had upon them may 
be better conceived than expressed. Their attention had been 
80 fixed upon what my master was saying, that they perceived not 
from whence he came ; and his appearing so critically at the in- 
vocation, and in such a shape, made them conclude he was the 
Being invoked. Terrified out of their senses by this thought, 
they all roared out with one voice, ' The devil ! the devil ' ! and 
starting from their seats, made directly towards the door, tumbling 
over one another, and oversetting everything in their way. 

In the height of this uproar and confusion, the baboon, frightened 
at the effects of their fear, happened to leap upon my master's' 
shoulders, as he lay sprawling on the floor ; who, turning about 
his head at feeling the shock, saw the animal grinning horribly at 
him, and concluded the devil had obeyed his summons in good 
earnest, and come to carry him bodily away. Driven as he was 
to despair by this thought, he strove, however, in the instinctive 
impulse of self-preservation, to shake off the invader ; but he, 
instead of loosing his hold on his repeated efforts, only clung to 
him the closer, clasping his paws around his neck, and chattering 
with spite at his ear. This completed the caitiff's distress. Every 
shadow of spirit failed him, and conscious guilt suggesting to him 
the meaning of this unintelligible jargon, he attempted, in the 
blindness of fear, to move the very devil to pity, by his pathetic 
waitings and supplications. 

' Spare me, gracious devil ' ! said he ; ' spare a wretch who never 
was sincerely your servant ! I siimed only from vanity of being 
in the fashion ! Thou knowest I never have been half so wicked 
as I pretended ; never have been able to commit the thousandth 
part of the vices which I have boasted of. Take not, then, the 
advantage of that vanity ; but judge me only from my actions. 
I knew not that thou wouldst have come, or I should never have 

' Lord Sandwich. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 389 

invoked thee ! leave me, therefore, and go to those who are more 
truly devoted to thy service. I am but half a sinner. My conscience 
always flew in my face when I commited any crime ! my heart gave 
the lie to my tongue, when I gloried in my vices ; and I trembled 
at the damnation I affected to brave ! Oh, spare me, therefore, at 
least for this time, till I have served thee better. I am as yet but 
half a sinner '. 



CHAPTER XXI 

THE DEVIL IS DEGEADBD TO A BABOON, AND HIS APPEARANCE WELL 
ACCOUNTED FOE, WHICH EESTOEES THE MIETH AND COUEAGE OF 
THE COMPANY, AND PAETICULAELY OF CHEYSAL's MASTBE, V7H0 
EXEETS HIMSELF TO EECOVEE HIS CHAEACTBE — THE APPEAEANOB 
OF THE BE-DBVILLED BABOON IS TEACED NEXT DAY TO HIS INTEO- 
DUCEE, WKO AT THE INSTANCE OF CICEYSAL's MASTEE IS EXPELLED 
THE SOCIETY, FOE PEESUMING TO EIDICULB THBIE EITES — FUETHBB 
CONSEQUBNCBS OF THIS AFFAIE MAKE THE SUPEEIOE BEBAK ITP 
HIS MONASTERY, AND BUILD A CHUECH 

While my master was making this essay of his eloquence upon the 
baboon, the person who had brought him there took the opportunity 
of the consternation the whole company was in, to open one of the 
windows, unperceived by them, for the animal to make his escape ; 
which he no sooner saw, than he made directly to it, giving my 
master a happy release. 

Before he could get clear off, though, one of the company, who 
was bolder than the rest, having mustered resolution to raise his 
head, got a full view of him ; and perceiving what he was, just as 
my master concluded his supplications, ' Your prayers are heard ' ! 
said he, starting up, and speaking, as soon as a burst of laughter 
gave him utterance ; ' your prayers are heard for this time ; and 
that devil of a great he-baboon that's just gone out of the window, 
despising half a sinner, has spared you till you are fitter for his 
service '. 

At hearing these words they all arose from the floor, where they 
had lain sprawUng on top of one another, and looking in amazement 
at him who had spoke to them. 'Courage, my friends', said he, 'this 
is but a false alarm ; our master is not so reaidy to come for us when 
we call him, or we should none of us all be here now. How a baboon, 
though, should come here to scare us all out of our little wits in such 
a manner, the devil may tell you, if he will, for I cannot ; but I 
swear I saw one go out of that window '. 

' And I'll swear, too, that I saw him come in at it, ' replied the 
author of the mischief, who saw no way to escape detection but 
by preventing further inquiry by this bold lie ; ' as I just then 
happened to look about to see from whence the wind came that blew 
upon my poll '. 

This eclaircissemeiii satisfied them all ; they instantly set the 
room to rights, and plastering up their broken shins and noses, 



390 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

aat down to conclude their carousal, resuming their former strain, 
in which they all exerted themselves in an uncommon manner, 
to wipe off the disgrace of their late squeaking, particularly my 
master, who outdid his usual outdoing in profaneness, blas- 
phemy, and wickedness of every kind, to recover his character, and 
convince them he was more than half a sinner. 

They held in this hand, till nature sunk under the fatigue, when 
they retired, to sleep off their debauch in their cells ; where, as I 
said, proper provision had been made for them, to reduce the theory 
of the day into practice, in the intervals of rest. Though the affair 
of the baboon had passed off so cleverly while their spirits were 
in such a flurry, when they came to inquire more coolly into it next 
day, the whole trick came out. It had been impossible to convey 
him into the monastery without the privity of some of the servants, 
who had so often felt the jests of this gentleman, that they were 
glad of an opportunity of being revenged upon him now, by making 
the discovery. This account, confirmed by some circumstances in 
his behaviour, which they had not attended to at the time, plainly 
pointing out the guilty person i, the superiors adjotirned (firectly 
to the chapel to consult how they should proceed on so deUcate an 
occasion. For, though they had always highly approved of such 
wit when practised upon others, they looked upon the application 
of it to themselves in the most heinous light ; especially in such an 
instance as this, the consequences of which had exposed them to 
the contempt of each other, by detecting their weakness, and show- 
ing that the guilt in which they gloried was only feigned. Mortify- 
ing as this was to their vanity, the thought, however, that the case 
was general, afiorded some consolation. However, to remedy 
the defect of this, and prevent a repetition of the like disgrace, it 
was proposed, after mature deliberation, and much learned argu- 
ment on the question, to bury what was past, by a solemn act of 
amnesty, and make a special law, whose observation should be 
enforced by an oath, that no member should ever after presume 
to attempt exercising his wit upon the society, in any manner, 
or by any means whatsoever ; on taking which oath, and asking 
pardon upon his knees, at the door of the chapel, the offender should 
be forgiven. 

To this proposal they all assented, except my master, who, for 
private reasons, thought the latter part of it much too mild for so 
flagrant a crime. He had long cherished a secret grudge against the 
other, who not only often pointed his wit against him in a manner 
that he could not digest, nor knew how to resent, it being as polite 
as it was keen, but also put him constantly to the expense of double 
wickedness, the only qualification in which he could possibly shine, 
to avoid being totally eclipsed by him. His desire of revenge also 
was strongest on this occasion, as he had suffered the deepest 
disgrace. 

^ By this practical joke upon his aristocratic associates, Wilkes seems 
to have provoked the lasting enmity of Sandwich and Dash wood, who 
took an active part, in 1763, in the proceedings against him for printing 
the Essay on Woman. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 391 

Accordingly, he exerted all his eloquence to show the enormity 
of the crime of attempting to turn any of the rites and ceremonies 
established by the laws of the society into ridicule ; the letting of 
which escape without adequate punishment, he said, would argue 
weakness, and want of spirit in them, and must end in the ruin of 
their authority ; for which weighty reasons he proposed that the 
offender should be directly expelled the society in form, as the only 
effectual way to vindicate their dignity, and prevent others from 
offering it the like insult for the future. This gave the affair a new 
turn. They all took fire at the thought of their dignities being 
insulted, and expelled him that moment, without ever waiting to 
hear him in his own defence. But he soon had the satisfaction of 
seeing himself amply avenged. The care they took to keep every- 
thing they did secret had long awoke the curiosity of the neighour- 
hood, who were the more severe in their guesses the less able they 
were to guess aright. But the affair of the baboon, whom the 
servants got sight of, before he could be caught, and whether misled 
by his dress, or misrepresenting by design, gave out to be the devil, 
was no sooner known, than a formal story was propagated over 
the whole country that the end of their meeting was to worship 
the devil, to whom this chapel was dedicated, and who had often 
been seen among them in a variety of shapes. 

Scandal always meets easy credit. The story was believed by 
many, and repeated by more, as if they believed it, never losing 
anything in the repetition ; till such a universal alarm was raised 
among the people — who are content to infringe the precepts of 
religion, without denying its authority — that the superior, whose 
seat was in the neighbourhood, found it necessary to dissolve the 
society ; and effacing every trace of it, convert the building to the 
better use of a pleasure house, in which he entertained all his neigh- 
bours in general, whenever he was in the country ; beside which, 
he also built a church ^ on an eminence near his house, that answered 
the double purpose of convincing the populace of his regard to 
religion, and of making a beautiful termination to a vista which he 
had just cut through a wood in his park. 

I have anticipated these circumstances to satisfy your curiosity ; 
as I have also omitted many, and softened more particulars in this 
acooxmt, which were too horrid to have been represented in their 
proper colours. 

' High Wycombe Church, built by Dashwood some time after the 
dissolution of the Medmenham confraternity. Wilkes .said, ' I believe 
this is the fir.st church which has been built for a prospect '. The 
village, for the convenience of which it was erected, lay at the foot of 
the hill. 



392 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 



CHAPTER XXII 

A rrrRTHBB ACCOTTNT op the ETTLBS or the convent ; WITH SOME 
STBIKING INSTANCES OF ECONOMY — A SEEMING INCONSISTENCY 
ACCOUNTED FOB EBOM A PBINCIPLB NOT STJEFICIENTLY tTNDBB- 
STOOD — SOME BBMAKKABLB EFFECTS OF VANITY — REASON OF THE 
ABUSE OP WEALTH 

You are astonished how such scenes of debauchery and excess 
could be supported, either by the fortune of the entertainer, or 
the constitutions of his guests ; but this shall be explained. 

To prevent satiety or fatigue, these meetings were never pro- 
tracted beyond a week at a time, nor held oftener than twice a year ; 
by which frugality of pleasure, they were always returned to with 
the keenness of novelty. And as for the expense of them, that was 
defrayed jointly by the whole community — the superior contribu- 
ting nothing more than any other member, except the first cost of 
building the convent, which he thought himself amply recompensed 
for by the honour of having struck out the plan — and regulated 
by the strictest economy ; the slaves of their lusts being sent back 
to the brothels from whence they had been brought ; and the 
servants of their luxury discharged at the end of every meeting ; 
and no more retained for the rest of the year than an old man and 
woman, who took care of the place. To you who have supported 
the dignity of your nature, by preferring the pleasures of that 
reason which was given to distinguish man from brutes, to those 
of sense, which they enjoy in common with him, the picture of this 
whole scene must appear overcharged and irreconoileable with the 
great principles of human action, which always propose some good, 
either present or future, however the judgment may err in the thing 
proposed. But more acquaintance with life would solve this 
difficulty to you. The general motive for attempting to turn re- 
ligion into ridicule has been already explained. But as some are 
seen to give in to this practice who seem to cultivate their reason 
with most success, and whose actions, and even inclinations, 
appear not to have the remotest tendency contrary to moral virtue, 
it may be proper to account for such an exception. 

The first principle of action, impressed by nature on everything 
that lives, is self-preservation. Prom this brute animals, which 
by necessity proceed regularly in the course prescribed for them, 
never swerve ; but the rational animal, man, bewildered in his own 
imaginations by the abuse of that liberty, which was given him to 
enhance the merit of his obedience to the dictates of reason, 
often substitutes another in its place, by whose impulse he acts in 
direct opposition to it. This is vanity ! the real source of that 
ambition which courts danger, and plunges with open eyes into 
destruction, however speciously it may be disguised under the 
pompous titles of love of glory, and regard to the public good ; as 
well as of most of the extravagances and absurdities which puzzle 
superficial observers, and make them presumptuously impeach, 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 393 

as a defect in the work of nature, their own neglect and perversion 
of its laws. 

A particular inquiry into the effects of this suppositious principle, 
many of which, as I said, are blazoned as the brightest virtues, 
while more are acknowledged to be the most atrocious crimes ; or 
how nearly such virtues and crimes proceeding thus from the same 
source, may be allied, though curious and interesting in itself, is 
not necessary here. It is sufficient to observe that its power is 
able to break the force of habit, reconcile contradictions, and 
confound the essential difierences of things ; to cope with prejudice, 
and overrule the infirmities of nature. 

This it is, for instance, that makes the constitutional coward, 
who trembles at the thought of danger, and would see his country 
ruined rather than draw his sword in its defence, fight duels for a 
doubtful punctilio of empty ceremony ; the superstitious wretch, 
who finds omens in spilled salt and crossed straws, and sees goblins 
and devils in the dark, profess infidelity, ridicule Providence, and 
dare the wrath of Heaven by insults and bravadoes ; and lastly, 
this it is that makes the hoary sage, whose life has been regulated 
by the strictest principles of morality and religion, while passion 
might have rebelled against them, commence libertine in the im- 
potence of old age, and glory in vices he has lost the power to practise. 
Of the justice of these remarks, the members of this society, of 
which vanity was the cement, as it had been the origin, afforded 
the most glaring proofs. 

You wonder what there could be to be vain of in such an associa- 
tion ; but you do not reflect that vanity is never the result of real 
worth. The false glare of public estimation reflects it from the 
vilest and most reproachful objects. The institutor of this society 
was admired for every polite accomplishment, every power of 
pleasing in conversation ; and the first set he chose were all of the 
same cast. This, with their rank and fortunes, and, above all, the 
mystery of the institution, which set curiosity on fire, and gave 
imagination room to form the most flattering ideas of it, made 
admission into it an object of universal ambition, as it seemed a 
proof of every member's meriting the same character ; and when 
once admitted, a vicious fear of ridicule made too many ashamed 
to quit it ; and even they who did, were precluded from discovering 
anything that might deter others, by the secrecy to which they 
were sworn. 

There is one thing more which, from the particular circumstances 
of your own life, affects you more than any other in this account. 
This is the folly and ingratitude of lavishing the blessing of wealth 
to the dishonour of the Donor, and with so little regard to its real 
use. But this, as has been the case in other instances, proceeds 
from want of better acquaintance with life. 

It has been remarked by travellers, that in those parts of the 
earth, where the blessings of nature are bestowed with the greatest 
liberality, the people seem least sensible of them, and are sunk in 
the grossest vice, as if reason and virtue were incompatible with the 
good .things of this world. The reason of this remark holds with 
respect to wealth in other countries. Provided to profusion with 



394 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

everything they want, the rich look no further than to the gratifica- 
tion of their appetites and paasions, as the means to procure which 
are in their possession, they acknowledge no obligation to the Power 
which first gave, and still preserves the enjoyment of them ; but, 
on the contrary, affect to show their independence, by prostituting 
it to purposes directly contrary to His declared pleasure, and this 
causes that abuse of wealth, which generally mars the blessing, 
and makes the gift of it so dangerous. 



CHAPTER XXIII 

ACCOUNT OP THE MEMBERS OP THE SOCIETY — THE HISTOSY OP THE 
STJPERIOE — THE PABTICtTLAB, QUALIFICATIONS BY WHICH HE 
AEOSE IN LIPB — SUCCESS IN" A PRIVATE INSTANCE ENCOURAGES 
HIM TO TRY HIS TALENTS IN A HIGHER SPHERE, FROM WHICH HE 
SOON DESCENDS WITH DISGRACE — A STRIKING INCONSISTENCY 
OP HIS CHARACTER 

I SEE you desire to have some account of the several members of 
so extraordinary a society. When the great lines which distinguish 
the characters of mankind are marked by virtues, or even by superior 
abilities that dazzle superficial observation by the splendour of 
their effects, and pass for such, however different in the tendency 
of their exertions, the delineation affords pleasure ; but, on the 
contrary, where those lines are all distorted by vice and folly, and 
distinguished from each other only by different modes and degrees 
of them, the contemplation is a pain, and to paint them a task so 
disagreeable, that nothing but an impartial regard to truth could 
make it be undertaken. However, your curiosity shall be gratified. 
As the convent was dedicated to pleasure, you may imagine that 
play was made a part of their entertainment. Contrary, indeed, 
to the scheme of all other parties of pleasure, it was not the first 
object of their meeting, and only served to fill up the intervals 
between other pleasures, which nature, without some respite, could 
not support in such excess. The circulation, however, even in this 
piddling for mere amusement, gave me an opportunity of taking a 
view of all their characters, such of which as contained anything 
worthy of your notice, for you must not expect it from them all, 
I will give you some general sketches of. As the looks of a man are 
generally a comment on his heart, I will place the whole company 
in youx view, as I have done on other occasions, to assist you in 
forming a proper notion of their characters. At the head of the 
table sits the superior^. You see every eye is expressively fixed 
upon him in admiration, at the vivacity, humour, and wit in all he 
says, while, by an art peculiarly happy, he alone seems unconscious 
of his own pre-eminence. These talents which, from the intoxica- 
tion of present applause, are much oftener of prejudice than advan- 
tage to the possessor, by diverting from more solid pursuits, proved 

' Dashwood. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 395 

the foundation of his exalted rank and fortune, because always 
directed by the deepest and most delicate address. The first instance 
m which this address was displayed, was ia his own family. He 
had a distant relation', who had spent his youth iu such busy scenes 
as left not time for his imagination to wander in search of amusement. 
To a miad unaccustomed to be wound up to such a pitch, the 
charnas of a conversation like his were a relaxation irresistibly 
engaging. He insinuated himself insensibly into his favour, and 
by seeming to have nothing in view but his pleasure, led him, as he 
pleased himself, not only into all the lengths of his own hbertinism, 
so as to be a member of this society, when the decline of life, at 
kast, should have_ suggested more serious thoughts, but also at his 
death to reward his complaisance with a much larger portion of his 
fortune than he had any claim to, from consanguinity, or the prefer- 
ence of reason. 

Such success encouraged his ambition to higher attempts. In- 
troduced by the same qualifications to the acquaintance of the 
great, he not only gained their favour by them, but also imposed 
them upon them for abilities of a higher class so far, that being 
secure of his subserviency to their designs, they admitted him to 
a share of their power^. But in this he had deceived himself, as 
well as them ; he found, to their disappointment and his own 
extreme confusion, upon the very first trial of his political talents, 
when^ he showed in the strongest light the difierence between the 
abilities requisite to raise a laugh and rule a nation. He had 
sense enough, however, to see his mistake, before it had involved 
him in any consequences from which he could not recede without 
danger as well as disgrace, and prudently sacrificing his ambition 
to his safety, he turned off all with a laugh, and returned to the 
enjoyment of those pleasures, for which nature seemed to have 
so particularly designed him. Whether that enjoyment is as 
sincere and undisturbed, though, as should appear from his looks 
and conduct, is a point not so certain as you may be apt to imagine. 

The principles on which this society was originally instituted, 
and from which it has never deviated, the professed ridicule of 
moral virtue and religion, should seem to have proceeded from an 
utter disbelief of a Deity, or, at least, a fearless defiance of His 
power ; but, contrary to this, there starts not at his own shadow a 
more abject slave to superstition and all its foolish fears, than he 
was at the time of his instituting it, and still remains. Such an 
inconsistency requires explanation to you, whose notions of life are 
formed solely from rational speculation. 

1 The seventh Earl of Westmorland [A. 1762]. 

"^ Dashwood was Chancellor of the Exchequer in Lord Bute's ministry 
[1762-3]. 



396 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 



CHAPTER XXIV 

CONTINTTATION 01' THB HISTORY OP THE STTPEEIOE — THE INCONSIS- 
TENOY IN HIS CHABAOTBB ACCOUNTED FOB — THE REASON OF HIS 
BEING SENT EARLY TO TBAVEL FOB EDUCATION — POLITICAL 
PRINCIPLES ALL NBOESSABY TO BE ATTENDED TO IN A TUTOR — 
THE METHOD AND EFFECT OF HIS TUTOR'S OABB TO INSTRUCT HIM 
IN RELIGION — A FRIGHTFUL STORY GIVES RISE TO A FRIGHTFUL 
DREAM, WHICH IS INTERRUPTED STILL MORE FRIGHTFULLY — A 
TREMENDOUS APPARITION TERRIFIES HIM INTO A SWOON — ACCOUNT 
OF THE APPARITION 

The political prinoiplea of his family beiag in avowed opposition 
to their sovereign, the earliest care was taken to instil the same 
into him, and the ripeness of his parts and genius flattered them 
with a, promise of his future consequence in the state. For this 
purpose, before reason should have time to be convinced by ex- 
perience of the injustice and danger of such designs, he was sent 
abroad to be educated in a country where every object should 
concur to prejudice him against the laws and constitution of his 
own, and the opportunity of personal intercourse confirm his attach- 
ment to him whose interest he was intended to promote. The 
public conduct of his life has sufficiently shown the success of his 
scheme, as an incidental circumstance in the execution of it will 
also account for the inconsistencies in his private character. 

The religious principles established in the country whither he was 
thus sent for education, and the political ones it was designed he 
should assist to establish at home, were so intimately and essen- 
tially connected, that it was impossible to find a tutor for him suffi- 
ciently attached to the latter to answer the purpose of his family, 
who was not also at least secretly inclined to, even if he did not 
openly profess, the former. But this made no difficulty. Religion 
is, in reality, the thing least thought of, however pompously it 
may be professed in political schemes. They scrupled not, there- 
fore, to commit his tender mind to the influence of such an one, 
regardless what impressions he might make upon it, beside those 
they desired ; an opportunity which he did not fail to take advan- 
tage of. Accordingly, as soon as the tutor and his pupil were 
settled in the place of their destination, the former began his designs 
by displaying on every occasion the excellence and importance of 
the ceremonies and rites of the religion professed there, as the 
objects most likely to strike the levity of youth, always complain- 
ing with a contemptuous concern of the want of such in that of 
his own country ; not choosing to speak more directly at flrst, for 
fear of giving him any alarm. But, artful as this method was, 
he had the disappointment to see it did not succeed so well as he 
could wish. Though, from the manner of his pupil's earliest 
education, it was easy enough to sink his own religion in his opinion, 
yet some circumstances rendered the raising of any other in its 
place a matter of more difficulty than might have been obviously 
apprehended. His natural quickness and turn of ridicule made 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 397 

him see everything in the most disadvantageous light at the first 
glance, at the same time that his dissipation and levity prevented 
iiis attending to the abstruser arguments, often necessary to estab- 
lish the credit of matters of such importance beyond the reach of 
rational doubt ; so that all the pains his tutor was piously taking 
to enlarge his faith, threatened to work the contrary effect, of 
making him an infidel. Alarmed at this, the tutor, whose bigoted 
credulity had swallowed every fiction of superstition, had always 
some miraculous story of a judgment or apparition ready to refute 
the scoffs of his pupil, and confirm the truth of whatever he himself 
advanced. The constant repetition of such tales, which he plainly 
showed his own belief of, insensibly made such an impression on hia 
pupil's imagination, as persuaded him of their possibility at least, 
if he was not absolutely convinced of the truth of everything in 
proof of which they were alleged ; and filled him with fears, for 
which a good foundation had before been laid in the nursery. 

When his mind was thus prepared to catch at every terror, his 
tutor took him one day to see the exhibition of one of those miracles, 
which are said to be wrought at the shrine of a contested saint ^ ; 
and which really weaken the credit of the religion they were devised 
to support. 

The absurdity was too striking to escape his observation. He 
turned it into the most poignant ridicule, in spite of all his tutor's 
pains to defend it ; who, finding that his arguments had no effect, 
had recourse to his usual proof of an apparition, which he dressed 
up in every colour and circumstance of horror, to make it have the 
greater weight. His pupil took not more than usual notice of the 
matter while light and company diverted his thoughts ; but when 
he went to bed, and found himself alone, and in the dark, the whole 
flashed upon him in all its terrors, heightened in every instance 
by the liveliness of his own imagination. 

What he felt in such a situation may easier be conceived than 
expressed. He covered up his head with the clothes ; and lay 
sweating and trembling, till his mind was wearied with dwelling 
on the same thoughts, and he sunk into a kind of slumber. But this 
was far from giving him relief. He was no sooner asleep, than 
imagination, now in her own empire, placed him in the midst of the 
scene which had just before been so elaborately described to him 
by his tutor ; from the contemplation of which he was delivered 
only to suffer still more severely, being awakened by sounds un- 
couth enough to startle, at such a time, the most resolute mind 
unacquainted with them. 

Such a continuation realised all the horrors of his dream. He 
started up ; and turning in the instinctive curiosity of affright to 
that part of the room from whence the sounds still continued to 
come, saw four glaring eyeballs fixed upon him, at the same time 
that a voice distinctly articulated but in a tremendous tone, and 
language which he did not understand thundered directly in his 
ear. 
The darkness, which prevented his seeing the bodies to which 

1 Abbe Paris [Davis's Olio]. 



398 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

those eyea belonged, and his ignorance of the imports of the sounds, 
only added to his fright, by giving room to imagination, not only 
to form the most horrible conceptions of them, bnt also to appre- 
hend them still more horrible than he could conceive. He was not 
able to support such an attack ; but giving one helpless shriek, 
sunk back in a swoon. His tutor, who lay in the next room, and 
had been awakened by the same sounds, but was not so much 
terrified at them, both because his mind was not so well prepared 
for terrors, and that he was acquainted with their cause, heard 
him shriek, and knowing his voice, ran to him, imagining he was 
engaged in a confJict, in which he might want assistance, with the 
oats which he heard in his room ; for, from two of these animals, 
which, finding the window open, had chosen it for the scene of their 
amours, had those dreadful sounds proceeded. 



CHAPTER XXV 

CONTIinjATION : BEHAVIOXJB OF THE TUTOR ON FINDING HIS PUPH. 
IN A SWOON — HE KBCOVBBS ; AND TEERIFIBS HIS TUTOR BY MIS- 
TAKING HIM FOR A SAINT — CHARITY BEGINS AT HOME — THE TUTOR 
SAGACIOUSLY GUESSES AT THE MEANING OF THE MISTAXE ; AND 
PIOUSLY RESOLVES TO IMPROVE IT — THE PUPIL's FULL AND TRUE 
ACCOUNT OF THE APPARITION, WITH THE TUTOR's HONEST ADDITION 
TO IT — HIS REPENTANCE AND CONVERSION — HIS TUTOR MODER- 
ATES HIS ZEAL FOR WEIGHTY REASONS — HE RELAPSES ; AND HIS 
TUTOR, FOR PEIVATB REASONS, DIVULGES THE WHOLE AFFAIR — 
THE METHOD HE TOOK TO INVALIDATE THE STORY. 

You may judge how he was affected at seeing the person upon whom 
all his hopes of wealth and preferment were founded, in such a 
situation. Awkward at the best, he now knew not how to attempt 
giving him any assistance, nor had even the presence of mind to 
call any one who could, so great was his embarrassment and con- 
fusion. Nature, however, soon dehvered him from his distress, 
and restored his hopes, by the recovery of his pupil. 

As soon as he came a little to himself, he stared wildly roimd him 
for some moments ; and then, fixing his eyes upon his tutor, who 
still stood gaping in amazement at him, he mistook him, from his 
being in his shirt, for the saint that ran in his head — ^his imagination 
still continuing the former scene — and holding up his hands in a 
suppliant posture, as he lay trembling on his back, ' Oh, mercy, 
gracious saint ' ! said he. ' Have mercy on my youth ! never will 
I again presume to ridicule any of the sacred rites of religion ! 
never will I admit a doubt of anything it commands me to believe ! 
Oh, mercy ! mercy ' ! — Saying which words he fainted away 
again. 

This address, one word of which the tutor did not understand, 
threw him into a fright almost as great as that of his pupil. He 
stood for some time stupefied by astonishment, till the cold reminding 
him that he was in his shirt, care for his own health conquered 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 399 

every other concern, and made him go to put on his clothes, 
before he attempted to do anything for the other. While he was 
dressing himself, he considered what his pupil had said with rather 
more attention than his fear had permitted him before.; and re- 
collecting the subject of their conversation the preceding evening, 
concluded that Heaven had made use of some supernatural means 
to subdue his infidelity, the impression of which remaining still 
upon his mind, had occasioned his mistaking him, in the manner 
he did, for a saint — for that he should be terrified to that degree 
by the screaming of the cats never came into his head — and piously 
resolved to contribute his assistance to the deception, by taking 
no notice that he had been with him before, or even denying it, 
if he saw occasion. With this intention he returned to his pupil, 
determined, though, not to disclose his suspicion, till the other 
should make some discovery to direct him more certainly how to 
proceed. 

His pupil, who was just come to himself, knew him directly, 
now he was dressed, and catching his hand eagerly, as soon as he 
came within his reach, ' Oh, my dearest, my best friend ' ! said he, 
pressing it to his lips ; ' what have I suffered since I saw you ? 
How dearly have I paid for that profaneness and infidelity for 
which you have so often reproved me, with pious and paternal 
care. But never will I be guilty of the like again. I resign myself 
implicitly to your direction ; and will, from this hour, believe 
everything you require me '. 

His tutor, after giving him some spiritual comfort, and encourag- 
ing his perseverance in this pious resolution, desired to know what 
had been the happy occasion of it ; to which the other answered, 
that some little time after he went to bed, the room was suddenly 
enlightened in a manner not to be described, when the apparition 
of which he had given him an account the evening before, stood 
before him, wrapped in blue flames, and breathing smoke and 
sulphur ; and calling to him in a voice that appalled his soul, 
denounced Heaven's vengeance against his infidelity, which he was 
just going to put ia execution, when the holy saint, whose miracles 
he had so impiously turned into ridicule, appeared all robed in 
white, and circled round with glory ; and interposing between him 
and the spectre, the latter gave a shriek that shook the room, and 
then vanished in a flame of fire ; upon which the saint turned to 
him with a look ineffably benign, and exhorting him to repentance, 
gave him his benediction, and disappeared. 

Ready as his tutor was to believe everything that exceeded belief, 
when alleged in the cause of religion, the circumstance of himself 
having been mistaken for a saint staggered his faith in all the rest, 
and made him for once justly conclude, that the whole miracle 
was no more than a fiction of that fear with which the screaming 
of the oats struck him in his sleep ; for he now plainly traced the 
effect of their voices. However, far from undeceiving him, he 
improved upon the thought ; and, as soon as his pupil concluded 
his tale, with a grave face and solemn air, added a sequel to it, of 
equal truth, but dictated by a very different degree of veracity ; 
the former being deceived himself, and having eked out the illusions 



400 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

of his fear, as distracted imagination suggested to him ; whereas 
the latter aggravated those illusions by untruths premeditately 
devised to confirm that deception. He said that, grieved at the 
danger with which an unhappy prejudice of education threatened 
the spiritual safety of one so dear to him, instead of lying down 
to rest, he had fallen upon his knees, and poured out his soul in 
prayer and supplication to Heaven, to enlighten his pupil's mind, 
and convince him of his errors ; in which holy exercise he had con- 
tinued ever since till this moment, when, in the impulse of a per- 
suasion, which he now perceived to have been divinely inspired, 
that his prayers were heard, he came to satisfy himself of the reality 
of so miraculous an event ; for which he begged him to join in 
returning immediate thanks to Heaven, and the blessed saint who 
had wrought it. 

This completed the deception of his pupil, so far as to make him 
believe the truth of some parts of his own tale, which he was not 
altogether so certain of before. He arose, therefore, and reconcil- 
ing himself to the faith of his tutor, by the strongest and most full 
professions, dedicated the remainder of the night with him to 
prayer and pious conversation. 

In the first heat of his devotion, he was for making the whole 
affair public, and openly joining himself to that religion, whose 
truth was thus confirmed to him. But his tutor moderated the 
fervency of his zeal, sensible that such a step would not only defeat 
the political designs of his friends, which must be carried on under 
a mask, and in whose success his own wishes were most warmly 
interested ; but also overturn his own hopes of being well rewarded 
for the care of his education, by a church Uving of great revenue, 
that was in the gift of one of his pupil's relations, who had promised 
it to him, as soon as the incumbent, then sinking under all the in- 
firmities of extreme old age, should die ; for his religious principles 
never interfered with his interest. Tor these most weighty reasons, 
though, as you may imagine, he communicated only the former, 
he prevailed upon his convert to be content with the private practice, 
without the profession of his new faith, till he should, in the fulness 
of time, be so happy as to contribute his assistance to the great 
event, which should establish it in his own country. 

Such an argument could not fail of effect upon one who found 
the fervour of his devotion cool so fast, that in a few days the whole 
matter was entirely reversed, and his practice as libertine as ever ; 
though fear of seeing any more spectres restrained his professions 
within more decent bounds. For, so deeply was the dread of them 
imprinted on his mind, that to this day he dares not to sleep by 
himself, or be a moment alone in the dark ; though his tutor, soon 
after his ret\im home, divulged the whole affair, as far as it affected 
not himself, with the addition of many circumstances, if possible, 
still more contemptibly ridiculous than the true, to revenge his 
procuring the living for one of his raking companions, and ingratiate 
himself with a particular enemy of his, from whom he expected a 
recompense for so pleasing a piece of scandal ; to invalidate which 
was one of his pupil's motives for instituting this society. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 401 



CHAPTER XXVI 

AOCOtTNT OF THE MEMBERS, CONTINUED : HISTOEY OF ONE WHO 
arCTRNED LIBERTINE IN SPBCITLATIOlir, AFTER HE HAD LOST THE 
POWER OF BEING SO IN PRACTICE — HOW THIS HAPPENED ; THE 
FORCE OF LITBRABT VANITY ; AND THE REASON WHY IT 13 
STRONGER THAN ANT OTHER — INSTANCES OF THE ADVANTAGES 
REAPED FROM ENCOURAGING GENIUS — A NEW METHOD OF FLATTERY 
IS SUCCESSFUL WHERE ALL OTHERS HAD FAILED ; AND BY A 
MASTER-STROKE MAKES VANITY GAIN A SIGNAL TRIUMPH OVER 
VIRTUE 

At the riglit hand of the superior you see one ', whose example 
should be a warning to mankind never to be off their guard against 
the allurements of vice, while there is any possibility, however 
remote and improbable, of their falling into it. While youth might 
have been pleaded in excuse of passion ; and the busy application 
of manhood extenuated any speculative errors in opinion, his 
conduct had been regulated by the strictest regard to the prin- 
ciples of moral virtue, and the precepts of religion. But in the 
evening of his days, when all that heat and hurry gave place to 
cool reflection, and the serenity of the prospect more than com- 
pensates for its approaching close, the whole scene was wretchedly 
reversed, and his setting sun overcast with a cloud of vices most 
blameable in any stage of life, but aggravated ten thousandfold in 
his, to which they were unnatural. 

I have told you before that vanity was the cause of a fall so 
reproachful to humanity ; the manner, though, of its operating 
upon one who seemed to be removed so far beyond its reach is 
worthy of attention. In no instance is the power of vanity so 
tyrannically exerted over the human heart as when it arises from 
an opinion of literary merit. The reason is obvious. Real learn- 
ing is the most efEectual check to vanity, as it shows the instability 
of its foundation. When, therefore, anything that makes pretence, 
however falsely, to that name, seems to administer to its support, 
it instantly looks upon itself as above control. Though early 
engagement in the active scenes of his country's service had pre- 
vented his making any great proficiency in the more abstruse 
pursuits of speculation, his natural inclination to them, directed 
by a taste formed by the best education, made him embrace all 
opportunities of patronising every advance in science, and improve- 
ment in the finer arts. The liberality with which he indulged his 
inclination soon marked him out to the attacks of every needy 

' George Bubb Dodington, Lord Melcombe, the most servile place- 
hunter of his day. Throughout the reigns of the first two Georges his 
sole ambition was to serve whichever party happened to be uppermost ; 
and his continual shuffling disgusted all parties alike. He got a peerage 
from Bute in 1761, and died next year. He wrote verses and posed as 
a Maecenas, Paul Whitehead being one of his hangers-ou. Browning 
holds him up as one of the worst of the selfish statesmen of the eight- 
eenth century, in Parleyings with Certain People- 

2c 



402 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

adventurer in the trade of letters. Projectors consulted him on 
their schemes. Poets submitted their works to his correction. 
His virtues, among which munificence was never forgot, were the 
inexhausted theme of panegyric ; and dedications declared to the 
world his abilities and knowledge. Adulation so gross was an 
affront to reason. He rejected, with just contempt, the praises 
to which he knew himself not entitled ; and was superior to the 
flattery which compassion for the flatterer often made him seem 
to pay for. Happy had he always preserved the same delicacy. 

Among the crowds of parasites who lay in wait thus for his favour, 
was a person ^ whom idleness seduced to prefer this abject state 
of dependence to the pursuit of a Uberal profession, which he had 
been bred to : a baseness aggravated by his possessing every qualifi- 
cation necessary to have made him eminent in any state. This man, 
who had thoroughly studied the human heart, soon saw that any 
direct attack upon his patron would prove ineffectual. He, there- 
fore, struck out a new scheme, the depth of which secured it from 
detection, though, at the same time, the difficulty of carrying it 
into execution would have discouraged anyone less anxious for 
success, and less confident of his own abilities. He disguised the 
strongest flattery under the mask of the most cynical bluntness 
and candour ; and, instead of praising all he did, and echoing in 
assent every word he spoke, he missed no occasion of differing in 
opinion with him, declaring he thought that being, who could 
debase the dignity of his nature so far as to give up his judgment 
to another, from any other motive than rational conviction, im- 
worthy of the name of man. 

A behaviour so singular necessarily attracted the notice of hia 
patron, as the manner in which it was carried on soon won hia 
favour : for in all the debates of any moment, which this champion 
for liberty of thought held with him, he managed with such delicate 
art, as to lead him — his patron — to confute him, though frequently 
contrary to the opinion with which he had originally set out. In 
trifles indeed, where being foiled could reflect no disgrace, he pro- 
ceeded not with that caution, but often gained a victory, for which 
he laughed at himself when it was won. But with others he ob- 
served not such moderation. Be the subject what it would, he 
exerted all his powers — and great as I have said they were — till 
he silenced, at least, if he could not convince, his adversary, over 
whom he then triumphed in all the insolence of superiority. 

Such a method could not fail of success. His patron, sure of 
coming off with honour, sought every opportunity of entering into 
debate with him, and contracted an esteem for one who, as he 
thought, had thus discovered to him his own abilities, while every 
one else declined entering into a contest, which always involved 

^ Dr Thompson [Davis's Olio], the subject of Paul Whitehead's 
Epistle to Dr Tliompson. ' A physician of dissolute habits, who had 
quarrelled with the treatment adopted by the prince's {i.e. Frederick 
Prince of Wales) physicians in his last illness, and whom Whitehead, 
from whatever motive, strives to justify by indiscriminate abuse of 
the "college"'. He was one of the 'monks' of Medmenham. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 403 

them in disgrace. Encouraged by this success, he boldly ven- 
tured upon a stroke, the event of which was to decide his hopes. 
In gratification to his own depraved taste, he had written a treatise, 
in which the grossest libertinism was set in so advantageous and 
alluring a light, and the arguments against it evaded with so much 
plausibility and true wit, as were almost sufficient to put virtue 
out of countenance, and debauch its sincerest votaries. The con- 
tradiction between such principles and the practice of his patron, 
through his whole life, would have deterred any one less enter- 
prising and experienced in the weaknesses of human nature from 
disclosing them ; but he had lately made some discoveries, which 
emboldened him even to push his designs much further than owning 
himself the author of that book. 

While the vigour of life had enabled his patron to persist in busier 
pursuits, he had despised the flattery paid to his Uterary merits ; 
but as soon as the infirmities of age rendered him unfit for such 
employment, he, with a natural partiality, gave the preference to 
that pre-eminence which he thought still within his reach, and 
affected to slight all fame that was not founded on the nobler labours 
of the mind. This was a sufficient direction to the parasite. He 
immediately showed his book, with a mysterious air, to several of 
his patron's friends, giving them broad hints at the same time, 
but under the seal of secrecy, that he was the author of it. There 
is no way so effectual as this to spread any story. One whispered 
it to another, till, in a few days, the whole town was in the secret. 

The hints and allusions which were every hour thrown out to 
the patron on this occasion perplexed him not a little, as he knew 
not what they meant. A secret, though in the possession of so 
many, could not possibly remain long such to him. One of his 
acquaintances, provoked at the seeming affectation of his not 
imderstanding his hints, told him the whole affair. 

Much as he was surprised at the account, vanity would not let 
him suppress it by a direct negative, as the book was mentioned 
in terms of the highest praise. He answered with the coy evasions 
of modesty, the most effectual affirmation, and shifted off any 
further discussion of the subject, till he should be better informed. 
Accordingly, the moment his friend left him, he sent for the author 
of the report, and charging him with it, desired to see the perform- 
ance which he had done him the honour to father upon him. The 
parasite, who took his cue from the looks of his patron, was far from 
denying the charge. He presented him the book without hesita- 
tion, saying, with his usual bluntness, that if it was not actually 
written by him, it was literally written from him, being nothing but 
what he had frequently said on those subjects, and, therefore, 
might without any injustice be asserted to be his. 

The advantageous manner in which the patron had heard the 
book spoken of prevented his making any reply, till he should have 
read it, when he was so struck with the various beauties of it, that 
vanity subdued all his virtue, and deprived him of the power of 
denying it. 

' If . the sentiments are mine ', said he, blushing at his own 
baseness as he spoke, ' I am obliged to you for placing them in so 



404 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

advantageous a ligkt, and think I ought to decline sharing in an 
honour, so much of which belongs to another '. 

Such a repulse was no way discouraging. The parasite repeated 
his assertion that the whole was genuinely his, both in words and 
sentiments, as indeed, he knew not any other whose they could 
be ; and insisting that he had no more merit in the affair than 
barely that of writing them down, a liberty for which he begged 
pardon, appealed to his former conduct to acquit him of so mean 
a piece of flattery, as giving to another the honour of a work which 
had not its equal. 

It is not difficult to persuade a willing mind. The patron could 
no longer deny what was so clearly proved, and what his own 
conscience bore testimony to, against his false modesty. All that 
remained was to act in such a manner that his practice should not 
contradict this declaration of his principles, and so raise a doubt 
of their authenticity. But after having made the first step, he 
found no difficulty in this. He directly changed the whole tenor 
of his life. He laughed at morality, ridiculed religion, and pro- 
fessed vices he was unable to practice, and lastly, to complete 
his character, procured admission into this society, which, as I 
said, was the proof of every polite accomplishment and qualifica- 
tion, where he nods, as you see, over the grave, as insensible to 
the mirth and pleasures enjoyed by his companions as of the 
despicableness and danger of his own situation. 

As for his parasite, his end was gained. Prom that moment, he 
commanded him as he pleased, sharing in the enjoyment of his 
fortune while he lived, and sure of such a portion of it if he sur- 
vived him as should sufficiently supply his appetites, the only use 
for which he desired a fortune. 



CHAPTER XXVII 

CKRYSAL CONTINUES THE ACCOUNT OT THE MEMBERS — THE HISTOETT 
OF A BEMAEKABLB PERSON IS GIVEN FOB A BBMAEKABLE EBASON 
— HIS PLBAStTBES BRING HIM INTO DISTBESS, PROM WHICH HE 
EXTRICATES HIMSELF BY MAKING THEM SUBSERVIENT TO HIS 
INTEREST, AND GETS INTO A GOOD KEEPING — NOT CONTENT WITH 
THE MOTHER, HE CASTS HIS EYE UPON THE DAUGHTER ALSO, BUT 
IS DISAPPOINTED, AND FORCED TO TAKE UP WITH A SHARE OF 
HER FORTUNE, FOB PROCURING HER IN MARRIAGE FOB ANOTHER 
— HE EBSOLVES TO BE A GREAT MAN, AND FOR THAT PUBPOSE, 
BBEAK3 WITH HIS KEEPEB 

One of the most specious arguments alleged against the obligation 
to virtue, is the success that is often observed to attend the viola- 
tion of it, in the general pursuits of the world. Of this you see the 
strongest instance which this age has afforded, in that man ^ who 
sits at the left hand of the superior, wrapped up in the conscious- 

1 Henry Fox (afterwards Lord Holland) [see Introduction]. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 405 

nesB of hia own importance, and smiling contemptuously at the 
company around him, while they believe he is joining in their 
mirth. 

A particular account of his life would lead into too great a length. 
It would seem a satire on mankind, rather than a detail of the 
actions of one man. However, as a short sketch of it may be of 
advantage, by unveiling this mystery in the conduct of Heaven, 
and proving the insufficiency of the highest prosperity to confer 
happiness, even in the hour of attainment, when that prosperity 
is not founded in and procured by virtue, I will just run over the 
great heads of his story, with that brevity which the disagree- 
ableness of the subject naturally dictates. 

The opening of his life gave no prospect of his exalted station. 
Pleasure in every licentious excess soon dissipated a small patri- 
mony, and he was hardly entered into man's estate when want, 
of his own earning, began to stare him in the face. The peculiar 
cast of a man's mind is in nothing more strongly shown than in the 
expedients he has recourse to, in order to extricate himself from 
difficulties. Instead of quitting the vices which had brought him 
into this embarrassment, he resolved, on the first alarm, to build 
his hopes of fortune on them, by pursuing them in a different 
manner. Experienced in all the mysteries of intrigue, he knew that 
age and deformity will purchase pleasures, for which youth and 
beauty expect to be flattered, if not even paid. Unrestrained, 
therefore, by any scruples of honour or conscience, he directly 
determined to fix upon some wealthy female of the former class, 
and never doubted making her passion repay him manifold what 
he had expended on the gratification of his own. This hopeful 
scheme was no sooner formed than carried into execution. As his 
character gained him easy access to all such as were proper for his 
purpose, he immediately singled out an old dowager^, in whose 
disposal the dotage of a djong husband had left the accumulated 
wealth of several ages of successful industry. Such a quarry en- 
gaged all his attention in the pursuit. He paid his addresses to 
her, though destitute of everything that could raise natural desire, 
with so much assiduity and warmth, that she readily received him 
into her good graces, and in return for the pleasure she found in 
his conversation, lavished her fortune upon him with a profusion 
that even exceeded his hopes. 

Erom the principle on which he set out, it may be judged that he 
did not neglect to improve such an opportunity of repairing his 
broken fortune, and laying up a fund for a future day, out of the 
overflowings of her untimely fondness. But, unbounded as her 
generosity was, he was far from being content, while anythiUjg 
further remained possible to be got from her. Beside the great 
wealth which was directly in her power, a very large estate was by 
family settlements to descend to an only daughter, whom she had 

' Mrs Homer. Fox met this woman on the continent whilst he was 
fleeing from his creditors, and got bo much out of her that he was able 
to return in a year or two, and enter Parliament as member for Hiudon 
in 1735. 



406 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

by her husband. Aa soon, therefore, as her modest lover had got 
possession of the former, his heart yearned for the latter also, 
with as much greediness as if his wants were only increased by his 
acquisitions. But, though he was seldom long at a loss for means 
to accomplish anything he had in view, as he was under no restraint 
from principle in the choice of them, there was an obstacle in his 
way here, which all the fertility of his genius could not surmount. 
This was his connection with the mother, the nature of which he 
well knew would never let her consent to a scheme destructive of 
itself ; for he had no fear of her making opposition, from motives 
of honour or virtue, to anything that dad not clash with that, as 
he found none in his own conscience even to this, though contrary 
to the iirst principles of nature. Since he could not, therefore, 
get the daughter's whole fortune by marrying her, he resolved to 
exert his influence on her mother, to give her to some person of his 
choosing, who should divide it with him, as a recompense for making 
the match. For this purpose he pitched upon a near relation ^ of 
his own, who readily gave in to his scheme, though possessed him- 
self of a fortune that placed him above the necessity of such mean- 
ness. The consent of the guardian mother, as he foresaw, was 
easily obtained. She was happy in having such an opportunity of 
proving her regard for him, as well as of removing her daughter 
out of his reach, his attention to whom, while his first project was 
in his head, had not escaped her jealous notice. 

His share of the prize, added to his other gains, made him now 
a man of considerable fortune, and fired him with an ambition of 
making a considerable figure in the state. To accomplish this, the 
natural turn of his mind suggested it to him to marry into some 
family, the interest and splendour of which might drown the ob- 
scurity of his own original, and assist his hopes. Nor did he appre- 
hend any opposition to this scheme from the same quarter that had 
defeated the former. He had now gotten from her all that she had 
to give, and the same principle that prompted him to be the hired 
drudge of her loose desires made him find no scruple to leave her 
service, when she was no longer able to pay the wages of it. 

Nothing is easier than to make matter for dispute. On her 
expressing her resentment, with the haughtiness which she thought 
the circumstances of the connection between them gave her a right 
to assume, as she had on many occasions before, at something he 
had done with design to provoke her, his sensibility took fire, and, 
in just indignation at treatment so improper for a man of honour 
to submit to, he bound himself by the most dreadful imprecations 
to shake off so intolerable a yoke for ever, and so flung out of her 
presence. 

Her surprise at a behaviour so different from what he had ever 
shown before suspended her resentment, and she waited with im- 
patience for a repetition of the blandishments with which he had 
been accustomed to soothe her anger. But, what was her astonish- 
ment to find that, instead of making any advances of the kind, 
he had actually withdrawn himself from her house. This alarmed 

1 Fox's elder brother, Stephen Fox, Lord Ilchester. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 407 

her. In the arrogance of her former superiority, the loss of which 
she was not yet sensible of, she sent him a peremptory summons to 
attend her directly. But her commands had now lost their weight, 
and she received a refusal, the more cutting for being couched in oool 
equivocal politeness. This drew on him an epistolary torrent of 
upbraidings, expostulations, and at last of the most tender en- 
treaties ; but all were equally ineffectual. He pleaded his rash 
vow, lamented the cruel obligation of it, and, as she began to be 
softened by this address, hinted at a sense of religion, and even 
distantly recommended it to her, as the best consolation under the 
crosses and af&iotions of life. 

Such sentiments from him could mean nothing but sneering insult. 
In that light she took them. However, as the nature of the afEair 
made it impossible for her to open her mind too explicitly, she 
resolved to play his own game back upon him, and affect to be 
convinced by arguments of which she hoped to take advantage at 
a proper time, though in a manner very different from his intention, 
in applying them. 



CHAPTER XXVIII 

CONTINUED : HE BEGINS HIS SCHEME SUCCBSSrULLY BY STEALING 
A MAKBIAGE — ^HIS LATE KEEPER MAKES AN ABTEITL DEMAND OP 
ALL THE PKESBNTS SHE HAD GIVEN HIM, WHICH HE ANSWERS AS 
AETFTTLLY — ^HE ADVANCES IN HIS SCHEME, BY STEPS EXACTLY IN 
HIS CHARACTER, AND GETS INTO PAVOtm WITH A GREAT PERSON — 
OHEYSAL MAKES SOME BBMABKS ON THE ORIGIN OT THE AFFEC- 
TIONS OF THE HUMAN MIND, AND THE DIFFERENT MANNER OF 
BREEDING MEN AND HORSES, WITH THE CONSEQUENCE 

While she was pleasing herself with this thought, he had carried 
the most difficult part of his scheme into execution. The passion 
for play, which marks the character of the present age, though it 
really counteracts every social virtue, is yet the means of associating 
all kinds and ranks of people who have, or even appear to have, 
money to play for. At meetings for this purpose, he had found 
means to make an acquaintance with a nobleman \ who was so 
pleased with his conversation, studied designedly to please him, 
that he admitted him to an intimacy in his family, which he knew 
so well how to improve with one of his daughters^, that, in despite 
of the disparity of age and rank, he soon prevailed upon her to 
crown his hopes by a private marriage, as the consent of her family 
could not be expected. As the immediate fortune of the lady 
could not be thought an object of mercenary pursuit, when the first 

* The Duke of Richmond. 

2 Lady Georgina Caroline Lemiox. Fox was forty-one at this date 
(1744). The marriage, in spite of the scandal it created at the time, 
was a singularly happy one. Lady Holland survived her husband only 
a few weeks. 



408 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

emotions of resentment gave place to reflection, hia plea of passion 
was admitted as an excuse for this violation of the sacred laws of 
hospitality, and his wife's father unknowingly completed his design, 
by exerting all his interest, which was very great, to advance him 
in the state. 

The secrecy with which it had been necessary for him to conduct 
this affair, and the rapidity of his success, prevented his late mistress 
from making any attempt to defeat it. As soon, however, as she 
recovered from the first stroke of her astonishment at the news of 
his marriage, she proceeded to put her scheme in execution. Ac- 
cordingly, she sent him compliments of congratulation on this 
happy fruit of his conversion, exhorting him to persevere in it, and 
professed her resolution to imitate his example, and dedicate the 
remainder of her days to the duties of virtue and religion, as a 
proof of which she proposed to begin by restoring to her injured 
daughter as much as possible of the fortune which the confidence of 
her husband had left in her power, and she had unhappily lavished 
in pursuits to the criminal nature of which he had opened her 
eyes. 

As all that was not dissipated beyond recovery was what she had 
given to him, and her restoring it, therefore, must depend on his 
making a restitution to her first, he was not a moment at a loss 
for the drift of this extraordinary instance of penitence, nor how 
to treat the account of it. He immediately returned her an answer, 
congratulating her in his turn, with sincerity equal to her own, 
on her pious resolutions, the intention of which, he said, would 
make amends for the impossibility of carrying them into execution 
any farther than by stinting herself to the indispensable necessaries 
of life, and laying up the rest of her large income to supply the place 
of the sums she had expended. 

Such an answer necessarily drew on an explanation, and of 
course a demand of the several presents she had made him in the 
course of their dalliance, and knew he had laid up, as he lived at 
her expense all the time. This was no more than he expected. 
He replied, therefore, without being in the least disconcerted, that 
he looked upon everything he had received from her not as presents, 
but payment for the time he had devoted to attending upon her, 
and for that reason thought it inconsistent with that regard for 
justice which is inseparable from true piety, for her to demand such 
a restitution, especially aa she must be sensible that he could not 
now make it, without doing wrong to his wife, who had an undoubted 
property in everything that belonged to him, and concluded with 
desiring that a correspondence, which might be misunderstood, 
and so disturb his connubial happiness, might be dropped between 
them. 

This sufficiently explained the motives of his conduct, and the 
despicable situation which she had brought herself to. However, 
she was obliged to acquiesce with the best grace she could, without 
even the poor satisfaction of revenge, for he had taken care to 
insert in every paragraph of his letters such anecdotes of the con- 
nection that had been between them, that it was impossible for 
her to show them, in order to expose him, without exposing herself 



ADVENTURES OF A OVINE A 409 

at the same time, to the contempt and detestation of the world. 
From this time, therefore, all intercourse beyond that of common 
civility was broken off between them, though some consequences 
of their former connection, which happened after her death, make 
one of the most striking parts of his story, as shall be observed in 
the proper place. 

The first essays of a man's disposition indicate the rule by which 
his whole life will be conducted. The interest of the family into 
which he had thus stolen had no sooner raised him to some degree 
of power, than he aspired to the highest, to attain which he resolved 
to pursue a method exactly in his character. This was to ingratiate 
himself, he regarded not by what means, with one of the first person- 
ages' in the state, whose interest he meant to make use of, as long as it 
could serve him, and then fly in his face to show his independence. 
Nature had never endowed a man with qualifications fitter for such 
a purpose. He was ever3rthing to every man. The gay were struck 
with his wit, the grave with his solidity, while an appearance of 
candour and sincerity, that lulled suspicion to sleep, won the con- 
fidence of all with whom he conversed, all which powers of pleasing 
were, by a servility of disposition, derived, perhaps, from a servile 
birth, prostituted to the humour of those whom he desired to please, 
however contrary to his own. 

I see your curiosity at my saying that the servility of his dis- 
position might perhaps be derived from a servile birth. You want 
to have the origin of the affections of the human soul explained, 
whether they are imprinted on it, at its first emanation, from the 
source of all existence, or received by traduction from the immediate 
parents of the body, or only caused by the casual operation of 
external objects. But this, as I have said in other cases, is a 
difficulty that I am not at liberty to solve, as the question is not yet 
determined by the learned, though much ingenious reasoning has 
been displayed on every side of it. This only I shall say, that the 
practice of mankind seems to contradict the second of these opinions 
who show no regard to the dispositions of those on whom they 
propagate their own species, though they trace back the pedigree 
of a dog or a horse for many generations, for fear of any fault in 
the breed, the reason you may perhaps imagine why the brutes 
fed with such care are found so much seldomer to degenerate than 
the offspring of the greatest men. 

1 The Duke of Cumberland. During the debates on the Begency Bill 
jn 1751, Fox made an indignant defence of his patron against an attack 
by Pitt, Fox's colleague in the government, and left the house without 
voting. 



410 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 



CHAPTER XXIX 

CONTINUED : HE PBACTISBS A StrCCBSSFtTL METHOD FOR GAINING 
THE CONPIDBNCB OF HIS NEW PATKON, WHICH HB TOBNS TO GOOD 
ACCOrrNT — HISTOBY OP THE LOVER WHO SITOCEBDED HIM IN THE 
GOOD GRACES OP HIS LATB KEEPER — ^HE STRIVES TO PREVENT HIS 
TAKING ADVANTAGE OP HIS INPLTTBNCE OVER HER, AND PINDINQ 
HE PAILS IN THAT, POOLS HIM INTO DISTRESS, WHICH BRINGS HIS 
LIPB IN HIS POWER — HE SLIGHTS MANY MOTIVES, WHICH MIGHT 
HAVE HAD WEIGHT WITH OTHERS, AND TAKES ADVANTAGE OP THE 
OPPORTUNITY TO GET BID OF HIM AND ALL PURTHBR TROUBLE 
ABOUT HIM — HB CONTINUES TO DUPE HIM TILL THE LAST MOMENT, 
WHEN HIS EYES ABB OPENED, AND ALL COMES OUT 

As soon as he had insinuated himself into the pleasurable liking 
of his designed patron, by an unwearied exertion of all his powers 
of pleasing, he directly proceeded, with the nicest art, to improve 
that liking into an important confidence. He watched his every 
action, word, and look, till he discovered the peculiar turn of his 
mind, to which he accommodated his own so implicitly, that the 
very faculties of his soul seemed to move only by the other's will. 
They who are above deceit themselves, suspect it not in others. 
That self-love, which is inseparable from humanity, was easily 
imposed upon by such art. His patron liked himself in him, and 
insensibly came to think all reserve unnecessary with one whose 
soul appeared to be only the shadow of his own. This soon gave 
him real consequence, as the numbers whom interest or inclination 
attached to his patron found it necessary to take the lead from 
him, and enabled him to grasp at every opportunity of engrossing 
power, and acquiring wealth to supply those pleasures which he 
had quitted only from necessity, and returned to again the moment 
he had the means of obtaining them. But all this torrent of success 
was not able to divert his attention for a moment from the smallest 
matter in which his avarice was concerned, as he gave the strongest 
proof in the following affair, to explain which I must look back 
to the woman whose lavish fondness first raised his fortune, as it 
happened in consequence of his connection with her, though some 
considerable time after her death. 

It is observed that habitual indulgence continues the passions 
proper to youth after the fire that first supplied them is exhausted, 
and the end for which they were implanted by nature become 
impossible. Old as this woman was when our hero deserted her, 
and to appearance as incapable of feeling as raising desire, she had 
BO long accustomed herself to the gratification of every sensual 
appetite, that she could not bear to live without a lover. The 
difficulty was, how to fix upon a proper object, for as interest was 
her only attraction, the first glances must necessarily come from her, 
and then her prodigality to her last had put it out of her power 
to make it worth the while of such another as she might like to 
supply his place. Precluded thus from much delicacy in her choice. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 411 

necessity directed her to one of her domestics^, sometliing in whose 
circumstances pointed him out more particularly to her notice. 

There is not a more despicable instance of vanity than being 
ashamed of the oonnectiona of nature, because of poverty, when 
that poverty is not the efiect of vice. A far distant female relation 
had from this vanity bequeathed to her a very considerable fortune, 
to which this man should have been heir, had not the lowness of his 
condition, a motive sufficient to have influenced a generous heart 
in his favour, made her think it would be a disgrace to her to be 
succeeded by him, for which reason she wantonly deprived him of 
the inheritance of his ancestors, to give it to one who did not want 
it. Dispirited by such unnatural injustice, for which the law 
afforded no redress, he was no longer able to pursue the industry 
that had hitherto been his support, and sunk into such distress, 
that his despair made him at length throw himself at the feet of 
her who enjoyed hia spoils, to beg relief. 

This happened critically at the time when her inclinations for 
a new lover began to get the better of her grief for the loss of the 
last. Softened by what she herself so lately felt, she pitied his 
distress, and as all the tenderer passions are allied, that pity was 
soon warmed into such love as she was capable of feeling. Ac- 
cordingly, as she had taken him into her family on his first applica- 
tion, she now entrusted him with the management of her affairs, 
to give colour for the further intimacy she had in view. The 
consequence was natural. He readily took hints too plain to be 
overlooked, and she kept up his assiduity in her service, by some 
presents in hand, and grants of more, charging most of them, indeed, 
on the inheritance of his ancestors, which she had settled upon his 
predecessor in her favour after her death, till when they were not 
to take place or be discovered, to avoid his reproaches, as well as 
those of her daughter and her husband for such a repetition of her 
former follies, and because she did not choose to straiten her own 
circumstances by the immediate payment of them. But these 
wages of vice, however welcome in his present indigence, proved 
fatal to him in the end. 

The hero of my tale, who saw the rise of this new favourite, and 
knew from experience on what it must be founded, though she 
affected to attribute her notice of him to gratitude to his relations, 
and retributory justice to himself, gave him a genteel and profitable 
employment ^ under one of the many which he himself enjoyed in 

^ John Ayliffe, at one time steward in the Jlohester family. In his 
trial he made damaging insinuations against his patron. Lord Holland, 
who is said to have held out hopes of a pardon if he would not reveal 
certain transactions. 

^ Fox gave Ayliffe the office of commissary of the musters, wliioh 
carried with it very considerable emoluments. But these could not 
satisfy his reckless extravagance, and he involved himself in a course 
of felonious practices that brought him to the gallows. He was popu- 
larly believed to be an injured man. ChuiohiU repeatedly alludes to 
him as the victim and scapegoat of Fox, and was prevented only by 
death from writing an elegy on his fate. •' Dost thou ', he says to 
Fox in the Author. 



412 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

the state, professedly in compliment to her, but really to attach 
him to his own interest, and prevent his exerting his influence on 
her, to obtain such grants as beforementioned, for the turn of his 
own mind made him suspect everything that was possible, and 
such is the partiality of man to himself, that he who has been 
ungrateful to all marJdnd will yet expect gratitude from others. 

Proud of this preferment, which raised his rank in life, and de- 
pending on the professions of friendship and promises which his 
new friend liberally made him, he thought proper at her death 
not only not to claim her grants for the present, to avoid breaking 
with him, as he knew must be the consequence, but also to give up to 
him a particular gift, part of his own alienated inheritance, which 
he had received publicly from her, as a reward for his services 
and trust to his honour for an equivalent return. But that return, 
when at length it was made, was as far from being equivalent as 
his promises were from performance, nothiag being more contrary 
to his intentions than to support his claims to those grants of which 
he had gotten notice, and judged from his own heart the reason of 
their being concealed. He continued, therefore, to feed him with 
promises, which led his vanity into expense, and encouraged him 
to embark in schemes that he had not a fund to execute, till he 
fell into distresses, to extricate himself from which he had recourse 
to means ^ that laid his life at the mercy of this his supposed friend. 

There are some crimes, the consequences of which are so dangerous, 
that no punishment can be too severe to deter from them. One 
of the worst of these is imitating a man's signature, with a design 
to deceive. It perpetuates the violation of truth, undermines the 
security of innocence, and breaks that confidence which is indis- 
pensably necessary to carry on the concerns of life. But, though 
no circumstance can, in a legal sense, extenuate the heinousness of 
this crime, there were some, in this particular instance, which would 
have deterred any other man from the prosecution of it. It had 
been committed not with an intention of doing injustice to him 
or any other, but to remedy for a time his injustice, by raising 
apparently the value of the return he had made for the gift of 
their common benefactress, as I have before observed, nearer to 
an equality with it, in order to procure present relief from distress, 
of which he had been, in so many senses, the cause. But all these 
considerations were of no weight with him, when put in competi- 
tion with the convenience of getting rid of one whom he doubly 
hated, for being privy to his iniquities, and interfering with his 
interest. He hesitated not a moment, therefore, to make use of an 

' Dost thou contrive some blacker deed of shame. 
Something which nature shudders but to name. 
Something which makes the soul of man retreat. 
And the life-blood run backward to her seat ? 
Dost thou contrive, for some base private end. 
Some selfish view, to hang a trusting friend. 
To lure him on, e'en to his parting breath. 
And promise life to work him surer death 1 — Lines 327-334. 

' Forging Lord Holland's name to a lease. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 413 

opportunity offered beyond his hopes, and sacrifice him, under the 
specious appearance of paying obedience to the laws. 

In this it was necessary for him to act with the deepest dissimula- 
tion, to accomplish his designs in its full extent. He professed pity 
for his misfortunes, and, while he corrupted all in whom the wretch 
placed confidence, to betray him, managed so as to seem to be 
compelled by law to appear against him, though he might with the 
greatest ease have avoided it, and buried the whole in silence. 
Nor did he stop here. His malice seemed to pursue him even 
beyond the grave, for instead of permitting him to prepare in peace 
for the approach of fate, he buoyed him up with the hopes of a 
pardon, to earn which the deluded victim subscribed to everything 
dictated to him to blacken his own character, and make void the 
grants which he had purchased at so dear a rate. And in this 
infatuation he was kept to the last moment, to prevent his recanting, 
for which purpose his nearest friends, and all who might have im- 
deceived him and administered comfort to his distress in the hour 
of anguish, were barred admittance to him. But his eyes were 
opened on the verge of life, and in that awful moment, when truth 
only is spoken, he revoked everything he had been thus drawn in 
to say, and asserted the validity of the claims which were the cause 
of his ruin, so that the whole scheme, laboured with such deep 
damnation to deceive the world, was defeated^ 

I see the horror with which you are affected at such a scene, 
and shall, therefore, close it with observing, that though he was 
permitted to perpetrate his crimes. Divine Justice prevented his 
reaping the fruits proposed from them ; as, beside the immediate 
price of his blood, it cost him more than he earned by his complicated 
guilt to stop the cries of the widow and orphan, and bribe venal 
defamation to silence when it was too late, and the mystery of his 
wickedness was made known to the world. 

1 Aylifie was hanged at Tyburn in 1759. Lord Holland had treated 
him with great kindness during his imprisonment and trial, supplying 
him with necessaries, and pajnng the prison dues. He also sent his 
own physician to attend him, and saved him from the indignity of 
being ironed by providing him with a keeper. He also agreed to the 
postponement of the trial, and allowed two confessions of forgery by 
Ayliffe to be suppressed. CJhrysal gives the worst possible interpretation 
of his motives. 



414 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 



CHAPTER XXX 

CONTINtTED : A VIEW OP HIS POLITICAL OHAKACTEE INTEODITCES A 
MAXIM NOT SUTMCIBNTLY ATTENDED TO — HE PAILS IN A GREAT 
STEOKE, AND MAKES SO MANY WRONG ONES, THAT HE IS KICKBD 
OUT OP POWBE, AND POECBD TO BE CONTENT WITH PEOFIT, WHICH 
HE PtTESTTES THBOFGH THICK AND THIN — AN UNHAPPY EVENT 
GIVES HIM AN OPPORTUNITY OP SHOWING HIS INGBATITUDE TO 
HIS LATE PATEON, ON THE MEEIT OP WHICH HE EISES TO HIGHBB 
POWEE THAN EVEE, WHICH HE WISELY BXEETS BEHIND THE 
CUETAIN, AND LEAVES HIS TOOLS TO BEAE THE BLAME— AN AC- 
COUNT OP THE JUST PEUITS OP SO MUCH SUCCESS CONCLUDES THIS 
HISTOEY 

You have hitherto seen him only in private life* I will now give 
you a glimpse of his political character, which will convince you 
of a truth, for obvious reasons not sufficiently attended to, which 
is, that the ruling principles of the heart influence the actions in 
all capacities ; and, therefore, that it is impossible for a bad man 
to make a good minister. 

The power to which the confidence of his patron raised him was 
such as might have enabled him to effect either much good or evil, 
had he known how to have used it to the best advantage. But his 
eagerness in the pursuit of his own views put him off his usual 
guard, and discovered his principles before it was too late to oppose 
them. 

The most exalted minds are not exempted from human weak- 
nesses. That of his patron was a thirst of power, though without 
a thought of using it in any improper manner. Some late services 
of the highest importance, which he had performed to the state, 
suggested to our hero a scheme for rivetting his interest with him 
still stx'onger, by procuring him a power which he knew would centre 
really in himself. Accordingly, he exerted all his abilities and in- 
fluence to wrest from the sovereign an essential part ' of the in- 
communicable power of the Crown, and vest it in him. Such an 
attempt instantly gave the alarm to every real friend, not only of 
the government, but also of him in whose favour it was professed 
to be made ; who, though they harboured no fear of him, did not 
dare to offer such an a&ont to their sovereign, and give a wound 
to the political constitution of their country, which might be of most 
dangerous consequence in less safe hands. The design, therefore, 
was defeated ; and, instead of serving his patron, only instilled 
doubts of him into those who were not acquainted with the upright- 
ness of his heart. Though the interest of his patron continued to 
support him for a considerable time after this, his whole conduct 
was such a series of blunders — many of them so gross, that it was 
doing violence to probability to impute them to ignorance — that 

^ General of the army for life. The Duke of Cumberland was appointed 
to the newly-revived oflSce of Captain-Greneral in 1745. He resigned all 
lis military appointments after the Convention of Closterseven in 1757. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 415 

at length the voice of the people was raised against him, and he 
was obliged to give up all pretensions to power, and sit down with 
an employment of great, but mere profit \ which all his own solicita- 
tions, though urged with the abject importunity of a common 
beggar, even to shedding tears, and imploring compassion for his 
wife and family, all he had hitherto acquired having been squan- 
dered, as fast as it came, on his pleasures, would not have procured 
for him, had not his patron sanguinely espoused his interest, even 
to the injury of his own ; though on a discovery of his principles 
and private character, now too notorious to be concealed, he 
rejected him from his esteem, and refused to give any further 
countenance to his ambition. 

From this time he appUed every power of his soul to amass 
wealth, which he had too many opportunities of doing in his present 
employment, the most iniquitous of which he never failed to im- 
prove to still greater iniquity, regardless of public reproach, and 
the distress of myriads, suffering under his injustice, whose cries 
and imprecations ascended hourly to Heaven against him. Riches 
give consequence, especially with those who sacrifice everything 
to luxury. Though he had no public power, his personal influence 
over in(fividuals in a short time became greater than ever, as he 
too soon had an opportunity of proving. 

One of those events which show the vanity of all human designs, 
however wisely conducted, and glorious in their end, threw the 
government into other hands ^. New men always adopt new 
measures, if only from an affectation of appearing wiser than their 
predecessors. In this change his late patron lost all influence 
except that which virtue establishes in the hearts of the virtuous. 
This was an opportunity for shaking off the weight of obligation 
not to be missed by one of our hero's turn. He not only deserted 
him directly in the basest manner, but also, to ingratiate himself 
with the present powers, fathered upon him the fictions of his own 
brain, under the appearance of betraying his secrets, and made 
a merit of aggravating his ingratitude and perfidy by open insults 
in hope of provoking him to some unguarded act or expression 
of resentment, which might give advantage against him, by the 
common trick of applying to the master what is meant to the 
servant. But, for once, all his art failed. Confident in conscious 
innocence and merit, he disdained to give weight to such base 
machinations by taking notice of them ; and receiving this in- 

' After the resignation of the Newcastle ministry in 1756, the King 
invited Fox and Pitt to form an administration, but the latter declined 
to act with Fox. In the Pitt-Newcastle ministry, which came into 
power in 1757, Fox was appointed to the subordinate but immensely 
lucrative ofiBce of Paymaster of the Forces. In this post he built up 
an enormous fortune, and won himself a black reputation for misap- 
propriation of public funds. 

^ The death of George II. George III was opposed to the war policy 
of the Pitt-Newcastle administration. He humbled Newcastle, opposed 
the Whigs on every point, forced Pitt to resign, and then Newcastle, 
and so made way for the ascendency of Bute, who settled the Peace of 
Paris in 1763. 



416 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

gratitude as a punishment for having placed his esteem so un- 
worthily, looked down upon him with indignant contempt, nor 
was ever heard to honour his name with utterance. Such a proof 
of his sincerity gained our hero the confidence of his new friends, 
to whose tottering power his personal interest was found a necessary 
support. But he lent not that support but on his own terms. 
Cooled by experience, he had learned that the name of power is 
always pursued by envy and ambition. He, therefore, wisely 
gratified the vanity of others with the dangerous shadow, while 
he reserved the substance to himself, dictating in safety, because 
in secret, all the measures, for any mistake in which they were 
answerable. 

In this situation you see him now. But such a series of suc- 
cess has been far from procuring him the happiness proposed in 
the pursuit. BecoUection of the means embitters the end. The 
ingratitude and perfidy of one ', whom he had placed his whole 
confidence in, and bound to him by the highest obligations, up- 
braid him continually with his own baseness to his patron, and 
make him afraid to place trust in any other ; so that he lives in 
a state of constant suspicion and dread of all mankind, destitute 
of that friendly confidence which is the cement of society, the 
comfort and support of life. 

Nor is this the only wound that rankles in his breast. The un- 
happy victim of his avarice, murdered under the formalities of 
law, is never absent from his thoughts a moment. Conjured up 
by conscience, his spectre haunts his dreams. He sees him in the 
dark. He hears him in the deepest silence. Nor can the loud 
laugh of mirth and riot drown his louder voice in the midst of 
company. Hence that gloom which you see hang upon his brow ; 
that consciousness of guilt, which gives a cast of horror to his very 
smiles. Consider now the story of this man ; and own with rever- 
ence and awe that vice never wants an avenger ; that wickedness 
is its own punishment. Who would not rather be the apparent 
wretch that wanders homeless through the world, fed by the cold 
hand of common charity, than he with all his honours, power, and 
wealth ! The characters of the rest, except him who had been my 
master's competitor for admission into the superior order of the 
society, are not distinguished by anything to make them worth 
displaying. I shall, therefore, leave them in the obscurity they 
deserve ; as I shall reserve his for another place where some new 
occurrences will show it in a stronger light. 

^ John Calcraft [1726-72], who was made deputy commissary general 
of musters by Fox, and in this and subsequent appointments speedily 
amassed a large fortune. In 1763, he deserted Fox, and was henceforth 
' the best head for intrigue in the whole party of Pitt's followers ' 

Junius. His defection, and that of Rigby, were two of the bitterest 

thinfB Fox had to bear, at the time of his quarrel with Shelbume, 
and his virtual retirement from public life. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 417 



CHAPTER XXXI 

CHEYSAL LEAVES THE CONVENT — HIS MASTER PBOCBBDS IN CHAB- 
ACTEB — HE PEACTISBS A NEW MANNEB OF COTJBTSHIP ; AND 
SIGNALISES HIS TALENTS FOB INTBIGUE, BY DEBAUCHING THE 
DAUGHTEB OF HIS EBIBND — HEB DISTBESS, WHEN TOO LATE, GIVES 
HIM SOME SLIGHT QUALMS OF CONSCIENCE ; BUT HE SOON 
BECOVEBS, AND GOES ON IN HIS ENTEEPBISE 

It was my fortune to leave this place in the posaesaion of the aame 
person i who had brought me to it. The moment the meeting 
broke up, he flew to reduce into practice some part of the theory 
which had been so well discusaed among them. A peraon of dia- 
tinguished learning and virtue 2, who had taken great pains, though 
to little purpose, with some part of the education of his youth, 
had observed of late that he seemed to pay him particular respect, 
and was more frequent than usual in his visits at his house, where 
he behaved with a moral decency very different from his general 
character. The good man saw this with real pleasure, and, attribu- 
ting it to the influence of his own conversation, as vanity will flnd 
its way into the best hearts, gave him all the encouragement he 
could to come, in hopea of working a thorough reformation iu him. 
But he was deceived in. that hope ; and found, when too late, that 
he had cherished a viper in his bosom, to sting his heart. Busebius 
— that was this person's name — had an only daughter^, on whose 
education he had exerted the tenderest care. She was now in that 
dangerous time of life, when ripened youth has given all the passions 
their full force, and reason not yet acquired strength to rule them. 
This danger, though, seemed less threatening to her than it is to 
most of the sex, nature, which had been most liberal to her mind, 
having denied those charms of face which too often prove a snare 
to the possessor ; and the precepts of her father trained her in such 
principles of wisdom and virtue as seemed a sufficient guard. 

Such circumstances, exclusive of the obligations of honour not 
to infringe the laws of hospitality — I add not virtue, for that has 
long lost all obligation in matters of this kind — would have pre- 
vented any other man from thinking of attempting her ; but the 
pleasure of seducing iimocence supplied every defect of beauty ; 
and the dif&culty of such a conquest doubled his ardour in the 
pursuit, as the triumph would establish the fame of his gallantry, 
which had never yet aspired beyond a servant wench ; beside, that 
the age and profession of her father secured him from the danger 
of personal resentment. Encouraged by all these equally powerful 
motives, the moment he saw her, he marked her out for the 
proof of his talents for intrigue. How to begin his attack, though, 
so as to elude her father's vigilance, without alarming her virtue 
was the question. But he was not long at a loss. Difficulties, 
which appear unsurmountable to wisdom, are easily conquered 

^ Sandwich. ^ Dr Sum [Davis's Olio]. 

"Really his niece [/5id]. 

2d 



418 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

by cunning — and with this he was plentifully stored — because 
it will make use of means which the other holds in abhorrence. 
In pursuance, therefore, of a plan which he soon formed, he culti- 
vated the acquaintance of Eusebius with the greatest assiduity, 
and, in all his visits to his house, turned his conversation entirely 
upon points of speculative knowledge, in which he professed the 
most earnest desire of information. Eusebius took the bait. As 
these were the usual topics of discourse between him and hia 
daughter, he was pleased at her being present whenever my master 
was with him, both for her information, and to give her an oppor- 
tunity of displaying the advantages she had received from his care ; 
for which purpose he often led her and my master into arguments, 
to which he listened with the highest delight, as she always had 
the better in them. Nor was she less pleased on such occasiona 
than her father. The modest deference which my master con- 
stantly paid to her judgment was so flattering to her consciousness 
of superiority, that she soon became fond of his company ; at the 
same time that the artfulness of his address to her, for he never 
showed any other notice of her sex than by a most guarded delicacy 
in his expressions, deceived the watchful care of Eusebius so effectu- 
ally, that he never scrupled to leave his two pupils — as he fondly 
affected to call them — alone together, when any business demanded 
his attendance elsewhere. As this was what my master had long 
aimed at, it may be supposed he did not neglect to improve oppor- 
tunities so favourable to his wishes. He always turned his con- 
versation directly to such subjects as were most likely to inflame 
the passions, on the gratification of which he expatiated with a 
particular warmth and luxuriancy of imagination, but in terms 
so well wrapped up, as to conceal the poison they conveyed. The 
effect soon answered his design. Subjects, proposed merely as 
points of speculation, gave her no alarm. And when such thoughts 
are once suggested, nature will lead them to her own ends. Her 
passions had been smothered, not extinguished ; and were the readier 
to take fire for such restraint. She heard him, therefore, with 
pleasure, and slid insensibly into danger, the direct mention of 
which would have struck her with horror. 

Matters were in this critical situation, when he returned from 
the society. The moment he alighted, he flew to the house of 
Eusebius, who unhappily was not at home. The conversation 
soon fell into its late course. There are some moments in which 
nature will bear down all opposition. Though she had indulged 
herself in talking on such subjects, she meant nothing more. But 
he was too well versed in the practice to let her stop at the theory ; 
and one unguarded minute murdered the peace of her future life 
and blasted the fruits of all her father's care. It is impossible to 
describe what she felt when passion gave place to reason, and she 
became sensible of what had passed. Even he, hackneyed as he 
was in the ways of wickedness, could not stand it. He left her 
precipitately, and for the first time felt something Uke remorse. 
But these qualms lasted not long. His desires were rather raised 
than satisfied ; besides that, to have stopped here, without making 
his success public, would have disappointed perhaps the principal 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 419 

pleasure he had in view. He resolved, therefore, to seduce her 
from her father's house, that all the world might be witnesses of 
his triumph. For this purpose he went to her the next morning, 
at a time when he knew Eusebius was usually engaged abroad. 
On inquiring for her, he was answered that she was not well ; and 
was turning about to go away, when her maid, who, from her own 
experience, had suspected something of the cause of her mistress's 
illness, officiously ran to him, and told him she was in her dressing- 



CHAPTER 2XXII 

CONTTNTTED : CHKYSAl's MASTEB MAEBS HIS TEITTMPH PUBLIC BY 
SEDUCING HIS NEW MISTKESS AWAY FROM HEB PATHEE's HOUSE — 
THE MANNEE IN WHICH HE IMPOSED UPON THEM BOTH TO EPEBCT 
THIS ; WITH THE CONSOLATION HE GAVE HEE EOE SOME NATUEAL 
CONSEQUENCES OF HIS GALLANTEY — HIS TEIUMPH IS COMPLETED 
BY HEE GOING UPON THE TOWN, AND HER PATHBE's BEEAKINQ 
HIS HEART — CHEYSAL CHANGES HIS SERVICE 

His intimacy in the family giving him a title to visit her there, he 
went directly up, where he found her in a condition that once more 
shook his resolution, and made him almost sorry for what he had 
done. She sat the image of despair. Sleep had never closed her 
eyes. She had not changed the disordered dress of the day before ; 
and her face was so swollen with incessant weeping that he could 
hardly believe it was she. Her maid, withdrawing conveniently, 
as soon as he entered, he threw himself at her feet in all the trick 
of woe, and imploring her pardon, lamented what had passed, for 
which he imprecated Heaven's vengeance on his own head, in such 
passionate terms, as, amid all her grief, alarmed her fear of his being 
overheard ; for hitherto the secret was their own. 

The .first hint of this cured him of his penitence, and suggested 
to him how to proceed. He persisted in all the extravagance of 
grief ; and acted his part so well, that, forgetting her own distress 
for a moment, she was insensibly led to administer consolation to 
him. This was what he wanted. He at length seemed to be 
comforted by her arguments, which he gradually improved so far 
as to glance at her continuance of the guilty commerce, which he 
pressed for by the most rapturous professions of love, and the 
strongest vows of constancy and truth. 

This was an attack which she was in no way prepared for. Her 
heart was softened by grief, and shame for what was passed pre- 
cluded her arguments against a repetition. She hesitated, however, 
silenced, not convinced, till the voice of her father turned the scale. 
' Oh ! save me from his sight ' ! exclaimed she, wringing her 
hands. ' Save me from his sight ! I'll go to death, to anything 
rather than meet his eye '- 

' Nor shall you meet it ', answered my master, clasping her in 
his arms and kissing away the tears that trickled down her cheek. 
■* I'll go this instant, and take him home with me as upon business, 



420 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

where I'll find means to detain him, while you paok up 8ome im- 
mediate necessaries, and prepare to meet my faithful valet-de- 
chambre, who shall wait with a coach at the end of the next street, 
and conduct you to my country house, whither I'll follow you on 
the wings of love, and drown every disagreeable thought in 
rapture '. 

He did not give her time to answer, but rushing out of the room, 
and meeting her ready maid at the door, took his cue from her, 
who told him she had excused her mistress's absence from supper 
the night before, on a pretence of her being engaged in readiiig, 
as she said in the morning that she had sat up too late to rise to 
breakfast. 

Satisfied with these excuses, because he suspected nothing else, 
Eusebius, on hearing my master was above, was coming up to pay 
his compliments to him, when he met him at the bottom of the 
stairs. 

' I must give up arguing with one ', said my master, smiling 
as he went forward into the parlour, whither he knew Eusebius 
would necessarily attend him, ' who sits up studying all night. She 
has turned me out on a pretence of dressing ; but I know it is to 
go back to the book at which I caught her ; so that I shall make 
but a poor figure in the evening if you don't help me out. However, 
I'll try ; I am not ashamed to yield to her. But, come, I called 
so early to beg your company at my house, where I have something 
that will please you to consult you upon. I shan't keep you long, 
as I am obliged to go out before dinner '. 

To this Eusebius readily assented ; and my master, putting his 
hand under his arm, led him away, proud of such familiarity with 
a person of his rank, as unsuspecting as a victim to the altar. As 
soon as he got home, he gave the necessary instructions to his trusty 
valet-de-chambre ; and then, returning to Eusebius, amused him 
with imaginary schemes of reformation and economy in his family, 
and improvements in his house, till the return of lus emissary let 
him know all was over. He then dismissed Eusebius with a smile 
of triumph, who went home, happy in his mind at the prudence 
and virtue of his conversation, the effects, as he fondly imagined, 
of his own care and example — the last time his mind ever knew 
happiness. The moment he was gone, my master hasted after the 
deluded fugitive, whom he overtook juat as she alighted at his 
house, the servants of which were too well accustomed to such 
things to be surprised at the sight of a new face. The maimer of 
their meeting may be easily conceived. On his side, all was joy and 
triumph ; on hers, guilty confusion, shame, and fear. However, 
repetition, though the highest aggravation of a crime, is yet less 
terrifying than the first commission. 

Three days he stayed with her, every moment of which was 
embittered to her by reflection, and seemed tedious to him from 
satiety and impatience to make his triumph known, and then left 
her on pretence of business, vidth vows of immediate return ; and, 
going back to London, repaired directly to the tavern, where he 
had by letter appointed to meet all his associates, to whom he 
related the whole affair in such terms of exultation as raised their 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 421 

envy, not so much at the possession of her, as the glory of such a 
triumph. 

I see your anxiety to know the fate of the unhappy Eusebius, 
and his more unhappy daughter. Though I saw them no more 
myself, I had too many opportunities of hearing their story, the sum 
of wliich is this : Eusebius, on his return home from my master, 
found a note from his daughter, bidding him farewell for ever, and 
desiring he would not take the trouble of making any inquiry after 
her, as she was unworthy of his care. The distraction evident in 
the style and purport of this note too plainly showed her ruin. 
This was an attack his heart was not proof against. He sunk down 
instantly in a swoon, in which he escaped some hours of misery 
before he recovered his senses. The first exertion of his reason 
was to make inquiry after his daughter, but no one could give him 
any information, her maid who conducted her having accompanied 
her flight. He then flew to ids friend, my master, for counsel and 
assistance ; for the goodness of his own heart would neither let 
him suspect him, nor desert her in the ruin to which he had fallen ; 
but he was told at his house that a nobleman of his acquaintance 
had called upon him the moment he left him and taken him into 
the country for a few days. Every inquiry he could make after 
his daughter was equally unsuccessful, till my master's exultation 
made the whole affair public. This, if possible, gave fresh poignancy 
to his grief. He did not, however, desert the wretched victim of 
such villainy, but wrote to her directly to return to him, and liide 
her shame from the world ia his bosom ; but despair made her 
reject his offer. 

As for her, a few days, ia which my master left her to the comfort 
of her own reflections, discovered to her that his love had been 
injurious to her health, as well as to her peace of mind. What she 
felt at this discovery may be easily conceived. She wrote to him 
in the agony of her soul, to reproach such manifold baseness ; but, 
instead of an answer of excuse or consolation, received only a 
quack doctor's advertisement, and a banknote for a trifling sum, 
enclosed in a blank cover. The same post brought her father's 
offer of forgiveness and reception. The contrast was more than 
she could bear. She hurried back to town, where despair prompting 
her to revenge her folly on herself by still deeper ruin, she plunged 
into all the horrors of a life of common prostitution. 

This filled the measure of her father's woe. He had no redress 
to expect ia this world ; and, therefore, resigning the punishment 
of his wrongs to the great Avenger, indulged his grief in silence, 
till in a few months it brought his gray hairs to the grave. 

I here quitted his service, and after an extensive circulation, 
became the property of a pawnbroker, from whence I got into the 
possession of a beau. 



422 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 



CHAPTER XXXIII 

HISTORY as A BBAtr, WITH A JOURNAL OF HIS MANNER OF LIFE 
rOE ONE DAY — CHBYSAL CHANGES HIS SBRVICB IN A COMMON WAY 
FOB THAT OF A LADY OF FASHION 

I WAS now become tlie property of a beau, who was one of those 
ciphers in nature, who seemed bom only to make up the number 
of mankind. The poor pittance, which pride of family spares 
from the oldest son to save the rest from starving, had been enough 
to purchase him a commission in the Guards in which he signalised 
his prowess on the parade, and talked as big, and looked as bluff, 
as the best, while his campaigns were confined to St James's Park ; 
but the prospect of a war changed his note. The irregularities 
and licentiousness of a military life now shocked his delicacy, and 
he exchanged for half -pay ; and, retaining only the convenient title 
of captain, resolved to push his fortune in the gentler way of matri- 
mony. For this purpose he directly commenced beau, as the fair 
Bex is soonest caught by the eye, and, when that is pleased, seldom 
inquire further. Accordingly, he now studied nothing but fashions, 
as all his care was to procure clothes to keep up to them, which the 
narrowness of his circumstances made so difficult for him to do 
that his belly mourned many a time for the finery of his back. 
Nor was that his only difficulty. The very expense of going into 
company to display that finery was often as distressing to him as 
to procure it. 

It was on an occasion of this kind that I came into his possession. 
His showy appearance, together with his being one whom every- 
body knew, making him a convenient faggot to fill up those musters, 
the only end of which is to show the consequence of the commanding 
officer, by the numbers she can crowd together, there was hardly 
a genteel rout in the town to which he was not invited. Such 
a distinction was the height of his ambition ; accordingly, having 
received a card to summon him to one the next evening, he was 
not able to resist the temptation of so favourable an opportunity 
of showing himself to the ladies, though his finances were so low 
that he had no other way to defray the expense of his chair, but 
by applying to a pawnbroker, where distress is preyed upon by 
profession, and really aggravated under the deceitful appearance 
of momentary relief — an expedient, indeed, to which he was well 
accustomed. As soon as it was dark, therefore, he came wrapped 
up in a horseman's coat, and pulling a laced waistcoat out of his 
bosom, mortgaged it for three guineas, one of which I was. When 
this weighty transaction was concluded, he returned home, and, 
changing his dress, repaired to a coffee-house at the court end of 
the town, where he talked over the news of the day, with all the 
significant airs and importance of one in the secret, confirming 
every word he said with the authority of his cousin, this lord, or 
his friend, that duke, till he carelessly outstayed all his engage- 
ments for supper, when a welsh-rabbit and three-pennyworth 
of punch made him amends for the want of a dinner, and he went 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 423 

home satisfied. Well, as I was by this time acquainted with the 
inconsistencies of human life, I could not help being struck with 
the contradiction between the external appearance and domestic 
economy of my new master. The former was in all the elegance 
of taste and affluence, while the latter was regulated by the strictest 
parsimony that nature could support. He lodged ia a house which 
opened into a genteel street, and had a back door into a blind alley, 
that served him whenever he chose to go out or come in incognita. 
Here, one room up three pair of stairs — but the name of the street 
overbalanced that, and every other inconvenience — served him 
for every purpose of life, in most of which he ministered to himself, 
undisturbed by the company of anyone but his hairdresser, laundress, 
and tailor, at their appointed times. To all others he was con- 
stantly denied by the people of the house, who received all messages 
for him, and returned proper answers. But the manner of his life 
will be best described by the history of the one day I was in his 
possession ; the business of every day beiag invariably the same. 

As he had sat up late, it was near noon when he arose, by which 
genteel indulgence he saved coals, for his fire was never lighted till 
after he- was up. He then sallied out to breakfast in-a tarnished laced 
frock and his thick-soled shoes, read the papers in the cofiee-house 
— too soon after breakfast to take anything — and then walked a 
turn in the Park, till it was time to dress for dinner, when he went 
home ; and, finding his stomach out of order from his last night's 
debauch, and his late breakfasting, he sent the maid of the house 
for a basin of pea-soup from the cook's shop to settle it, by the time 
he had taken which, it was too late for him to think of going any- 
where to dine, though he had several appointments with people 
of the first fashion. When this frugal meal was over, he set about 
the real business of the day. He took out and brushed his best 
clothes, set his shirt to the fire to air, put on his stockings and 
shoes, and then sitting down to his toilet, on which his washes, 
paints, tooth-powders, and lip salves were all placed in order, 
had just finished his face when his hairdresser came, one hour under 
whose hands completed him a first-rate beau. 

When he had contemplated himself for some time with pride of 
heart, and practised his looks and gestures at the glass, a chair 
was called, which carried him to a scene of equal magnificence 
and confusion. IVom the brilliant appearance of the company, 
and the ease and self-complacency in all their looks, it should have 
seemed that there was not one poor or unhappy person among 
them. But the case of my master had convinced me what little 
faith is to be given to appearances ; as I also foimd, upon a nearer 
view, that many of the gayest there were in no better a condition 
than he. Having reconnoitred one another sufficiently to lay in 
a fund for remarks, and bandied about the common cant of compli- 
ments, the company sat down to cards, when the looks of many of 
them soon underwent a change. For prudential reasons my master 
always declined engaging in parties of this nature, but this night 
all his address could not excuse him. A lady, whom he had dressed at^ 

^ Lady Mansel [Davis's Olio]. 



424 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

for a considerable time, happening to come late, unluckily wanted 
one, and, seeing Mm idle, would take no apology. He complied, 
therefore, with the best grace he could, and, invoking fortune with 
more fervency than he had ever prayed to Heaven, cut in ; when 
chancing to fall against her, her superior luck, or skill, aided not a 
httle by his anxiety, soon stripped him of every shilUng in his pocket 
and sent him home in a pensive mood, to study ways and means 
for raising another supply. And on this occasion I followed the 
smiles of fortune, and entered into the service of the winner. 



CHAPTER XXXIV 

HISTOKY OF CHRYSAL'S NEW MISTEESS — SHE IS BROUGHT INTO 
DISTRESS BY HER BEAUTY, FROM WHICH A LUCKY INTERVIEW 
BELIEVES HER — THE DANGER OF AEGUING IN FAVOUR OF INCLINA- 
TION AGAINST REASON — HER FRIEND PUTS HER TO SCHOOL TO 
LEARN MANNERS, AND AFTERWARDS MARRIES HER — HIS FAMILY 
SHOW IMPOTENT RESENTMENT, AT WHICH HE IS SO ENRAGED, THAT 
HE MAKES HIS WILL, BY WHICH HE LEAVES HER HIS VSTHOLE FORTUNE 
AND THEN DIBS — AN UNCOMMON INSTANCE OF THE QOOD-NATUEB 
OF THE WORLD 

Though my late master had put the best face he could upon the 
matter, and excused his breaking up the party at the end of the 
first rubber, on a pretence of being taken suddenly sick, my mistress 
saw through him. ' Sick indeed ' ! said she, laughing ; ' ha ! ha ! 
ha ! poor captain ! I do not doubt but you are, and that at heart. 
I saw it coming upon you ever since the first deal, when I held four 
by honours; but I don't wonder at it. A full rubber was too much. 
Two guineas and a half are no trifle to some people ' 

Two or three other visits which she had to pay that evening 
prevented her making a new party ; she only stayed to tell the 
story of the captain's sickness to everyone she knew in the room, 
who all joined in the laugh against him. I see you are shocked 
at such an instance of insensibility ; but, if you will reflect a moment, 
you will find you have no reason. Though poverty is attended 
with many real evils, yet, when the worst of them are voluntarily 
encountered to gratify vanity, the pity, otherwise due to it, is justly 
turned into contempt ; and the efforts used to hide it, which are 
always seen through, treated with ridicule and insult. 

The morning after I came into the possession of my new mistress, 
she brought to conclusion an affair of a most exti-aordinary nature, 
which few women beside herself would have had spirit even to under- 
take. To explain it properly to you, it will be necessary to give you a 
short sketch of her story. The gifts of nature are either a blessing 
or a curse, according to the use made of them. My mistress was 
born in one of the lowest classes of mankind ; the obscurity of her 
birth, though, seemed to be made amends for by the endowments 
of her person and mind, which were such as raised universal admira- 
tion from their first infant dawn. But these, tempting the licentious 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 425 

spoiler, like the beauty of a flower growing in the highway, lost 
their advantage, and proved her ruin for want of proper care. 
She had scarce passed her childhood, when one of those female 
purveyors of vice, who go about, like their master, seeking whom 
they may destroy, to the disgrace not only of their own sex, but 
also of human nature, marked her out as proper for her purpose. 
There was no difficulty either in getting her into her power, or 
seducing her mind. The poverty of her parents made them glad 
to part with her, without further inquiry, to anyone who promised 
to take care of her, only to be delivered from the expense of her 
support, as it had prevented their giving her the least education 
to form her manners, or inspire her mind with principles of virtue. 
Such a subject was exactly suited for so vile an agent to work 
upon. She took her home, dressed her up decently, and, teaching 
her what account to give of herself, prostituted her, while she could 
make any profit of her, and then turned her adrift upon the world, 
to live as well as she could on the earnings of sin and wretchedness. 

I must not attempt to describe the life of a common prostitute ; 
it is too horrible ! She had run through the lowest scenes of it 
for some time, when fortune one night threw into her way one of 
those old debilitated debauchees i, who indulge in the speculation 
after they are past the practice of vice. Something in her air and 
manner, as she picked him up, struck him. He took her to a tavern, 
where he was still more pleased with her uncommon smartness and 
vivacity. ' I am cloyed ', said he, to himself, ' with the gross 
ignorance of the women of the town ; I hate the impertinent airs 
of virtue, which those of better education give themselves ; I'll 
therefore unite those qualifications, which separately please me in 
both, in this young creature, who can never offend me by pretences 
to virtue, at the same time that the excellence of her understanding 
will receive and reward me with the fruits of the best education '- 

There was novelty in the whim ; and, therefore, he resolved to 
carry it into execution. He took her home with him, and, sending 
for the most eminent masters in every part of polite education, 
put her under their care, and incited their application by most 
liberal promises of reward. Young aa she was, and hackneyed in 
every vicious habit, she had a sufficient sense of the change in her 
way of life not to forfeit the advantage by any misbehaviour or 
neglect. On the contrary, she applied herself so closely to every- 
thing taught her, and showed a disposition so desirous of improve- 
ment in every sense, that her benefactor, proud of the discernment 
which could discover such talents under so great disadvantages, 
became enamoured of the effects of his own benevolence and care. 
' I have at length found ', would he say to himself, ' what I have 
hitherto sought in vain — a woman that can make me happy. Her 
wit and understanding will enliven the hour of heaviness ; while 
a false parade of virtue will never throw a damp on pleasantry 
and mirth. What though her birth is obscure, are we not all 
descended from one common stock ? Is the blood of a peasant less 
pure than that of a prince ? If she has taken a false step in the 

' Sir E. Mansel [Davis's Olid]. 



426 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

weakness of her youth, that should be charged to fate, that led 
her into temptation before she had reason to resist it. But all these 
seeming disadvantages are now turned in her favour. Her ex- 
perience in the ways of the world will make it impossible to deceive 
her again. Her consciousness of the meanness of her own family 
will give her a proper sense of the honour of being admitted into 
mine, and save me from the intolerable plague of having her pedigree 
rung in my ears every hour. Her youth and luxuriance of con- 
stitution will also supply to our children the defects which too 
eager a pursuit of pleasure may have made in mine. Let those who 
are dependent on the world regard its censure ; I am above it, and 
will pursue my own happiness, wherever it leads me '. 

There is nothing more dangerous than seeking for arguments in 
favour of inclination against reason. Trifles, light as air, will be 
admitted as the weightiest proofs of that which is wished to be 
proved ; and palliatives, barely possible, answer objections, ia their 
nature unanswerable. He had taken a liking to her. He had taken 
it into his head to secure the gratification of that liking by marrying 
her ; and a very little arguing with himself in this manner soon 
convinced him, not only of the expediency of such a marriage to 
his happiness, but also of the obligation he was under of doiug that 
justice to her merit and his own judgment. The consequence may 
be easily concluded. He married her, as he professed, in obedience 
to reason, rather than to gratify inclination. But the case was 
very different with the world ; which, far from seeing the force of 
his arguments, laughed at him for being taken thus in a snare of 
his own making. His own family, in particular, beheld her with 
eyes, perhaps, not less blinded by interest than his were by in- 
clination ; and, depreciating the merit she reaUy had, represented 
his marriage as the mere effect of vicious dotage. 

Nothing is so ill-judged as to show impotent resentment. It 
only provokes a return of no effect ; and makes a wound incurable 
which otherwise might have healed of itself. Incensed that they 
should presume to censure actions which they could not control, 
he directly made his will, by which he gave away the inheritance 
of his ancestors from his own blood, leaving his whole fortune to 
his wife, as a testimony of his unaltered regard for her, and to show 
his resentment to them ; soon after which he died. This was 
more than her most sanguine hopes could ever have risen to. She 
was in the prime of life ; and possessed of a fortune to afford her all 
its pleasures. These advantages, and I should add her beauty, 
which was in the perfection of a ripened bloom, naturally attracted 
a number of admirers of different kinds, and with as different views, 
who all thought themselves sure of her, from the circumstances of 
her past life. Needy adventurers, such as my late master, paid 
court to her fortune in the matrimonial way ; while her beauty 
attracted the more dangerous address of those who meant no more 
than pleasure. But she was guarded against both. She had tasted 
something of the sweets of virtuous reputation, and knew the value 
of it too well to forfeit it entirely again by compliance with the latter ; 
and her pride and experience set her above all the schemes of the 
former. She lived thus for some time in the highest happiness 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 427 

of which she had any idea, for she was a stranger to that false 
delicacy, which creates itself imaginary uneasinesses, and palls 
the enjoyment of present pleasures. She was admitted into good 
company, where her behaviour, if not absolutely approved of, was 
still received with good-natured allowances, as much better than 
might have been expected, from the circumstances of her life ; and 
she herself treated with tenderness, to encourage her to persever- 
ance in so uncommon an amendment. But this happiness was 
too great to last long undisturbed. 



CHAPTER XXXV 

THE "common COlrSBQTTBNCB OF OVBBDOINQ THINGS — HER HUS- 
BAND'S RELATIONS FIND OtTT A FLAW IN HIS WILL — THE COMFORT 
OF HAVING GOOD LAWYERS TO KEEP UP A CLIENT'S SPIRITS — FOR 
THE ADVANTAGE OF HAVING TWO STRINGS TO HER BOW, SHE ENTERS 
INTO AN AGREEMENT OF MARRIAGE HNDBR A HEAVY PENALTY — 
THE EVENT OF HER LAWSUIT SHOWS THE PRUDENCE OF THIS 
PRECAUTION — SHE IS CAST ; HER LOVER FLIES OFF, AND SHE SUES 
HIM FOR THE PENALTY OF HIS ENGAGEMENT — HE BEGS THE MONEY 
AMONG HIS FRIENDS, AND THEN BY A NICE FINESSE PLAYS HER 
OWN GAME BACK UPON HER, AND FLINGS HER OFF WITH HALF — 
CHRYSAL CHANGES HIS SERVICE 

It daily happens that men defeat their own intentions by carrying 
them too far. Hurried away by his passions, her husband, in making 
his will, had exceeded the power vested in him by the law, and so, 
by striving to give her more than he had a right, really gave her 
much less. But it was a considerable time before his family re- 
covered sufBciently from the astonishment and confusion with 
which such a stroke overwhelmed them, to perceive this, and to be 
able to pursue proper measures for taking advantage of it. The 
first notice my mistress received of this affair was by an offer they 
made her, to refer their claim to private decision, in order to avoid 
the expense and trouble of a lawsuit. But, though the former 
part of her life had impressed her with horror at the very name 
of the law, she would not listen to such a proposal without taking 
proper advice, the result of which may be easily judged. 

Lawyers will never lose a good client for want of giving hopes. 
Hers persuaded her so fully of the justice of her cause, and gave her 
such positive assurance of success that she resolved to spare no 
expense to obtain it. Though right and wrong are so essentially 
different from each other, they yet are sometimes involved in such 
intricacies, by the industry of those whose profession it is to dis- 
tinguish between them, that it is difficult to know which is which. 
It was so in this case. They had raised such clouds, that reason 
could not see through them ; and so everyone was left to speak 
according to inclination. While matters were in this situation, one 
of her admirers ^ thought it a proper time to push his fortune with 

1 General George Bosoawen [Davis's Olio]. 



428 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

her. His rank and expectations in life raised him above the neces- 
sity of such a scheme ; but avarice will stoop to anything ; and he 
would gladly have taken her, with all her faults, for the sake of her 
fortune, the certainty of establishing her right to which he had taken 
care to be well assured of by sages learned in the law before he laid 
siege to her. This, however, he was far from avowing. He pleaded 
the most disinterested love, and pressed for a return with all the 
ardency of desire. 

But, though she could not do so much injustice to her charms 
as to doubt their power of inspiring such a passion, she positively 
refused to listen to any proposals of marriage till her lawsuit 
should be decided, from a generous fear of involving him in incon- 
veniences, which her lawyers positively assured her could never 
happen ; as he, with equal generosity, founded on the like assur- 
ances, offered to marry her while it was depending ; whereas, the 
truth of the matter was with both, that he thought he could make 
a better bargain, as she knew she must a worse, if it should be 
concluded, till everything should be finally settled. 

They had played this game upon each other for some time, when 
a diffident word dropped by one of her lawyers, as the day of decision 
drew near, determined her to change her system, and make sure 
of something for fear of the worst. Accordingly, the next time 
her lover visited her, on his repeating his professions of the violence 
of his passion, and offering, as a proof of his disinterestedness, to 
enter into a mutual engagement of marriage, as soon as the suit 
should be ended one way or other, under the penalty of a large 
sum of money on the refuser, she let herself be overcome by such 
an instance of sincerity, and, taking him at his word, signed the 
engagement directly. The event justiiied this caution ; for, after 
all the assurances of success by which she had been led on by her 
lawyers to run into every expense they could devise, justice appeared 
so strongly in favour of her opponents, that she was cast ; and a 
considerable part of the estate of her husband adjudged to return 
directly to his family, and the rest after her death. 

Though what remained to her was more than sufficient to 
support her in the genteelest manner, she could not but feel at first 
a fall from such high hopes ; but her spirit had been too well exer- 
cised in the beginning of her life to yield long to anjrthing, and she 
had. almost got the better of it, when something that piqued her 
resentment roused her effectually. Among all the friends who 
came on this occasion to gratify the insolence of condoling her 
inisfortune, she was not a Uttle surprised never to see the face of 
her lover. As she could not be at a loss for the mean motive of 
such behaviour, she might possibly have treated it with the contempt 
it deserved, had not necessity urged her to show a warmer resent- 
ment. 

The expenses of her lawsuit had involved her in debts — for she 
never lowered her living, depending on the assurances given her of 
success— which were now demanded with an importunity that per- 
plexed her. This was just at the time when she took notice of the 
desertion of her lover. The urgency of her creditors, therefore, 
suggested it to her to call upon him to fulfil his engagement of 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 429- 

marriage ; whicla his conduct convinced her he would forfeit the 
penalty rather than do, by which means she should punish him for 
his rashness, and extricate herself from her difficulties at the same 
time ; for, had she thought that he would fuliil it, there was nothing 
that she would not have suffered, sooner than link her fate to him. 
There was something in a woman's calling upon a man to marry 
her so contrary to those notions of delicacy, on which the superior 
class of the female sex value themselves, that, perhaps, no other 
woman of her rank could have prevailed on herself to do it. But 
she had not been bom in, nor bred up with expectations of that 
rank ; her notions, therefore, were of a coarser complexion ; and, 
though she had learned the external modes of behaviour — the 
trick of complaisance — she had been put to school too late in life 
to change her sentiments so far as to make her think it necessary 
to sacrifice such powerful motives as resentment and interest to a 
delicacy that appeared to her merely fantastic. The moment, 
therefore, the thought occurred, she applied once more to her 
lawyer ; and by his advice wrote a letter to her lover, in which 
she directly claimed the performance of his engagement. But, 
as this was no more than his heart had told him he must expect — 
for he would have done the very same thing himself — he was pre- 
pared how to answer her. Accordingly, he wrote to her in the most 
artful manner, excusing him of his not having been to wait upon her 
since the fatal decision of her lawsuit, on account of the pain he 
must feel at seeing her, when he had lost all hopes of ever calling 
her his ; for, as her generosity would not permit her to marry 
while there was only a possibiUty of such a misfortune, he could 
not suppose that her sense of honour and justice would now, when 
it had actually happened ; and for this reason he desired that she 
would please to send him his engagement, not that it was of any 
consequence, as he would return hers, to whom he wished the 
highest happiness in every scene and view of life. Such a refusal 
was just what she wanted ; she, therefore, instantly commenced 
a suit at law with him, to recover the penalty of his engagement, 
which he had thus forfeited to her. 

The care he had taken himself to make the engagement as binding 
as possible, precluding every hope of defeating her claim ; and 
his knowledge of her temper convincing him that it would be in 
vain to attempt prevailing on her to drop it now she had once begun, 
he had recourse to an expedient to extricate him from this difficulty,, 
of the same mean land with that which brought it upon him. Ac- 
cordingly, though he was well enough able to pay the penalty him- 
self, as he did not choose to fulfil his engagement by marrying, he 
put on a poor face, and went begging to all his relations for their 
assistance, pleading poverty, and alleging the disgrace it would 
bring upon the whole family, if he should be obliged to marry such 
a woman ; whom he represented in the blackest colours, exagger- 
ating every circumstance of her fife. Though this might justly 
have been retorted upon himself for ever thinking of her, they 
took pity on his distress, and raised the money for him, by a general 
contribution. 

Such success encouraged him to hope for further, and try the 



430 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

force of his eloquence upon my mistress. For this purpose he 
desired an interview, which she had with much reluctance con- 
sented to give him the next morning after I came into her pos- 
session. I had seen vice and folly in a variety of shapes, but never 
did the human heart appear to me in so contemptible a light as his 
upon this occasion. He began his attacli with flattery, professing 
the highest respect, and lamenting, in the most passionate terms, 
that the difficulty of his circumstances would not permit him to 
have the happiness of marrying her ; and appealed to her generosity 
and justice as before, for a release from an engagement that it must 
be the ruin of them both to fulfil. But all was in vain. She scarce 
deigned to make him any answer ; and that only to tell him that 
his professions and arguments were equally ineffectual to alter a 
resolution, which the baseness of his behaviour alone had made 
her take. Not quite discouraged, though, by such a repulse, he 
instantly changed his method of application. He threw himself 
at her feet, implored her compassion on his poverty, and offered, 
as the utmost it would admit him to do, to pay her down half the 
penalty directly, concluding vdth saying that, if she refused to 
accept of that, he had no other resource but even to fulfil his 
engagement and marry her. 

Tfus was fighting the devil at his own weapoiw. The mention 
of marriage was a stroke she was not prepared for. Startled at 
the thought, therefore, as she knew not what despair might drive 
him to, she agreed to Ids proposal ; and so they divided the money 
between them — for he prudently pocketed the other half himself, 
as he could not think of offering such an affront to his friends as 
to return any part of their bounty — and were equal gainers by a 
bargain in which each outwitted the other. 

Though what my mistress got fell short of her expectation, it 
answered the double end of gratifying her resentment, and paying 
her debts ; on the latter of which occasions I left her service. 



CHAPTEB XXXVI 

CHB.YSAL MAKES SOME OITT-OF-THE WAY BBlVtAilKS ON" MATEIMONT 
— DESCBIPTIOM" AND HISTOKY OS HIS NEW MASTEB — CKRYSAL 
VINDICATES HIS USING A COMMON ESPEESSION — HIS MASTEB's 
FIEST BISE FBOM A BEOGAB TO A FOOT-BOY — HE GAINS HIS MASTBE's 
FAVOTJB, OP WHICH HE MAKES THE USB NATUEAL TO BE EXPECTED 
FROM HIS FIBST EDUCATION — SOME ACCOUNT OF A RELATION OF 
HIS principal's — THE DANGEB OF GIVINQ ADVICE — CHEYSAl'S 
MASTER INSINUATES HIMSELF INTO THE COLONEL's T.TKTNG, 
AND UNDEEMENES HIS PRINCIPAL IN HIS BEGAED 

I HAVE observed in the course of this account of my last mistress 
that you have been shocked at the thought of a man's marrying 
a woman in her circumstances. To you, who view life only by the 
light of reason, it must certainly appear most unaccountable ; but 
better acquaintance with the ways of the world would reconcile 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 431 

you to that and many other things equally grosa and shocking in 
speculation. Marriage is a mutual trust of honour. A man's 
marrying a woman, therefore, who has lost her honour, is trusting 
his whole fortune to a bankrupt who has no security to give for that 
trust ; a foolhardiness that must proceed either from a conscious- 
ness of having himself no honour to lose, a total disregard to the 
loss, or an affectation of acting on different principles from the rest 
of mankind, as a proof of being above their prejudices. Where her 
honour indeed has been lost to himself, justice makes it a duty 
upon him to repair her loss by marriage ; but then that very marriage 
is a punishment for his crime, as it must want the essential happi- 
ness of confidence ; for he will be always ready to suspect that 
the disposition which betrayed her into error with him may have 
the same effect with others. Nor is this suspicion unnatural. I 
see you would argue from the habitual, avowed incontinence of 
man, that this trust of honour is not equal, and therefore cannot be 
obliging. But this is judging without duly considering the subject. 
Chastity is, in its nature, a virtue equally the duty of both sexes 
to observe, and, with regard to society iu general, the violation of 
it is equally criminal in both ; but in those nearer connections of 
life, the interest of which is the more immediate object of human 
attention, the consequences of that violation in woman are attended 
with so much greater iuconveniences than in man, that, in respect 
to them, the crime is obviously less pardonable in her than him ; 
and, for this reason, this virtue of chastity is made, in a peculiar 
manner, the honour of woman ; while the honour of man is placed 
in other virtues, from which she receives as much advantage as 
he does from her chastity ; and, therefore, the trust of honour is 
mutual and equal. In distinguishing thus between honour and 
virtue, I speak according to the notions of maiikind ; in their own 
nature there is no distinction between them. 

There was something in the whole appearance of the person to 
whom my mistress paid me away, that made me expect to see a 
character of the oast which I had not yet met with among man- 
kind. His looks were sly, methodical, and plodding. Practice 
had fixed upon his passive face the hollow varnish of a servile 
smile ; and an over-acted affectation of polite behaviour made 
his natural awkwardness truly ridiculous. But under all this 
I could see a depth of design, and latitude of principle equal to any 
great attempt, the success of which should in the opiaion of the 
world determine the quality of that greatness, whether villainy or 
virtue. That knowledge of his life which is necessary to explain 
his character, and account for the principles upon which he acted 
consistently his manifold part, will be comprised in a few words. 
Sprung from the dregs of the people, and turned loose upon the 
world to shift for himself, as soon as he was able to crawl, he took 
his stand about the house of a person in business, where he hardly 
earned a morsel of broken victuals, by running of errands, cleaning 
shoes, and such offices as are performed by those servants of servants. 

I see you wonder at my saying he was sprung from the dregs of 
the people, as if difierence of rank could make any alteration in the 
essential equality of human nature ; but without entering into a 



432 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

discussion of undetermined points, on both sides of whicli much has 
been said with equal strength of reason, the best observation of 
the power of early example, to impress those principles which are 
to govern the future life, will sufficiently justify my using the ex- 
pression here. The patience with which he was obliged to bear 
the cuffs and kicks of those worst of tyrants, who always wantonly 
revenge tenfold upon their wretched underlings whatever they 
suffer themselves, taught him that hypocrisy and abject submission 
to everything that might anyway serve his convenience, which 
afterwards proved the groundwork of his fortune ; as the example 
of his parents, who got their living by retailing to the poor the 
meanest necessaries of Ufe, initiated him so early into every species 
of low fraud and chicane, that they became absolutely natural to 
him, and invariably ruled the conduct of his life. 

He had been some time in this hopeful course of education, when 
an accident opened him an opportunity of showing what a progress 
he had made in it. A brother of the person ^ about whose house 
he picked up the scraps that kept him alive, happening to see one 
of the servants beating him unmercifully, interfered from mere 
humanity, and saved him. The marks he bore of his beating 
raised a curiosity to know how he had deserved it ; when he gave 
so seemingly innocent and pitiable an account of himself, and attri- 
buted the servant's cruelty so artfully to his having refused to do 
something for him which was improper for him to do, that the young 
gentleman believed him, and taking compassion on his distress, 
admitted him into the family to wait upon himself, by which he 
was delivered from his dependence on the other servants, and pro- 
tected from their future insults. The humility with which he 
behaved himself in this first step of his advancement, his assiduity 
and seeming attachment to his master, soon won his good opinion 
so far, that he dispensed with his attendance and sent Hm to school, 
where he applied himself so closely, and made such a proficiency, 
that his master took him into his own business ; in which lus 
sobriety, diligence, and obedient temper gained his confidence 
BO entirely, that, as soon as ever he thought him capable, he ad- 
mitted him into fellowship with himself, and absolutely resigned 
the management of his whole business to him. It may naturally 
be supposed that he did not neglect to improve such an oppor- 
tunity of practising the lessons he had learned in his youth. He 
secreted the profits of all the business, which his principal was not 
indispensably obliged to be personally engaged in ; he supplanted 
him with such as he could of his customers ; he cheated of con- 
siderable sums of money such others, as long experience of his, the 
principal's, honesty had put ofiE their guard with him ; and took 
every occasion of insinuating to the world, under the most effectual 
disguise of friendly concern and complaint, his negligence and 
incapacity ; at the same time, that he professed to himself the most 
impUcit respect and obedience, and seemed ambitious of showing 
his gratitude and attachment, by performing the same servile ofSces 
which had been his first occupation about him. 

^ Mr Burgh [Davis s Olio\. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 433 

But all this was trifling in comparison with the stroke he made 
against him in his own family. There was a near relation of his 
principal's', who was indebted to his friendly assistance for the 
first step of his rise to the rank of colonel in the army. Nature 
had been layish to him in the endowments of mind and body ; but 
pride marred the blessing, and turned them all to his disadvantage. 
Confidence in the external graces of his person made him neglect 
the improvement of his understanding ; while an affection of 
singularity, which is always assumed as a mask to hide real ignor- 
ance, made him set his own opinion in opposition to the established 
judgment of mankind. As the conduct of such a man must neces- 
sarily be irregular, his relation and friend, my master's principal, 
exerted the authority of those characters, and frequently reproved 
him in the sincerity and well-meaning of his heart. The notion that 
this liberty, which when properly taken is the highest proof of 
regard, was assumed on the score of obligation, gave offence to the 
captious haughtiness of the colonel's temper, and estranged an 
esteem which it ought to have confirmed. 

This was an opportunity for my master to display his talents. 
He studied the temper of the colonel, and paid court to his caprices. 
He cringed to his haughtiness, bore his insults, and ministered to 
his vices, with an implicit submission to his superior sense and 
judgment, which he received as the only standard of right and 
wrong. 

The contrast between his complaisance and the superiority 
which the colonel thought his relation assumed by giving him 
advice, insensibly transferred to my master that regard which his 
principal lost. As this was what he had all along aimed at, he 
omitted nothing to widen the breach by insinuations so artfully 
conveyed as to aggravate the offence taken by the colonel, and yet, 
if repeated, would bear a sense directly opposite, and seem to 
spring entirely from friendly concern, should a reconciliation be- 
tween them bring his practices to light. But an event that he could 
not scheme for removed every such apprehension, and riveted 
his influence beyond his most sanguine hopes. 

1 Captain Wheeler of the Isis [Davis's Olio]. Captaia Edward 
Wheeler was engaged in the East Indies about 1760, and fell in the 
MeditfciTanean in 17(il in an action between the lais and the Oriflamme, 
which was captured. 



2e 



434 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 



CHAPTER XXXVII 

BtTBTHBE ACCOmrT OP THE COLONEL — CHEYSAL'S MASTEB, IN CON- 
JUNCTION WITH THE FAMILY ASSOCIATE PEOPEK FOE THE PUEPOSE, 
COMPLETES HIS SCHEME OF ALIENATING THE COLONEL's EEGABD 
FEOM HIS FAMILY, OF WHICH HE GIVES A PEOOF OF A MOST ESTEA- 
OKDINAEY NATUEE — A EEMAEKABLE INSTANCE OF CHEYSAL'S 
MASTEE's TALENTS FOE A PAETICULAE KIND OF WIT, WITH A 
STEIKING ACCOTTNT OF THE WOETHY MANNBE IN WHICH HE AST) 
HIS FAMILY ASSOCIATE ACQUITTED THEMSELVES OF THE TEUST 
EEPOSED IN THEM BY THE COLONEL 

Vain of the beauty of his person, the colonel prided himself in an 
opinion that there was no woman whose virtue could resist his 
addresses. This self-conoeit, which the frailty of the lower class 
of females had first given rise to, was confirmed by his success with 
one ', whose fortune and education should have secured her against 
his attacks. The glory of such a conquest satisfied his vanity ; 
and the pleasure of having her on his own terms so endeared her to 
him, that he thought not of any other. One thing only gave him 
concern about her, which was, in whose care he should leave her 
when the business of the campaign called him into the field. But 
in this he was not long at a loss. The humble, implicit attachment 
to my master, pointed him out as the person, in every respect, 
most proper for such a trust. To him, therefore, he committed 
her at his departure, hugging himself in the happiness of having 
such a mistress and such a friend. 

The nature of this trust necessarily brought on an intimacy 
between my master and his charge. Intimacies between the sexes 
are dangerous in any circumstances ; but in theirs, where she could 
not even make pretence to that virtue which could be her only 
guard, the consequence is obvious. !From this time they joined 
their interests, and laid their heads together to estrange lum from 
his own family, particularly my master's principal, who, in case 
of death, had the first claim, from law and nature, to his fortune. 
In carrying on this scheme, they played into each other's hands 
with such address at his return, that, when he was going to the next 
campaign, he made a will, by which he gave not only his own large 
acquisitions, but also the inheritance of his ancestors between them, 
in such a manner as plainly showed a wrong mind, and supported 
nis bequest with such reasons, as were an insult to the laws and 
religion of his country ; at the same time that they perpetuated 
the infamy of those to whom it was made, by arguing expressly 
in favour of the vices which had gained them this mark of his 
regard ; and this will, the substance of which satisfied them for 
the circumstances, he left in the hands of my master. 

In this situation matters stood between the three when I came 
into his possession. When he had finished the drudgery of the 
day, he went as usual to spend his evening agreeably with his 

' Miss Stephenson [Davis's OUo\. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 435 

charge. There waa one species of what is called wit, upon his 
espertness in which, my master valued himself not a little. This 
was telling a fictitious stoiy with so grave a face, and corroborating 
it with such plausible circumstances as to raise the hearer's anxiety, 
and then to laugh at the easy faith that could be so taken in. 
Low as the merit of such wit was at the best, in him it had none 
at all. His fictions were no better than downright Ues, destitute 
of imagination or humour, and corroborated with nothing but 
new-coined oaths and imprecations, fit to afford entertainment 
only to the damned. With an essay of this kind he resolved to 
entertain his mistress this evening. Exerting, therefore, all his 
command of countenance, ' My dearest love ', said he, with a 
melancholy look, and deep-drawn sigh, as he entered the room, 
' I have received bad news, blast my eyes ! there has been a battle 
in which our fool ' 

' Has not been killed ! ' interrupted she, snatching the word out 
of his mouth ; ' that is bad news, indeed, but another battle may 
afford better '. 

I see you were struck with horror at my repeating the imprecation 
he made use of on this occasion. Instead, therefore, of intermixing 
them with every period of his discourse, as he always does, I will 

in their place make a pause, thus , which wiU serve as well, 

for he uses them in general, as no more than mere expletives. 

' No ' ! answered he, shrugging up his shoulders, ' that chance 

is lost for ever, . He has received a wound , which, 

without endangering his life, has disabled him from further service, 

so that we shall be blest with his company , for the rest of our 

lives '- 

' Cursed, you should say ! but is there no way to be thought 
of to prevent it ? Could not proper application be made to the 
surgeons ' ? 

' All is too late ! his leg was taken off directly ; and the 

danger entirely over when the account came away ; as you may 

see by his letter, in which he writes me word, that he hopes 

to be at home with us in a month, to leave us no more. Eh ! what 
have I done with his letter ? it should be in this pocket. I cer- 
tainly have left it behind me in my confusion. But you will see it 
soon enough. He sends his love to you ; and bids me tell you he 
would have wrote to you, but was prevented by company, so that 

you see he cannot be in any danger . But he'll make you 

amends. I see how everything will be . He'U marry you 

as soon as he returns , that he may introduce you into his 

family, who will treat you with forced civility, in order to get him 

into their hands again. I see very well , how everything 

wiU happen '. 

' No ! that shall never happen ! I hate them and despise their 
civility. I had rather bear the sneers and insults of the world than 
that. Nor will I marry him, let what will be my fate ; his insolent, 
capricious humour is scarce to be borne now, though he curbs it, be- 
cause I am at liberty to leave him. What would it then be, were I to 
be his slave for Uf e ? I had rather feign penitence, and throw myself 
■on the compassion of my own family than plunge into such misery. 



436 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

Marriage on any terms is a state I despise, but with him I 
abjure it '. 

This passion was such a triumph to my master, that he could keep 
his countenance no longer. ' Ha ! ha ! ha ! a fair humbug, damn 
me ' ! said he, bursting out into a horse-laugh ; ' your humble servant, 
madam ! I thought you could not be taken in. Ha ! ha ! ha ! 
a fair humbug, damn me '. 

' Taken in ! ' said she, vexed at being played upon, but more 
pleased that it was no worse ; ' how can you take delight in such 
a low-lived trick ? If I could not show my wit in a better maimer 
I am sure I would give up all pretensions to it '. 

' All poor spite and malice ! But don't fret for it. Come, we'll 
kiss and be friends, and think no more of the matter ; only remember 
not to brag another time that you cannot be taken in, though, 
ha ! ha ! ha ' ! 

Everything being thus made up, their conversation for the rest 
of the evening was such as may be supposed between persons of 
their cast, and in their situation. They gloried in the success of 
their schemes upon their common dupe, the colonel ; they formed 
plans for spending his fortune, should any lucky accident put an 
end to his life ; they ridiculed the pride and self-sufficiency of wliich 
they had taken advantage ; and concluded iu their usual way, with 
proving in each other's arms the justness of his confidence in their 
fidelity. 



CHAPTER XXXVIII 

CHBYSAL'S master receives an ACCOrrNT OP THE DEATH OP THE 
COLONEL — HE PIITOS APTEB MITCH DELIBERATION THAT HE CANNOT 
PLDfQ HIS WORTHY ASSOCIATE OUT OF THE WHOLE SPOIL, AND 
THEREFORE PRUDENTLY RESOLVES TO SHABE IT WITH HBK BY A 
MARRIAGE, OP VPHICH HE DRAWS A COMFORTABLE PICTtHBE — HE 
TJBaES HIS SUIT, AND SHE STRIVES TO EVADE IT BY ARGUMENTS 
CONSISTENT WITH BOTH THEIR CHARACTERS — HE CABBIES HIS 
POINT IN A PARTICULAR MANNER 

But all this harmony was soon disturbed for ever by the accom- 
plishment of the very schemes it was founded on, which was much 
nearer than they imagined. The first news my master received 
on his return home next morning was, that the colonel had been 
killed in a late battle. This was an interesting event ; he directly 
locked himself up in his closet, and, taking out the will, though he 
had often read it before, studied every syllable of it over and over, 
to try if there was any possibility for him to fling his own and the 
colonel's common mistress, and get the whole fortune himself ; but 
he had the mortification to find that this exceeded all his sagacity, 
and that the whole will must stand or fall together. 

After some, not the most pleasing, meditation, therefore, ' And 
so ' ! said he, biting his nether Up and turning up his eyes, with an 
execration too horrid to be repeated, ' I have been labouring aU this 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 437 

while to get a fortune for this brimstone ! A very pretty reward 
truly, for supplanting my beat benefactor. It were better for me 
that even he had it than she ; for then I might not only enjoy my 
share of it as it goes, along with him, but also very probably cheat 
him out of the most of it in the end. What though I am to have 
it after her death ; may not she live as long as I ? Beside, I have 
made away with the greatest part of the money, and so am liable 
to be blown up and undone, whenever she t hin Ira proper to call it 
in ; for I know too much of her to ezpect that she should show favour 
to anyone, when once in her power. No ! that shall never be I 
I have it in my power to set aside the whole unnatural, nonsensical 
■will, and will do it, if she refuses to come into terms with me. Such 
a sacrifice of my own interest to gratitude and honesty, as this 
■win appear, will gain me so great reputation, that I shall make a 
better fortune myself in a little time ; and as to what I have em- 
bezzled, I know by experience that I can sink that upon my ■wise 
principal at a proper time, as I have done more before now ; so that, 
after all, I may find honesty to be the best policy, as the saying is. 
Well, be that as it will, I am resolved to be honest to myself first, 
and do that which shall serve my own interest best, ■without regard 
to proverb or opinion. Let me consider, then. Suppose I marry 
her, and so get possession of all at once. But the de^vil of it is, that 
I must take her into the bargain ; and I know her too well for that, 
if I could help it. She may most likely serve me the same trick 
■with somebody else that she has served this fool ■with me : once a 
whore and always a whore. However, I must take my chance 
for that. Cunning as she is, she shall not cuckold me easily. If 
I am not a match for her she must be able to outwit the devil him- 
self ; so, happy come lucky, I'll e'en venture '. 

Ha^vLng reasoned himself into this prudent resolution, he would 
lose no time, but went to her directly to carry it into execution. 
As soon as he met her, ' I have brought you news now ', said he^ 
' in earnest. News that ■will be either good or bad, according as 
you take it '. 

' Pshaw ' ! answered she, slightly, ' this is piore of your ■wit, I 
suppose. But for Heaven's sake, leave off making a fool of your- 
self, and teasing me. I am quite sick of such stuff '. 

' Strike me to the centre ', replied he, passionately, ' but I am 
serious. I have this moment received an account that the colonel 
is actually dead. He was killed in the late battle '. 

The look -with which he said this had more weight with her than 
all the oaths and imprecations he could utter, for, much as he was 
master of Ids countenance, he could not conceal the agitation of 
his mind. 

' Dead ' ! interrupted she, eagerly, ' thank Heaven ! then all my 
fears are over '. 

' Ay ', replied he, dryly, ' but it is well if your hopes are not also 
over ■with them '. 

' How ! What do you mean ? Has he not made a ■will by which 
all his fortune comes directly to me ? For Heaven's sake, do not 
torture me in this manner '. 

' Yes, he has made a will, it is true. But, don't you know that the 



438 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

last letter I received from him revoked it, so that everything goes 
now to his family, for he lived not long enough to make another, 
after he received his wound ; though that is no great loss to you, 
for, from what he said when he was dying, it would not have been 
much in your favour '. 

' But, did you not promise me that you would suppress that 
revocation in case anjrthing of this kind should happen ; which you 
said you had it in your power to do, as your principal was fool 
enough to promise you that he would never open any letters that 
should come directed to you from the army, as he had a right to 
do, by which means it had luckily escaped coming to his knowledge '. 

' Perhaps I may have said so. But, do you think I have no more 
conscience than to conceal such a thing, and rob a man to whom 
I am under so great obligations ' 1 

' Conscience ! For Heaven's sake, I conjure you again, do not 
torture me any longer. Speak of conscience to those who do not 
know you. I have had sufficient proof that your interest is yotu: 
conscience ; and this will surely determine you to serve me, as 
you serve yourself at the same time. Is not all to come to you at my 
death ' ? 

' But what am I to do in the meanwhile ? Come, then, as you 
say you know me so well, I'll offer you a fair proposal that shall 
make it my present interest — for that is what I regard — to serve 
you ; and your future interest, on which you lay so great a stress, 
to serve me. Suppose we join our interests in all things and marry. 
By this expedient I shall come directly into the enjoyment of the 
fortune ; and your children will inherit it '. 

' Marry ' ! exclaimed she, starting in surprise ; what could put 
such a strange thought into your head, who know my sentiments 
on that unnatural state of superstition and slavery ? No ! that 
of all things I can never come into. But, I see you are at your 
humbugging again. The professions and oaths of friendship, you 
have so often made me ' 

' Were all but wind ', answered he, ' and have left no trace 
behind them. But this kind of talking answers no end. The whole 
depends on the one word by which you answer me this short question 
— " Will you marry me ? or will you not " ? If you consent, I 
will secret the papers that set aside the will, and so we shall share 
the fortune between us. If you refuse, I will give them up to his 
family, who will directly defeat your claim, and then you may follow 
for your living that libertine way of life you appear so fond of ; 
for I have no notion of damning my character in this world, and 
my soul in the next, to serve any other but myself. Consider, 
therefore, before you speak, as I will go directly from you to them, 
if you refuse me '. 

Such a menace was not ineffectual to one who knew him so vrelh 
' Will nothing else satisfy you ' ? replied she, bvirsting into tears. 
' No part of the fortune ; and to continue as we are at present, 
man and wife in everything but the cursed ceremony ' ? 

' No, that ceremony is everything I want, and nothing else ; 
because that only can give me a right to your fortune ; for, as to 
your person, I would not have you think I set any value on that — 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 439 

I have long since had enough of it — and for sharing the fortune, 
I am resolved I will have all, or none ; and this is the reason why 
I make you such an ofier ; for, otherwise, I assure you I hate 
marriage as much as you possibly can. So let me have your answer 
directly, for I will not trifle thus a moment longer '. 

The manner in which he said this left her no room to doubt hia 
resolution. ' Well, then ', replied she, sighing, ' if you will have 
it so, it must be so ; and I consent because I cannot help it. But 
when is this blessed marriage to be solemnized ' ? 

' As for that, I am in no more hurry than you. All I desire is, that 
you will directly sign a, promise of marriage, whenever I think 
proper to call upon you. I'll go this instant and draw it up ; and 
leave you to consider how much better this is for us both, than to 
have disagreed, and let all go to his family '. He waited not for a 
reply ; nor was long before he returned with the deed, which she 
signed with evident reluctance. 



CHAPTER XXXIX 

ACCOTTNTS OF THE METHODS WHICH CHEYSAL'S MASTEB TOOK TO 
OBVIATE THE EPrBCTS OF HIS PBINCIPAL'S EESENTMENT, WITH 
THE CHABACTEEISTIO OONVEKSATION THAT PASSED BETWEEN 
THEM ON THE FOEMEB'S AVOWING THE COLONEL'S WILL — CHBYSAL's 
MASTBE OVEESHOOTS THE MARK, AND PEOVOKES HIS PEINCIPAL 
TO DO MOEE THAN HE EVEE INTENDED — AN TTNCOMMON INSTANCE 
OF THE JtrSTICB OF THE WOELD — CHBYSAL'S MASTEE OBLIGES 
THE LADY TO COTJET HIM IN HEE TTTEN, AND AT LENGTH MABEIES 
HEE — THE CONSEQUENCBS OF STTCH A MAEEIAGE, AND EEtTITS OF 
THE STJOCESS OF ALL THEIR SCHEMES 

This point being settled, the next thing was to produce the colonel's 
will, the thought of doing which gave him some alarm, in spite of 
all his fortitude, as it would be throwing off the mask he had worn 
all his life, and declaring war with his principal, who he judged from 
himself would not fail to publish to the world the meanness of his 
original, and the misery from which his compassion had raised him. 
But such thoughts, disagreeable as they might be, could not divert 
him from his purpose. To disable his principal, though, as far 
as possible from carrying his resentment any further than words, 
he ransacked all hia papers, and took away not only such as related 
immediately to the private transactions between themselves, but 
also those of other people, with whom they had been concerned in 
business in order to distress his circumstances, and involve him in 
such perplexities as should lay him under a necessity of keeping 
fair with him. But this precaution, like many others dictated by 
the same spirit, occasioned the very thing it was designed to prevent. 
The first news of this affair was like a thunderclap to the family 
of the colonel. My master's principal, who, though, in the course 
of law and nature, had the first expectations, as I have said before, 
could not believe it to be true, so high was his confidence in the 



440 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

honesty and attachment of my master. To satisfy, however, the 
importunities of his family, he came to him, and with a look of in- 
dignation at the baseness of such a report, rather than apprehension 
of the truth of it, ' I am come ', said he, ' to tell you a piece of news, 
I have just this moment heard, which is, that the colonel has left 
his whole fortune between that jade, his mistress, and you ; and 
that you were privy to his will, which he left in your hands when 
he was going abroad. But the latter part of the story makes me 
easy about the rest ; for, whatever his capricious temper might 
lead him to do, I am convinced you would have no hand in so base 
an affair, nor even conceal his having such an intention from me 
a moment. I see you are shocked at the scandalous imputation ; 
but do not think I mention it as if I believed it. I could not do 
you so much wrong '. 

The first impressions of youth can never be totally effaced. 
Though my master could lay schemes to cheat his principal, and 
revile him behind his back, he had learned to look at him with 
an awe, when a beggar about his brother's house, and afterwards 
his servant, that he could never after get over, when in his presence. 
This awe, added to the confusion of conscious guilt, made him unable 
to make any answer for some moments, and had wrought that 
change in his countenance which the other took notice of. 

As soon as he could collect spirits to speak, ' I — I — I am obliged 
to every one f — f — for their good opinion of me ', said he, with his 
eyes fixed on the grormd, and faltering at every word ; ' and hope 
I shall not f — f — forfeit it by accepting the favours of my friends '. 

' How ' ! interrupted the other, eagerly. ' What can you mean 
by that ? You surely do not, cannot, avow ' ! 

' As for that, sir ', returned my master, plucking up a little more 
assurance, ' what I avow or disavow is nothing to the purpose. 
I presume that my most dear and worthy friend, the colonel, had 
a right to leave his fortune to whom he pleased ; and that whoever 
he has left it to has also a right to take it, without being answerable 
to your opinion, or that of any others, who may be prejudiced by 
you ; for the world will judge better, and be satisfied that he had 
sufficient reasons for what he has done '. 

' And so, then, it is even so ', replied the other, after a long pause ; 
■ and this is the return I meet for raising you from wretchedness, 
and admitting you to the first place in the esteem and confidence 
of my heart. Cherish a viper in your bosom, and he will sting you 
to death. But it is beneath me to upbraid you. I leave the revenge 
of my wrongs to yoxir own conscience and the justice of Heaven ; 
and from this moment disclaim all intercourse with you ; nor shall 
my lips ever more utter your name, if I can help it. The sight of 
you is a pain to me. I will send a person to take my affairs out of 
your hands, and desire you will directly provide yourself another 
habitation. Unhappy for me was the day when I first gave shelter 
to your misery in mine '. Saying this, he turned away, without 
waiting for a reply, and left the room. 

This insolent behaviour — for so my master called it, as soon as 
the other was gone — was such an affront to his honour as in his 
opinion cancelled all obligations, and justified everything he had done. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 441 

or could do against him. Giving vent to his resentment, therefore, 
in a burst of blasphemous execrations, he proceeded in the execution 
of his schemes with this improvement, that to obviate the imputa- 
tions of base dishonesty and ingratitude, which his own conscience 
told him his principal would publish to the world against him, he 
loaded him with every scandal that his inventive malice could 
suggest. But this, instead of answering his purpose, produced the 
very contrary efiect, as it put him under a necessity of laying open 
things to vindicate his own character which indignant shame of 
having placed his confidence so unworthily would otherwise have 
made him conceal ; and in this instance the world was not dazzled 
by success, but directly paid his villainy with the infamy it deserved. 

As for the lady, fashion made it necessary for her to put on all 
the mimicry of woe, in which she persisted most decently for the 
usual time, at the end of which she found her husband that was 
to be so slack in his addresses that she was obliged to court him, 
as such an unsettled life was equally contrary to her interest and 
inclinations. This answered a double end. It gratified his vanity 
— for he took care to make it known — and seemed to obviate the 
credit of the contract between them, should it ever happen to be 
■discovered. Accordingly, he kept off a little longer ; and at length 
consented, with the affected irresolution of a man of the most 
delicate principles and sense of honour. As he only got a legal 
right by his marriage to what he was already in possession of he 
soon grew tired of the state, the circumstances of which in his 
particular case could not be very pleasing to any man. However, 
to avoid the evils of which he was most immediately afraid, he went 
to live in the country, where he permitted his wife to see nobody 
but those he approved, and in company with himself. Nor was he 
satisfied that his utmost vigilance could prove effectual, as he had 
experience of the looseness of her principles, and her expertness 
in all the arts of intrigue. 

Their situation, in these circumstances, may be easily conceived. 
Continual suspicions, quarrels, and recriminations, aggravated their 
mutual dislike to the most rancorous hatred, and made their lives 
such a scene of misery, that they themselves looked upon it as a 
commencement of Heaven's vengeance on their crimes ; while all 
who knew them expected in horror that they would make that ven- 
geance still more signally dreadful, by wreaking their hatred upon 
each other's lives, or their despair upon their own. All the advan- 
tages, thus dearly earned, were an affluence disgusting for want 
of power of enjojmient, except in an external pomp that only mocked 
the misery within, and made the meanness it was designed to hide 
the more remarkable. 



442 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 



CHAPTER XL 

chrysal's master designs to set up a coach, but wants a 
matbeial article towards making a proper figure with it — 
he consults with a herald, who gives him an elaborate 
dissertation, not the most pleasing to him, on coats op 
arms, and the modern methods op making them, in which 
he unpolds many curious mysteries, ast) undertakes at 

last, on proper encouragement, to make him a gentlemau 

chrysal changes his service — conversation between his 
new master and an antiquarian — curious argttments, by 
which he proves the genuineness and importancb op certain 
relics op antiquity — chrysal changes his service 

In this age of delicacy and refinement tlie fijst thing thought of in 
genteel life is a carriage, which is so indispensably necessary to pro- 
cure respect, that no eroinence in science, no practice of virtue, is 
held in esteem, where that is wanted. Sensible of this, my master 
resolved to bespeak one, the elegance and grandeur of which should 
prove his taste and magnificent spirit. One difficulty, though, 
perplexed him not a little in the design. This was, his want of a 
coat of arms to decorate the outside of it, and display to the world 
his illustrious descent. After much fruitless mechtation on so 
important a subject, it occurred to him that a herald must be the 
proper person to consult with upon the best means of remedying 
this defect. Accordingly, he inquired for the most eminent in that 
way, and, on the morning fixed for his attendance, prepared to 
receive him in such a manner as he imagined could not fail to 
inspire him with respect. He was lolling at breakfast in an elbow- 
chair ; dressed in a morning-gown of green damask, with a red cap 
on his head, the cambric lining of which was edged with a rich lace 
that turned up over it, and crimson velvet slippers on his feet, one 
of which was extended on a cushion of the same materials, to give 
him the appearance of the gout, a disorder which he looked upon 
as an incontestible proof of his being sprung from a good family, 
while his lady poured out his tea, and between every dish read a 
paragraph in the newspapers to entertain him. 

As soon as the herald was shown in, my master cast an eye upon 
his lady, and nodding majestically towards the door, she withdrew, 
and left him to his business. After the usual questions about the 
weather and the news, my master at length entered upon the sub- 
ject. ' I understand, s — s — s— sir ', said he, faltering, and almost 
blushing in spite of his assurance, ' that you have great skill in 
heraldry : and, therefore, desired to see you to consult about my 
c — c — c — coat of arms '. 

' I do presume, sir ', answered the herald, with an air of import- 
ance, ' to have some knowledge in that mysterious and sublime 
science, and hope I shall not wrong the character you have received of 
me in anything in which you are pleased to employ me. Hem ! 
ahem ! Pray, sir, what may be the nature of your present com- 
mands ? I suppose you want to introduce into your own coat the 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 443 

bearing of some branch of your family, which is fallen to you. 
There is nothing in the world easier to be done, that is by one 
who, as I said before, understands the science. It is only dividing 
the field properly, and taking care that the blazoning of the different 
quarterings, of which all good families gain many in a long course 
of descents, may not be wrongly blended, as colour upon colour, 
or metal upon metal, which you must know is false heraldry ; 
though, I beg pardon, your blazoning is most likely in precious 
stones, the peculiar emblems of nobility with us. But that makes no 
difference, as I will convince you, if you please to let me see your arms'. 

' Sir ', replied my master, still more confounded by this jargon, 
' that is not what I want. I would have an entire n— n — ^new coat '. 

' Oh ! I understand you, sir ! you are the first of your family ; 
and want to make arms for yourself, as none of your ancestors have 
left you any. Why, sir, that too may be done ; but it must be 
with judgment and care, as I said before, for fear of interfering 
with the arms of any other family. But, you may trust me for that, 
sir. HaU the arms you see cut such a figure about the town are of 
my devising. The king may make lords and knights of whom he 
pleases, but it is the herald must make them gentlemen ; for what 
is any man without a coat of arms ? Pray, sir, what is your name ? 
and of what profession was your father ' ? 

' Wh — wh — why do you ask ? I suppose there cannot be any- 
thing material to your purpose in them ' ? 

' Pardon me, good sir, they are material, very material. A name, 
especially if it consists of many syllables, often gives an excellent 
hint ; for, as much as your modern wits may affect to despise the 
mysterious learning of rebuses, wiser antiquity held it in higher 
repute, as you must have observed from the many illustrious coats 
of arms taken entirely from the name ; and then knowledge of the 
profession of a gentleman's father is absolutely necessary for many 
reasons. There are professions, the implements of which are never 
dropped, because the professions themselves are reckoned honour- 
able, as there also are others, nothing relating to which is ever 
borne for the contrary reason. The son of a general or an admiral, 
for instance, will have his arms charged with implements of war ; 
but the son of a man who keeps a chandler's shop will never bear 
a lump of butter, or bunch of candles, nor the son of a tailor, a pair 
of scissors or a thimble, for these would at once betray what is 
designed to be hid ; and therefore it is absolutely necessary that 
I should be informed of these particulars '. 

' B — b^b — but, sir, can you not strike out something entirely 
new, without alluding to any name or profession at all ? I am 
willing to pay you well for your trouble, only let me have something 
elegant and grand '. 

' I understand you, sir. I'll engage to please you. I'll quarter 
you the coat of a crovraed head ' in an instant without anybody's 
being able to say a word against it. Leave it to me, and I'll engage 
to please you ; not the richest contractor or nabob of them all shall 
make such a figure '. 

' Fleur de Lys [Davis's Olio]. 



444 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

' And pray, sir, -what is your price for a job of this kiad ' ? 

' Price, sir ? I never make bargains ; let common mechanics do 
that ; gentleman always make me a present, when they bespeak 
their honours ; and, according to the value of that, my invention 
is either high or low '. 

' Well, sir, it shan't sink on that account now. Here are ten 
guineas for you, as an earnest of what I will give if I like your work, 
when it is done '. 

' Sir, you may depend on having the highest arms of any man in 
the kingdom. Your generosity shows that you ought to be a 
gentleman ; and it shall be my fault if I don't make you one in 
the sight of the world '. Saying this, he took his leave, when I was 
heartily glad to go with him, being part of the price paid upon this 
occasion for the making of a gentleman. 

As soon as my new master went home, he retired to his closet, 
and, taking out the money he had just received, ' Ha ! ha ! ha ! 
no bad price for a little daubing ' ! said he, laughing and chinking 
the purse. I wonder how the fellow could be such an ass as to 
think that anything in my power to do could make him pass for 
gentleman. But let him have his way ; his folly is my gain ; and 
it is no more than justice that one who has cheated the world so 
long, should cheat himself at last, and sacrifice the earnings of 
villany to vanity. But, hold, this is about the time my antiquarian 
was to come. Let me see those ancient manuscripts and inscriptions 
which I had done last week. Upon my life, they look very well. 
The canker upon this copper, and the smoke upon this parchment 
are as natural as if they were the work of a thousand years ; and 
these scrawls might pass even for the spells of the witch of Endor, 
they have so little likeness to any marks made to convey thought 
at this time. He is a very pretty fellow that did them and 
deserves encouragement '. 

Just as he said this the person he expected came, and entering 
without ceremony upon his business, ' I called upon you, sir ', said 
he, ' to see those things you mentioned to me. If they are really 
what you describe, we shall not dififer about the price, high as it is '- 

' I hope, sir ', answered my master, ' you have not so mean an 
opinion of my judgment as to imagine I could ever think of im- 
posing upon you. No, sir ; I know that to be impossible, even 
if I could be base enough to attempt it ; and, therefore, would not 
mention anything to you that could admit of the least doubt to a 
person of your profound learning. As to the price, I could have 
had much more since I saw you ; but I thought it but justice to 
their merit to offer them first to you, as there is no other collection 
in the kingdom worthy of them ; and I am above rising in a demand 
I have once made, though infinitely short of their intrinsic value, 
as you will be convinced the moment you see them. Here, sir, is 
the manuscript which I had the good fortune to meet with, as I was 
rummaging among some old records in our office, that had never been 
stirred since the reign of Henry VIII. The paper in which it was 
wrapped was so decayed that it mouldered quite away, so immedi- 
ately upon its coming into the open air that I had scarce time to 
read the contents, which were that this parchment had been found 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 445 

in the tomb of Thomas a Beoket, upon the breaking up of his shrine 
at the Reformation, and -was laid up there on account of its an- 
tiquity. That it must have been very ancient, even before his 
time, the colour and decay of the parchment could sufficiently 
prove, were there not other proofs stiU more convincing to such as 
have judgment to comprehend them. The shape of the letter shows 
its age. This manner of writing, as appears by comparing it with 
other ancient manuscripts, was introduced in the beginning of the 
second century of the Christian era, and quite dropped by the 
middle of the third. Within that period, therefore, it must have 
been written. Its antiquity being thus fixed, the purport of it is 
next to be considered ; and of that and its importance, there can 
be no just room to doubt. This spot at the bottom of the parch- 
ment, though so much defaced by time, bears a strong resemblance 
to the impression of a mitre, and thereby proves that some bishop 
was the author of what was written over it, into which these four 
letters, m — a — t — ^h, fortunately so very plain, give the clearest 
light ; for as they must have been part of the word Arimathaea, 
they prove that the opinion of Joseph of Arimath^a having first 
preached the gospel in Britain was known so early as in the second 
century, and so decide that long-contested point ; as, who can 
be such an infidel as to doubt a thing given thus, as I may say, under 
the sacred seal of the mitre, and that so very near the time '- 

' Very true ; but is it not as probable that the design of this 
writing was to refute that opinion, as to confirm it ' ? 

' My good sir, if you allow weight to such trivial objections as this, 
you give up all the knowledge of an antiquarian, which never 
amounts higher than to possible conjecture, without regard to 
probability even against him ; for conjectures such as this, founded 
on effaced remains of antiquity, are of much greater weight in the 
learned world, because they show more learning than the plainest 
conclusions drawn from evident and complete records, as these are 
obvious to any common person. But, why do I mention these 
things to you, who understand them so much better than I pretend 
to do'. 

' I believe I do, sir, know something of those matters ; and was 
satisfied both of its antiquity and importance, at the first glance 
of my eye ; though I started that objection for mere amusement. 
But where is the fragment ? I should be glad to see that also '. 

' Here it is, sir ', answered my master, taking a bit of broken 
copper out of a box, in which it was carefully wrapped in cotton. 
' This plate of copper was torn in the manner you see, from the head 
of a sepulchral monument, on the top of Mount Libanus, by a person 
who had been sent thither by a celebrated society, on purpose to 
seek for such things ; and at his return made me a present of it, 
as the most valuable acquisition he had made, out of gratitude for 
my having helped him to the job. Observe this canker, sir. Much 
as it has been rubbed off in the carriage, the depth and colour of it 
show that it must have been some thousands of years in gathering. 
What the occasion of setting it up was, some particular circum- 
stances direct to a conjecture sufficiently probable. You see this 
hole which the canker has eaten almost through the copper, with. 



446 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

this stroke turning up over it. This, certainly, is the remains of 
the figure of a lion, as is plain from these two tufts in the middle, 
and at the end of the stroke, -which must have been the tail of it. 
Now, as the lion was the emblem of Judah, it cannot be doubted 
but some great personage of that tribe must have been buried 
where this emblem was set up — a circumstance that so clearly 
proves the antiquity of coats of arms, that I do not know how to 
think of parting with it, as it affords such an illustration to a treatise 
I am at this time engaged in writing on that sublime and difficult 
subject ' 

' Not part with it ', replied the antiquarian, returning it carefully 
into the box, and then cramming the box into his bosom. ' You 
must get it first, my good friend, to part with. Ha ! ha ! ha ! a 
very pretty jest, truly. You offer a thing to sale, and set a price 
upon it, and then you cannot part with it ; a very pretty jest, 
truly. Here is your money, both for the manuscript and the frag- 
ment ; and when you meet with any other such precious remains 
of antiquity, I shall be obliged to you to let me have the pre- 
ference. Nobody will give you a better price '. 

Saying this, he reached my master a bank-note, which he took 
with an air of dissatisfaction ; and while he was telling out change, 
' You do as you please with me, sir ', said he, ' this time, but the 
next I shall be more upon my guard. I am glad^ however, that it 
goes into so noble a collection as yours, where it will have justice 
done to its merit '. 

^ ' Ay, sir ' answered the antiquarian, with a smile of self-com- 
placency. ' I have been at some pains, and expense too, to make 
a collection ; and have the satisfaction to think that whenever 
I die, it will make as good a figure in a sale catalogue as that of 
most of my contemporaries. I shall leave proofs behind me that 
I have not spent my life in vain. What would I not give to hear 
the character which an able auctioneer will give of me upon open- 
ing the sale. I wish my good friend Puff may outlive me to have 
the job. There is no man sets forth the merit of anything in 
such happy terms. He has words at wiU, as they say. What a 
high opinion will he raise of my learning, taste, and judgment. But 
that's right ; you said you wanted this fragment for a particular 
occasion. I am by no means averse to obliging you. You are 
welcome to quote it, as in my collection, suppose in this, or some 
such maimer : " As it appears " — proving what you have advanced 
before — " by a most valuable and rare antique fragment — or what- 
ever else you shall call it — in the most curious, or costly, or in- 
estimable, or noble, or perhaps all these, collection of my late most 
learned, and judicious, and indefatigable and munificent friend ", 
or whatever other titles of the kind your judgment and regard shall 
dictate to you '. 

t' ' I am much obliged to you for the favour ', returned my master, 
scarce able to restrain his laughter, ' and shall be sure to avail 
myself of it at the proper time, as also to do it in a manner which, 
however short it may fall of your merit, will yet testify my high 
and respectful sense of it '. Saying this, he gave him the change 
of his note, among which I was, and sent him away happy. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 447 



CHAPTER XLI 

A MODEST METHOD OF SEEKING FAME — CHEYSAl'S MASTER CON- 
FIRMS HIMSELF IN HIS EESOLTTTION TO GEATIFY AN -UNCOMMON 
CtJBIOSITY, BY A QEBAT EXAMPLE — THE JTIDICIOUS AND LEARNED 
MANNER IN WHICH HE CLASSED AND ENTERED HIS NEW AC- 
QUISITIONS — CURIOUS REMARK ON THE VALUE OF BOOKS — HE 
GOES TO AN AUCTION, WHERE HE MAKES AN EXTRAORDINARY 
PURCHASE — CHRYSAL CHANGES HIS SERVICE FOR THAT OP THE 
AUCTIONEER — SPECIMEN AND EFFECTS OF HIS NEW MASTER'S 
ELOQUENCE, LEARNING, AND JUDGMENT 

A man's spending his life and fortune in buying up books of learning 
and obscure remains of antiquity, only to make a great sale after 
his death, was a method of seelong fame more modest than I had 
hitherto met among mankind. As soon as my new master reached 
home, he went directly into his museum, and, taking out his rare 
purchases, stared at them for some time in a kind of stupid delight, 
till no longer able to contain it. ' What an opinion ', said he, 
' win the world have of me, when all these come to be shown for 
sale ? I hope my worthy friend Puff will live to do me justice. 
What if I should beg of him to give me a specimen of the maimer in 
which he will set them out ? He cannot refuse me that gratification 
in return for all the money he has taken from me, especially, as 
I have told him that I design he shall have the job. It has the 
sanction of one of the greatest names in antiquity to support it. 
CScero, the great Gcero, desired his friend, the historian, to let 
him know what he intended to say of him ; and need I hesitate 
to follow his example ? Whatever has the authority of antiquity 
must be right ; and, therefore, I will go to him directly about it. 
But, hold ! I must enter these articles in my catalogue first '. 
Then taking down a huge folio, richly bound, and iascribed cata- 
logue on the back and sides, in capitals of gold, he sat down to insert 
this valuable addition to his treasure, and opening the book with 
great deliberation, ' What are the heads ', said he, ' under which 
they are to be classed ? Let me see. Antiques ! No ; that is 
for my coins, and busts, and urns. What is the next ? Ancient 
manuscripts and fragments ? Ay, these are they. Let me consider 
now, what are the titles ' ? Then laying the forefinger of his right 
hand upon the tip of his nose, supporting his chin with his thumb, 
shutting his eyes, and leaning back in his chair, on the arm of which 
he rested his elbow, ' How unlucky it was ', resumed he, after a long 
pause, ' that he did not tell their names. I was ashamed to ask 
him directly, though I did as much, if he had minded me. But, 
can't I make them out from what he said ? A very antique manu- 
script — No ! that will not do. Antique is for works of art ; ancient 
is the word here. A very ancient manuscript written by Thomas 
k Becket in the second century, and found in his tomb at the 
Restoration, proving that Joseph of Arimathsea was an English 
bishop. Yes ; that is it. And then for the fragment — a very 
ancient — no, antique. Antique is the word for fragments ; they 



448 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

are made by art — a very antique fragment torn from a monument 
on Mount Libanus, proving that some great person was buried 
there ; and that a lion was the arms of Judah. Ay ; these will do. 
I knew I could make them out. This is just the substance of what 
he said, but in fewer and better words. Titles should be short 
and pithy. Multum in parvo — much in a little compass. Let me 
alone for hitting off a striking title. I have not been an anti- 
quarian so long for nothing '. Then conning them over twice or 
thrice, to try how they sounded, he entered them in his catalogue, 
and putting the book back into its place, sat down to contemplate 
his own consequence in the learned world. But, sublime as this 
enjoyment was, his indefatigable industry would not permit him 
to indulge it long. ' Ha ' ! said he, starting as upon sudden re- 
collection, ' that's right ! the sale of those Chinese characters 
brought over in the last fleet comes on about this very time. It 
was quite out of my head ; and I would not have missed them on 
any account. They'll make a capital article ; for the Chinese 
taste is coming into such great vogue, that I suppose we shall soon 
learn their language ; though I should be sorry to see that, too ; 
as it would lessen the value of my Chinese books ; for books are 
now valued the more for not being understood, as I know by ex- 
perience, having laid out many a po\md in the purchase of such 
as I understood no more of than if they were Chinese. But let 
those who know no other use of books but to read them buy only 
such as they can read ; I collect mine for another purpose, and a 
noble collection I will have, let it cost me what it will. I care not 
whether I die worth a groat beside ; the fame of that is fortune 
enough for me '. 

Pursuant to this noble resolution, he went directly to the sale, 
where he was so charmed with the auctioneer's learning and elo- 
quence, that he outbid everybody, and carried off in triumph the 
curious, the rare, the inestimable key into all the mysterious, the 
profound, the sublime wisdom of that prince of all philosophers, 
legislators, and hierarchs, the divine Con — fut — see, and all his 
learned and judicious disciples and commentators, the Chinese 
characters ; in paying for which, I changed his service for that of 
the auctioneer. 

My new master i proceeded for the remainder of the sale to display 
his abilities in the same extraordinary manner ; giving circum- 
stantial accounts of things he knew nothing of ; and bestowing the 
most extravagant praises for excellencies of his own invention, 
often inconsistent with each other, and -with the subject to which 
they were ignorantly attributed, with a confidence that bore down 
doubt, and gained implicit credit with the gaping crowd, in defiance 
to reason and their very senses, till he led them on by little and 
little to pay the price of such an imaginary value. But this will 
be best explained by an instance that happened just after I came 
into his possession. The sale of that day consisted nominally 
of the collection of a cheesemonger lately deceased, who had been 
an eminent antiquarian and virtuoso. I say nominally, because, 

1 Mr Prestagi, the auctioneer [Davis's Olio]. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 449 

though the whole went under his name, scarce the tenth part of it 
had ever been his, the rest being made up from every quarter by 
my master. Among the rare, curious, and costly articles exhibited 
on this occasion, was a vessel of porcelain, of an uncommon shape, 
ornamented with several odd and uncouth representations of 
animals, and some figures not unlike the characters of a language. 
' Gentlemen ', said my master, as soon as this was produced, ' you 
see here one of the rarest and most valuable remains of antiquity 
ever brought into Europe. This here superb vase was the identical 
cup out of which the sublime emperors of China for numberless ages 
drank the consecrated wine on the day of their coronation. It was 
found, gentlemen, among the treasures of the great Mogul, by 
Thomas Couli Can, when he dethroned that there prince, out of 
a wreck of whose spoils, when they were lost in passing the river 
of the Indies, it was saved by a Chinese nabob, from whom it was 
afterwards taken, together with his crown, by that there heaven- 
bom general, who made those effeminate and dastardly Indians 
tremble at the name of an Englishman, and given by him as a 
precious token of his esteem to the deceased, his very learned and 
curious friend. This, gentlemen, is in few words the whole, full, 
and true account of this here inestimable curiosity, every word of 
which can be proved by unquestionable authority. As for the 
vase itself, exclusive of all this, its own merits give it sufficient 
value. Observe these here figures, gentlemen ; they are Egyptian 
hieroglyphics, denoting the duties of a sovereign, which those wise 
mandarins always take care to instruct their emperors in. This 
here lion, for instance, signifies that he must be courageotis and 
valiant ; this fox, that he must be wise ; and so on. But the 
most extraordinary thing of all, gentleman, is these here characters. 
They are a talisman or charm, invented by Mahomet to protect 
the owner of this cup from the influence of evil spirits. I do not 
presume, gentlemen, to stand up for the virtue of such things. 
The notion of spirits, I am sensible, is much exploded ; and the 
religion of Mahomet cried down among us ; but still, gentlemen, 
without entering into these here nice points, we all know that he 
was a great man, and lived a long while ago, which is sufficient 
to make anything that was his of great value to men of learning 
who are above prejudice in these matters. But, besides all this, 
these here characters are of the greatest importance on another 
account, as they prove beyond dispute, that the true method of 
writing the learned languages was without accents, not one appear- 
ing, as you see, gentlemen, in the most original and authentic relic 
of ancient learning, and so put an end to that there controversy 
that has so long puzzled the world. It were presumption in me, 
gentlemen, to attempt putting a value on a thing that is invaluable. 
I wUl, therefore, set it up at what you please, as you are the best 
judges. This only, I will make bold to say, that the best judge of 
all will have it, as he will give most for it ; for too much it is 
impossible to give ' 

So just an account, and such judicious praise, could not fail 
of effect. The virtuosi round him, satisfied that what he said 
must be true, because spoken with confidence and above their 

2p 



450 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

compreliension, vied with each other for the possession of so 
inestimable a treasure, till they raised it to an height at which they 
themselves were surprised, as soon as the spirit of bidding began to 
cool and they had time to reflect. 



CHAPTER XLII 

AN TTUSAVOTTEY ACCOOTTT STOPS HIM SHORT IN HIS HABANGTTE — 
HE TURNS OFF THE JEST WITH ANOTHBB, AND ACCOUNTS LEAENEDLT 
FOB VS^HAT HAS HAPPENED — THE EEAL CAUSE AND CONSEQUENCE 
OF THAT ACCIDENT — BEFLBCTIONS ON AUCTIONEEEEfa, AND THE 
CAUSES OF ITS SUCCESS 

This was the time for which he always reserved the highest flights 
of his eloquence, to raise that spirit again. Resuming, therefore, 
his harangue, ' You pause, gentlemen ', said he, ' only to consider 
how much further you may rise with safety ; for it is impossible 
that persons of your profound taste and judgment should disgrace 
them so much, as to let such a jewel go for a mere trifle. Do not 
take my word, gentlemen, for its value. I may be mistaken, but 
you cannot. Examine it, therefore, yourselves. Observe the 
beauty of these here unknown figures ; read these unintelligible 
characters ; and smell the aromatic odour which the vase still 
retains, and ever will retain, from the quintessences of all the spices 
of the Indies, which used to be mixed with the consecrated wine. 
The perfume is almost enough to revive the dead '. 

Saying this, he went to smell it himself, to lead the way to the 
rest, and putting the mouth of it to his nose, without taking off 
the cover, that the fragrance should not evaporate, as he raised his 
hand, a stream, that emitted a savour far from aromatic, gushed 
out into his face and filled his mouth, as well as nose, with something 
more substantial than perfume. It is impossible to describe his 
situation at such a disgraceful accident. Surprise, shame, and loath- 
ing aggravated each other, and threw him into such confusion, as 
once in his life deprived him of utterance for some moments. As 
soon as he had emptied his mouth, and wiped his face, ' Villain ',■ 
sputtered he to his servant, ' how has this happened ? Whom 
have you let play me this base and malicious low-lived trick ' ? 

' S — s — sir ', answered the fellow, as well as his struggle to sup- 
press his laughter permitted him to speak, ' I know nothing of the 
matter ; I never left anyone a moment alone among the things, 
but them there ladies, who, I told you, sent me out for a glass of 
ratafia the other morning ; and how could I have suspected their 
doing such a thing ' ? 

' Ratafia ' ? replied my master, who had by this time recovered 
his assurance, and knew the best way to turn off one jest by another, 
' gin, you should say ; for, if I can judge by taste and smell, that 
is their liquor. I suppose they did it on purpose to revenge their 
sex upon Mahomet for taking away their souls — I wish he had also 
taken away the filthiness of their dispositions — by defiling so 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 451 

celebrated a monument of his learning and skill in this nasty manner, 
ha ! ha ! ha ' ! 

The oddity of such a thought naturally made the company join 
in his laugh ; but could not so far wipe off the disgrace which the 
defiled vase had suffered, as to make any more be ofiered for it, 
so that it was forced to be knocked down to the last bidder, at not 
much more than if it had been made of gold, at which the purchaser 
and my master were equally mortified, though for different and with 
very unequal reasons. As for the cause of this misfortune, it was 
really what the servant said. One of the ladies who came to view 
the curiosities, having certain pressing occasions, feigned a pretence 
to send him out, and in the meantime made such use of the vase, 
being the first convenienoy that came to her hand, as overpowered 
the scent of some spices which had been put into it for the purpose. 
It was fortunate for my master that this was the last article in the 
sale of that day, as a spirit of ridicule could not be favourable to 
his businessi 

As soon as the company were gone, he settled his accounts, and 
summing up the profits, ' Why, this is pretty well ' ! said he, rubbing 
his hands, and shrugging up his shoulders ; ' this does pretty well I 
Though, if that damned accident had not happened ', turning up 
his nose, and spitting with loathing, ' it would have been much 
better. The fools were in the humour, and wanted only to be kept 
up. However, I have not much right to complain upon the whole. 
That there Jordan cost me five shillings, and I have sold it for fifty 
pounds. Much good may the judicious buyer make of his bargain 1 
This is the happiness of a man's having his tongue well hung. A 
mealy mouth will never do for my business ; which, after all, is the 
best going. I might have stood freezing behind a counter this 
month, and not made half this much, in the way of fair trade as 
it is called. People have their senses about them, and stand to 
examine before they buy, but any trumpery will go off in this way '. 
Ihave observed your astonishment at the easiness with which 
my"; master succeeded in such gross imposition ; but the reason 
of it is obvious. All mankind have an ambition of distinguishing 
themselves one way or another, and generally chose that in which 
they have the least qualifications to entitle them to success, in 
order to hide their own deficiency. The coward, for instance, 
affects valour ; the blockhead, knowledge ; and the illiterate 
tradesman, who has made a fortune by plodding on in some illiberal 
business, taste and judgment in the abstrusest pursuits of learned 
curiosity, in which, as there is no fixed rule to judge by, caprice 
takes the direction, and opens an ample field for imposition. As 
to the business of auctioneering in general, it owes the greater part 
of that success, with which my master was so well pleased, to another 
cause — the desire of buying bargains, which governs everyone who 
buys anything, makes people crowd to those places where things 
are to be sold, not as in the regular course of trade, for what they 
appear to be worth, but for the most that can be got for them ; 
and there emulation, dependence on each other's judgment, ' those 
people know what they are doing, and would not bid so much, if it 
was not worth more ', and the oratory of the auctioneer, leads them 



452 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

by insensible advances, as their spirits rise, to give prices which 
they never meant to give, when they began to bid. That great 
bargains are often got at such places is true, but that is chiefly in 
a particular branch of the business, the mystery of which will be 
explained to you. 



CHAPTER XLIII 

OHKYSAL's MASTBE is visited by a COmiOISSEtrB, TO WHOM HE 
GIVES A SHOET KEOEIPT HOW TO MAKE HIS PICTUEES SELL, A2TD 
MAKES SOME STEIKINO EEMAEKS ON THE DISEBGABD PEOPLE 
SHOW POK THE FAMILIES, WHICH SENDS HIS VISITOE AWAY IN A 
HtlTP 

My master was interrupted in his pleasing meditations by the 
entrance of a gentleman, the sight of whom promised him the great- 
est pleasure of carrying the subject of them into execution. After 
some judicious remarks on the taste of the town, and the present 
state of virtu, in the course of which, each liberally complimented 
the other, ' Pray, sir ', said the gentleman, ' how do pictures sell 
this season ' ? 

' Never better, sir ', answered my master. ' Pictures are every- 
body's money now. A good master brings anything ; and what 
is more, I am convinced they will rise still higher, so that buyers 
have no time to lose. I have a sale next week, when you will see 
such prizes as will astonish you. There are some things there, 
that I know you will have, let them cost what they will ; they suit 
your fine collection so exactly '. 

' Why, as to that ', replied the gentleman, ' my mind is a good 
deal changed. I have taken it into my head lately to part with my 
pictures, and have therefore called upon you to desire that you 
will come in the morning, and let me know what you think they are 
worth '- 

' Worth, sir ! they are worth a great deal of money ; which there 
is not the least danger but they will bring, if they are managed 
properly. There is more, sir, in the management of a sale, much 
more than most people dream of, I assure you ' 

' I am sensible of that, sir ; and also of your abilities in such 
management, which you will have the best encouragement to 
exert on this occasion, as I propose selling the whole to you 
together, if we can agree '. 

This turn came so unexpected that it struck my master quite 
down in the mouth, as he was sensible that he had overshot him- 
self, and spoiled his market by saying so much. ' It is very un- 
lucky, sir ', answered he, changing his note directly, ' that I did 
not know your intention sooner. I could then have divided them 
properly among the several sales of the season ; but it is now quite 
too late ; this here one next week is the last ; and the catalogues 
for that are all made out and dispersed, so that there is no possibility 
of slipping in a single article. Besides, the buyers have laid out 
all their money '- 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 463 

' Slipping in, sir, I do not understand you. Do not you think 
my pictures are sufficient, both in number and value, to make a 
sale by themselves ? I am sure I have more than once known you 
make noise enough about collections in no respect equal to mine. 
There must be some mystery in this, which I cannot comprehend '. 
' Very true, sir, there are mysteries, as you observe, in all busi- 
nesses ; and, perhaps, in none more than ours '. 

' I am not inquiring into your mysteries. All I desire to know 
is, why, after just telling me that pictures never bore so high a price 
as at this time, and that mine could not fail of bringing a great deal 
of money, you should so soon change your opinion '. 

' Pardon me, sir, I have not changed my opinion in the least ; 
and shall be very proud to serve you to the best of my abilities, in 
the way of a sale ; but there is a material reason why I must beg 
to be excused in buying them, to stand the hazard of it myself '. 
' I should be glad to know what that reason can be, for I must 
own I cannot conceive it '. 

' Why, sir, it is a thing to be sure that may seem odd to you ; 
but experience has taught us the truth of it. In short, sir, it is your 
being alive '. 

' How ! my being aUve ! What difference can my life or death 
make in the value of my pictures ' ? 

' A very great one, sir, I assure you. In all the course of my 
business, I never knew one instance of a sale going off well, where 
the owner was living. People conclude that a person parts with 
pictures either through dislike or necessity. The former, you 
know, depreciates them at once ; nor does the other much less ; 
as people of fashion despise a man, and everything belonging to 
him, the moment it is known that he is in distress. Besides, an 
auctioneer's tongue is tied up from saying anything of a person's 
taste and judgment, and all that, while he is living ; it sounds so 
fulsome ; and you are sensible that a good character of the collector 
often goes a great way in helping off a collection '. 

' The best thing, then, for a man to do on such an occasion, I 
presume, would be to shoot himself through the head ! Heh ' ? 
' Ha ! ha ! ha ! You are pleased to jest, sir ; but to be sure 
it would be of great advantage. Curiosity brings all the world 
upon those occasions ; and then a man has an opportunity of 
eaying so many things, as, that the deceased would not take ten 
times so much, if he were living ; or, that the high price he gave 
it caused the distress that made him kill himself ; or a thousand 
■other striking things of the kind. I never have so much pleasure 
as upon those occasions ; they give a man such room to show 
himself. Indeed, if gentlemen considered the thing in time, more 
of them would take this method of delivering themselves and their 
families both from distress, and not defer it till all is gone, and the 
survivors can make nothing by their death ; but few people take 
any care for their families nowadays. It is a bold push, to be sure ; 
though not so bad as a man's shooting himself to win a wager, 
neither. I should beg your pardon, sir, for speaking so freely, 
but, as I know it is not your case, you cannot take offence ; though, 
«ven If I thought it was, I would not presume to recommend such 



454 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

a thing for the -world. Every person is .to judge for himself. I 
only give you my opinion what efieot it would have '. 

' I understand you very well, sir ', answered the gentleman, who 
had much difficulty to hear him out ; ' and in return for your 
opinion will give you my advice, which is, to consider better whom 
you speak to in this insolent manner another time, for fear of re- 
ceiving such chastisement as contempt alone prevents my giving 
you this moment '. On saying which words he turned about, and 
left the room. 



CHAPTER XLIV 

OHRYSAL's master EBCBrVBS AN" AGREEABLE SUMMONS — ^HTS EN- 
COMIITMS ON THE GENEROSITY OF MERCHANTS, AND ACCOtraTT OF 
THE WAY MANY OE THEM ACQtTERB EEPUTATION FOR TASTE AND 
JITDGMBNT — HE MEETS THE MERCHANT, WHO CONStFLTS HIM ON 
A DIFPERENT BRANCH OP HIS BtTSINESS FROM THAT WHICH HE 
EXPECTED — CHEYSAL'S MASTER, IN ORDER TO ENCOtHBAGE HIS 
CtrSTOMER, GIVES A LARGE ACCOUNT OF HIS OWN ABILITIES, AND 
OPENS SOME CURIOUS SECRETS IN HIS BUSINESS — A BARGAIN IS 
STRUCK, TO THE MUTUAL SATISFACTION OF BOTH PAETIES ; AND 
CHBYSAL CHANGES HIS SERVICE FOR THAT OF THE MERCHANT 

Well as my master was accustomed to rebukes, there was some- 
thing in the nature of this which disconcerted him so much, that 
he had not power to make the gentleman any reply. But he was 
soon relieved from the trepidation into which it threw him, by 
a message from an eminent merchant, to meet him directly at a 
neighbouring tavern. 

' Ay ', said he, adjusting his wig at the glass, and putting on his 
cloak, ' this is the thing. There is some difierence between treating 
with a good substantial citizen, who will mind what a. man says, 
and your people of fashion, who fly into a rage, forsooth, if they 
can't have their own way in everything. No people part with their 
money so freely as merchants. They don't stand higgling, and 
criticising like the others. All they require is, to be asked a good 
price, and then they think a thing must be good, of course. Many 
a time have I got five times more from a merchant than I dared to 
have asked from a duke. I suppose he wants to show his taste 
next week at the sale ; and has sent for me, to tell him which are 
the best pieces, and how much he may bid for them. He is not the 
first citizen whom my instructions have made pass for a man of 
taste and judgment. I love such pupils, they pay so well for their 
learning ; and that more ways than one, for they buy what nobody 
else would bid for ; it is only slipping a puffer or two of quality 
at them, enough of whom come sharking to every sale for that 
purpose only, and they may be raised to any price. No people 
part with their money like merchants '- 

When he came to the tavern, he found the merchant waiting for 
him. After the compliments common upon such occasions were 



ADVENTUBES OF A GUINEA 455 

politely interchanged, ' I desired to see you ', said the merchant, 
proceeding to business, though not -without evident confusion, 
on an affair that will convince you of my confidence in your abilities 
and honour. Trade, as you know, has been so dead for some time 
past that there is no getting in a penny of money without tearing 
people to pieces. Now, as I had rather suffer something myself, 
than oppress any honest man till he can bring his affairs about, 
I should be glad to dispose of some parcels of goods even under 
their value, to raise money for present occasions ; that is, provided 
it can be done in such a manner as not to be known, as such a thing 
might injure a man's credit '. 

' Dear sir ', answered my master, whose heart leaped with joy 
at the mention of such an affair, ' never fear that ; I'U engage to 
manage it so, that if everyone who knows you were to watch, they'd 
never even suspect the least of the matter. There is nothing easier, 
nor more common in the way of business ; and it luckily happens 
that I have the first opportimity at this very time, that ever I had 
in my life. I have a large sale under a commission, the very week 
after next, into which I can hedge a thousand or two, with the 
greatest ease and safety. Assignees never take notice of such things. 
We understand one another better than that. Many a worthy man 
have I enabled to hold his head above water for years, by thi 
method. To be sure, it must have an end some time ; but then 
a man stands in fortune's way for a lucky hit, you know ; and not 
only that, but also makes sure of so much good living in the mean- 
time, and can be no worse at the last ; and then, when all comes to 
all, and there must be a blow up, it gives him an opportunity of 
securing something against a rainy day, as the saying is. As for 
its being discovered, there are ways enough to prevent that. It 
is but entering them as sold ; and I'll find a buyer that shall never 
be heard more of. Lord, sir, if it were not for things of this kind, 
our business would be nothing to what it is. Half the sales you 
see every day in the papers are made up in this manner '- 

' Well, sir ', replied the merchant, who had listened to him with 
attention, and seemed greatly affected at some part of what he said, 
' I presume you understand your business, and as I have no doubt of 
your honour, I shall leave the whole entirely to your managements 
Here is an account of the particulars which I want to dispose of at 
this time. They are in a private warehouse, whither I have had 
them conveyed, to be ready for the purpose, of which this is the key ; 
and here is a bill of sale, which I will execute directly, as I have 
occasion for two thousand pounds this very evening. You see 
there is value more than sufficient for double that sum, as you 
will be a better judge when you see the goods ; but the rest can 
stand forward till they are disposed of, and the account made up 'l 

' Really, sir, I should be extremely glad to serve you, but, I fear, 
I have not so much cash by me. However, if you please, I'll go 
with you, and look at the goods ; and then I'll step home and try 
what I can do '. 

Accordingly, away they went together to the warehouse, where my 
master, being satisfied with the value of the goods, left the merchant, 
and hied him home directly with a joyful heart for the money. 



456 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

' So ', said he to himself, as he went along, ' I thought what things 
would come to in the end. His coach and country house, his wife's 
routs, and his own kept mistress, have made quick work with 
him. I believe such men must imagine the rest of the world to be 
blind, or they would never go on at such a rate. I suppose he's 
preparing for a place in the Gazette to-morrow, or next day ; but 
that is no affair of mine. I'll take care to make a safe bargain for 
myself, and let him look to the rest. I am not to swear for him. 
Of aU the business in our way, I like this the best. A man can make 
up what account he pleases, without danger of its being disputed with 
him. All here is snug and secure. If I could but get jobs enough 
of this kind, I'd let who would chaffer for toys and daubings with 
people of quality, who often outsharp us, in spite of all our experience '. 

By this time he reached home, where he soon made up the money, 
with the help of that and the former day's sale, without hesitating 
a moment at its not being his own, and taking with him proper 
persons to attest his bargain, and new locks to make sure of it, 
returned to the merchant, with whom he soon concluded every- 
thing, without scruple or delay on either side, and then, paying 
him on the spot, in bank-notes and cash — among the latter of 
which I was — sent him away, as well satisfied as he himself stayed 
behind. 



CHAPTER XLV 

MOTIVE OF CHEYSAL's NEW MASTER FOB MAKING SUCH A BAEGAIS", 
WITH THE MANY AND GREAT ADVANTAGES A MERCHANT MAY 
MAKE OF BEING IN THE HOUSE — A SHORT SKETCH OF AN ELECTION 
— THE CURIOUS METHODS WHICH CHETSAL's MASTER TOOK TO 
EVADE THE LAWS AGAINST BRIBERY — HE TAKES OFFENCE AT 
THE UNREASONABLE PRESUMPTION OF HIS CONSTITUENTS, AND 
RESOLVES TO MAKE THE MOST OF THE BARGAIN HE HAS BOUGHT 
FROM THEM, WHICH, BY A SINGULAR PIECE OF MANAGEMENT, HE 
PROPOSES TO MAKE CHEAPER THAN THEY THINK — CHRYSAL CHANGES 
HIS SERVICE FOB THAT OF THE IDOL OF AN INN — THE CONSE- 
QUENCES OF ELECTIONEERING — SOME ACCOUNT OF CHEYSAL's 
NEW MISTRESS — ^HE QUITS HER SERVICE FOR A CURIOUS PURPOSE 
— AN EXPEDIENT TO PREVENT THE SALE OF POISON FOE MIND AND 
BODY — CHRYSAL AGAIN CHANGES HIS SERVICE 

When a man has fixed his mind upon gaining a particular end, 
he slights any inconveniences which may attend the means. Though 
my new master was sensible of the loss he must suffer by his bargain, 
the prospect of accomplishing the purpose for which he made it 
prevented its giving him any concern. As soon as he got home, 
he gave orders to have his equi made ready for a journey into 
the country early next morning, and then retiring into his closet 
for a few moments before he went to bed — ' At length ', said he, 
with a look of self -congratulation, ' I shall compass what I have 
so long set my heart upon. What an advantage it is for a merchant 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 457 

to be in the House. I can laugh at bailiffs and bankruptcies for 
five years at least, and in the meantime, I shall have a thousand 
opportunities of making my fortune, by pushing boldly in the alley, 
now that all fears of the immediate consequences are over, or getting 
beneficial contracts with the government, or at least some genteel 
and profitable employment under it. A merchant may make 
many advantages of being in the House. Confound that prating 
fellow ! I was once afraid that he smoked my design, he came so 
near some unlucky circumstances ; but it was above his cut. All 
his schemes are common and low-lived ; this of mine is a master- 
stroke. It is playing deep, to be sure. Fifteen hundred for my 
seat ; and what with other expenses, and the loss upon this night's 
work, as much more. It is playing damned deep. But it is too 
late to think of that now. I have sported many a thousand upon 
a, worse chance in my time. At any rate, I can laugh at bailiffe 
and bankruptcies for five years at least. What an advantage it is 
to a merchant to be in the House '. 

Sa5Tng this, he went to bed, where the advantages of being in the 
House still ran so strongly in his head that he dreamed of nothing 
all night but buUjring creditors, and cringing to ministers, doing 
jobs, and getting contracts, places, and pensions. 

In pursuance of his scheme, he set out next morning with a 
splencEd retinue for the borough he had in view, where he managed 
matters with such judgment and generosity, keeping the whole 
town drunk from the moment he arrived, according to the policy 
which permits a candidate to deprive his electors of their senses, 
in order to enable them to judge the better of his legislative abilities, 
that he was elected iu preference to a gentleman, the munificence 
of whose family had for many generations been the chief support 
of the place, and who himself spent his ample fortune in hospitality 
and beneficence in it, but disdained to buy the votes of a venal 
crew on this occasion. As such a competitor naturally had every 
man of worth and honour in his interest, it had been necessary for 
my master to proceed with the utmost care and circumspection. 
Accordingly, instead of directly giving his voters money, he lent 
them the prices stipulated on the security of their notes of hand, 
payable in a certain time, an expedient in which he had a further 
view, than barely evading the laws against such practices. 

Everything being concluded, he was preparing to depart in 
triumph, when his constituents waited upon him in form, with 
certain instructions for executing the trust they had thus reposed 
in him. Though he looked upon this as such a barefaced piece of 
insolence that he scarce knew how to bear it, yet, as he had not 
yet taken his seat, he received their commands with the politest 
humility, and promised the most faithful obedience to them. But 
they were no sooner out of his sight than he changed his note. 

' Impudent, unreasonable scoundrels ', said he to himself, giving 
vent to his indignation as he walked backward and forward in the 
Toom, ' to talk of having reposed your trust in me, and pretend to 
give me instructions. I have bought you, and I will sell you to the 
test bidder, if he were the devil ; and a bad bargain he will have 
of you, if he buys you as dear as I have, though I have a stroke 



458 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

in my head to bring myself home, that you little think of. Those 
notes of hand, which you thought I took only to evade the law, 
shall be paid to the last farthing, if I am not chosen for nothing, 
next election. You shall find you have no fool to deal with '. 

Just as he said this, he received notice that his coach was ready, 
and the landlord's daughter, coming to wish him a good journey, 
he saluted her politely, and slipping a couple of guineas (one of 
which I was) into her hand, to buy a ribbon, left the house like a 
man of honour. I have not entered particularly into the circum- 
stances of electioneering ; they are too gross to give pleasure, 
and too well known to require repetition even to you. The efiects, 
I mean immediately in the place, were such as reason may suggest 
to you. The electors, instead of making any advantage of the 
price for which they thus had literally sold their consciences, liberties, 
and properties, continued to wallow in drunkenness, till every 
penny of it was spent, after which it was so long before they could 
settle rightly to work again, that it required a year's hard labour 
and starving to repair what they suflEered by this bout of excess 
and idleness. My new mistress was what is not unjustly called 
the idol of an inn. Endowed by nature with prettiness enough to 
entitle her to flattery, and sufficient pertness to make her a coquette, 
on her return from a boarding-school, where her natural talents 
were so well improved by education that she was thought fit to try 
her fortune in the world, she took her place in the bar, and flirted 
away with every gentleman that came to the house, in hopes of 
taking in some one of the number for marriage, as others in her 
way.'had done. The first passion of the female heart is for finery, 
to the gratification of which girls seldom fail to apply all the money 
in their power. But though my mistress was very far from being 
insensible to this passion, another scarce less powerful with the sex 
took the place of it at this time, which was curiosity. 

A young officer, who had lately been quartered in the house, 
and made warm addresses to her, had said so many fine things in 
praise of a certain book called Memoirs of a Lady of Pleasure, that 
she resolved to see it, and for that purpose applied at a circulating 
library in the town, the keeper of which told her it was so scarce 
and valuable a book that he could not possibly procure it for her 
under a guinea. High as this price was, she would have found 
means to raise it, so strong was her curiosity, had not the hurry of 
the election, which just then came on, taken up all her time. But 
every obstacle was now removed, and the very evening I came into 
her possession, she muffled herself up in one of the maid's cloaks, 
and went for it as soon as it was dark, when I was the purchase of 
this extraordinary bargain. 

I see you are shocked at the dishonesty and wickedness of my 
new master for hiring out at such a price, or indeed at any price at 
all, a book, whose obvious design (and which it is too well calculated 
to accomplish) is to supplant every principle of virtue in the youthful 
mind. But the blame rests not solely upon him. The excuse which 
the poet puts into the mouth of the apothecary for selling poison, 
that ' his poverty, but not his will, consented ', may with equal 
justice be alleged in palliation of a poor bookseller's vending 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 459 

impious or immoral books— the poison of the mind. For this reason, 
as no penalty, however severe, may be sufficient to combat that 
necessity, the most efiectual way to prevent the vending of either 
poison would be to prohibit all those whose poverty might subject 
them to such temptation, from trading in books or drugs of any 
kmd, as it is most certain that if there were neither poor apothe- 
caries nor poor booksellers, the sale of both vicious books and 
noxious drugs would be much less extensive than it is, if it could 
not be totally suppressed, there being very few of the human species 
so entirely given up to a reprobate sense as to murder either the 
soul or body of a fellow-creature, merely for the pleasure of doing it. 
It may be judged that I did not remain long in the service of this 
master. The next morning after I came into his possession, he 
came to London, where he laid out all the money he had in the pur- 
chase of a parcel of such books as he thought most likely to suit 
the taste of his customers, without regard either to virtue or religion, 
on which occasion I changed his service for that of his bookseller. 



CHAPTER XLVI 

ACCOITN'T OF CHEYSAL's NEW MASTEE — HIS HEEOIC SPIRIT AND EE- 
SOLXTTION TO PUSH FOE A PENSION OE A PILLOEY — MEETING 
BETWEEN HUM AND A POET, WHO TURNS THE TABLES UPON HIM — A 
CUEIOUS METHOD OE FOEMING A JUDGMENT OF A WOEK OF GENIUS 
— CHKYSAL's MASTEE IS BEATEN OUT OF ALL HIS AET, AND FOE ONOB 
BOUGHT A BOOK BY QUALITY, NOT QUANTITY — THE VALUE OF AN 
AUTHOe's NAME CHEYSAL CHANGES HIS SEEVIOE 

My new master was one of those aspiring geniuses whom desperate 
circumstances drive to push at everything, and court consequences, 
the bare apprehension of which terrifies men who have some char- 
acter and fortune to lose, out of their senses. He was that evening 
to meet at a tavern an author,' the boldness and beauty of whose 
writings had for some time engaged the public attention in a par- 
ticular manner, and made his numerous admirers tremble for his 
safety. As he happened to outstay his time, my master's im- 
portance took offence at a freedom which he thought so much out 
of character. 

' This is very pretty, truly ', said he, walking backward and 
forward in a chafe, ' that I should wait an hour for an author. It 
was his business to have been here first, and waited for me, but he 
is so puffed up of late, that he has quite forgot himself. Booksellers 
seldom meet with such insolence from authors. I should serve him 
right, to go away and disappoint him. But would not that disap- 
point myself more ? He is come into such vogue lately, that the 
best man in the trade would be glad to get him. Well, if he does 
not do what I want, I know not who can. Fools may be frighted 

' Charles Churchill [see Introduction] then at the height of his fame, 
i.e. about 1762-3, before the Wilkes imbroglio. 



460 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

at the thoughts of a cart's tail or a pillory ; I know better things. 
Where they come in a popular cause, not hin g sets a man's name up 
to such advantage, and that is the first step toward making a fortune ; 
as for the danger, it is only a mere bugbear, while the mob is on 
my side. And, therefore, I will go on without fear, if I am not 
bought off. A pension or a pillory is the word '. 

These heroic meditations were interrupted by the entrance of 
the author, who, throwing himself carelessly into a chair — ' I believe 
I have made you wait,' said he, ' but I could not help it. I was 
obliged to stay to kick a puppy of a printer who had been imper- 
tinent ; as I am to meet company directly, so let me hear what 
you have to say '. 

' I thought, sir ', answered my master, with an air of offended 
importance, ' you had appointed me to meet you here on business, 
and business, you know, cannot be hurried over so soon '. 

' Don't mention business to me ; I hate the very name of it, and 
as to any that can possibly be between you and me, it may be done 
in five minutes, as well as five years ; so speak directly, and with- 
out further preamble, for all your finesses could have no effect 
upon me, even if I would submit to let you try them '. 

' Finesses, sir 1 I don't know what you mean. I defy the world 
to charge me with having ever been guilty of any. The business 
I desired to meet you upon, was about a poem I was informed you 
had ready for the press, and which I should be glad to treat with 
you for '. 

' Well, sir, and what will you give me for it ? Be quick, for I 
cannot wait to make my words '. 

' What ? Before I have seen it ? It is impossible for me to say 
till I have looked it over, and can judge what it is, and how much 
it will make '. 

' As to your judging what it is, that must depend upon inspiration, 
which I imagine you will scarcely make pretence to, tiU you turn 
Methodist at least ; but for what it wiU make, here it is, and you 
judge of that, while I go downstairs for a few minutes '. Saying 
which, he gave him a handful of loose papers, and left the room. 

The first thing my master did when left thus to form his judg- 
ment of a work of genius, was to number the s, and then the 
lines in a  or two, by the time he had done which the author 
returned, and taking the papers out of his hand — ' Well, sir ', said 
he, ' and what is the result of your judgment ' ? 

' Why, really, sir,' answered my master, after some paiise, ' I 
hardly know what to say. I have cast off the copy and do not 
think it will make more than a shilling, however pompously printed '. 

' What you think it will make is not the matter, but what you 
wiU give me for it. I sell my works by the quality, not the quantity '. 

' I do not doubt the quality of them in the least ; but considering 
how much the trade is overstocked at present, and what a mere drug 
poetry has long been, I am a good deal at a loss what to ofier, ae 
I should be unwilling to give you or any gentleman offence, by 
seeming to undervalue your works. What do you think of five 
guineas ; I do not imagine that more can be given for so little ; 
nor indeed should I be fond of giving even that, but in compliment 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 461 

to you. I have had full twice as much for two, many a 
time '. 

' Much good may your bargain do you, sir ; but I will not take 
less than fifty, for mine in compliment to you, or any bookseller 
alive. And so, air, I desire to know without more words (for I told 
you before that your eloquence would be thrown away upon me), 
whether you will give that, as I am in haste to go to company, much 
more agreeable to me than yours '. 

' What, sir ! fifty guineas for scarce five hundred lines ! Such 
a thing was never heard of in the trade '. 

' Confound your trade, and you together ! Here, waiter, what 
is to pay ' ? 

' But, dear sir, why will you be in such a hurry ? Can you not 
give yourself and me time to consider a little ? Perhaps we might 
come nearer to each other '. 

' I have told you before, and I repeat it again, that I will have 
so much, and that without more words '. 

' You are very peremptory, sir ; but you know your own value, 
and therefore, in hopes you will let me have more for my money 
next time, I will venture to give you your price now, though really 
if it were not for your name, I could not possibly do it ; but, to be 
sure, that is worth a shilling extraordinary, I own '. 

' Which is twelve pence more than yours ever will be, unless to 
the Ordinary of Newgate. But come, give me the money ! I want 
to go to my company '. 

' Well, sir, this is a hasty bargain ; but I take it upon your word, 
and don't doubt but there is merit in it, to answer such a price. 
Satire, sir, keen satire, and so plain that he who runs may read, as 
the saying is, is the thing nowadays. Where there is any doubt 
or difficulty in the application, it takes all the pleasure from the 
generality of readers, who will scarce be satisfied with less than 
the very name. That, sir, is your great merit. Satire must be 
personal, or it will never do '. 

' Personal ? that mine never shall be. Vices, not persons, are 
the objects of my satire, though where I find the former, I never 
spare the latter, be the rank and character in life what it will '. 

My master had by this time counted out his money (among which 
I was), which the author took without telling over, and then went 
to his company, leaving the bookseller scarcely more pleased with 
his bargain than mortified at the cavalier treatment he had met 
in making it. 



462 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 



CHAPTER XLVII 

SOME ACCOTJNT OF THE COMPANY TO WHICH CHBYSAL's NEW MASTER 
WENT — HIS BEHAVIOTIE TO A YOUNQ FEMALE, WHO ACCOSTED 
HIM ON HIS WAY HOME 1 — HE TAKES HBB TO A TAVEEN FOE AN 
UNCOMMON PTTEPOSB, WHERE HE TREATS HBE UNCOMMONLY, AND 
GOES HOME WITH HBE FEOM AS UNCOMMON A MOTIVE — ^ACCOUNT OF 
WHAT HE SAW IN HEE HABITATION, WITH THE MAifNBE IN WHICH HE 
BEHAVED THEEE — ^HE TAKES ANOTHER LODGING FOE THE WHOLE 
FAMILY, WHBEB HE LEAVES THEM ABEUPTLY, TO SAVE HIMSELF AND 
THEM TROUBLE 

The company to which my new master was in such haste to go, 
consisted of a few persons, whom a similarity of temper had linked 
in the closest intimacy. With these he spent the remainder of 
the evening, in a manner which few would dislike, though fewer 
still could approve it, the spirited wit and liveliness of their con- 
versation gilding the grossest debaucheries ; at the same time 
that the rectitude and sublimity of their sentiments, whenever 
their hearts could find opportunity to speak, made the vices of 
their practice still more horrible by the contrast. They broke 
not up, as it may be imagined, till nature sunk under their excesses, 
when my master, as he staggered home, was accosted by a female, 
who had something in her air and manner so difierent from those 
outcasts of humanity who offer themselves to casual prostitution 
in the streets, that Ms cxiriosity was struck, and he stopped to take 
more particular notice of her. She appeared to be about fifteen. 
Her figure was elegant, and her features regular ; but want had 
sicklied over their beauty, and all the horrors of despair gloomed 
through the languid smile she forced when she addressed him. 

The sigh of distress, which never struck his ear without affecting 
his heart, came with double force from such an object. He viewed 
her with silent compassion for some moments, and reaching her 
a piece of gold, bade her go home, and shelter herself from the in- 
clemencies of the night at so late an hour. Her surprise and joy 
at such unexpected charity overpowered her. She dropped upon 
her knees, in the wet and dirt of the street, and raising her hands 
and eyes toward heaven, remained in that posture for some moments, 
unable to give utterance to the gratitude that filled her heart. 

Such a sight was more expressive than all the powers of eloquence. 
He raised her tenderly from the ground, and soothing her with 
words of comfort, offered to conduct her to some place where she 
might get that refreshment of which she appeared to be in too great 
want. 

' Oh sir ', said she, pressing the hand that had raised her with her 
cold trembling lips, ' my deliverer sent from Heaven to save me from 
despair, let me not think of taking refreshment myself, till I have 

' This episode is said to be based on fact ; at any rate, Churchill's 
conduct in it is thoroughly characteristic of his impulsive good nature. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 463 

first procured it for those whose greater -wants I feel ten thousand 
times more severely than my own'. 

' Who can they be ' ? interrupted he, with anxious impatience. ' Can 
humanity feel greater wants than those under which you are sinking ' ? 

' My father ', exclaimed she, bursting into tears, ' languishing 
under infirmities, acquired in the service of his country ; my mother, 
worn out with attending on him, and both perishing of want (Heaven 
grant they are not already dead !) together with two infant brothers 
insensible of the cause of their distress, and crying to them for a 
morsel of bread, which it is not in their power to give '. 

' Where can such a scene of wretchedness be hidden from relief ? 
I wiU go with you directly; but stop, let us first procure some 
comfortable nourishment from some of the houses which are kept 
open at this late hour for a very different purpose. Come with me, 
we have no time to lose '. 

With these words, he went directly to a tavern, and inquiring 
what victuals were dressed in the house, loaded her with as much 
as she could carry of the best, and putting a couple of bottles of 
wine in his own pockets, walked with her to her habitation, which was 
in a blind alley, happily for her not very far distant, as weakness, 
together with the conflict of passions struggling in her heart, made 
her scarce able to go. 

When they came to the door, she would have gone up first for 
a light, but he was resolved to accompany her, that he might see 
the whole scene in its genuine colours. He therefore followed her 
up to the top of the house, where, opening the door of the garret, 
she discovered to him such a scene of misery as struck him with 
astonishment. By the light of a lamp that glimmered in the fireless 
chimney, he saw lying on a bare bedstead, without any other cover- 
ing than the relics of their own rags, a man, a woman, and two 
children, shuddering with cold, though huddled together, to share 
the little warmth which exhausted nature still supplied them with. 

While he stood gazing in horror at such complicated wretchedness, 
his conductress ran to the bedside, and faUing on her knees — ' Oh, 
sir, madam ! ' exclaimed she, in rapture. ' Arise ! I have got 
relief from an angel of Heaven '. 

' Take care ,' answered a voice, the hollow trembling of which was 
sharpened by indignation, ' take care it is not from a fiend of Hell, 
who has taken advantage of your distress to tempt you to ruin, 
for with whom else could you be till this time of night ? But know, 
wretched girl, that I will never eat the earnings of vice and infamy. 
A few hours will put an end to my miseries, which have received 
the only possible addition by this your folly '. 

' He must be such, indeed ', interrupted my master, still more 
struck with sentiments so uncommon in such a situation, ' who 
could think of tempting her in such circumstances to any folly. 
I will withdraw while you arise, and then we will consult what 
can be soonest done to alleviate a distress of which you appear so 
undeserving '. While he said this, he took the wine out of Ms 
pockets, and giving it to the daughter, went directly downstairs, 
without waiting for a reply, and walking backward and forward 
in the street for some time, enjoying the sublimest pleasure the 



464 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

human heart is capable of, in considering how he had relieved, and 
should further relieve, the sufferings of objects so worthy of relief. 

By the time he thought they might have learned from their 
daughter the circumstances of her meeting with him, and taken 
some nourishment, he returned to them, when the moment he 
entered the room the whole family fell upon their knees to thank 
him. Such humiliation was more than he could bear. He raised 
them one by one, as fast as he could, and taking the father's hand — 
' Gracious God ', said he, ' can a sense of humanity be such an uncom- 
mon thing among creatures who call themselves human, that so poor 
an exertion of it should be thought deserving of a return proper 
to be made only to Heaven. Oppress me not, sir, I conjure you, with 
the mention of what it would have been a crime I could never have 
forgiven myself to have known I had not done. It is too late to 
think of leaving this place before to-morrow, when I will provide 
a better, if there is not any to which you choose partictilarly to go. 
I am not rich ; but I thank Heaven that it has blest me with ability 
and inclination to afiord such assistance as may immediately be 
necessary to you, till means may be thought of for doing more '. 

' Oh, sir,' answered the mother, ' well might my daughter call 
you an angel of Heaven. You know not from what misery you have 
already relieved ' 

' Nor will I know more of it at this time ', interrupted my master, 
' than that which I too plainly see. I wiU leave you now to your 
rest, and return as soon as it is day '. 

' Speak not of leaving us, sir ' ! exclaimed the daughter, 
who was afraid that if he should go away, he might not return. 
' What rest can we take, in so short a time ? Leave us not, I 
beseech you ; leave us not in this place '. 

' Cease, my child ', interposed the father, ' nor press your bene- 
factor to continue in a scene of misery that must give pain to his 
humane heart '. 

' If my staying will not give you pain ', answered my master, 
' I will most willingly stay ; but it must be on condition that our 
conversation points entirely forward to happier days. There will 
be time enough hereafter to look back '. 

Saying this, he sat down on the bedside (for other seat the 
apartment afforded not), between the husband and wife, with whom 
he spent the little remainder of the night in such discourse as he 
thought most likely to divert their attention from their present 
misery, and inspire their minds with better hopes, while the children, 
all but the daughter, who hung upon his words, comforted at heart 
with a better meal than they had long tasted, fell fast asleep, as 
they leaned their heads upon their mother's lap. As soon as it was 
day — ' Now, madam ', said my master, addressing himself to the 
mother, ' I will go and provide a place for your reception, as you 
say all places are alike to you. In the meantime, accept of this 
trifle ', giving her ten guineas, ' to provide such necessaries as you 
may indispensably want before you remove. When you are settled, 
we will see what further can be done. I shall be back with you 
within these three hours at most '- 

For such beneficence there was no possibility of returning thanks ; 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 465 

but their hearts spoke through, their eyes, in a language sufficiently 
intelligible to his. Departing directly, to save both himself and 
them the pain of pursuing a conversation that grew too distress- 
ful, he went, without regard to change of dress or appearance, to 
look for a proper lodging for them, where he laid in such provisions of 
every kind, as he knew they must immediately want. This care 
employed him till the time he had promised to return, when he found 
such an alteration in the looks and appearance of them all as 
gave his heart delight. 

' You see, sir ', said the mother, as soon as he entered, ' the 
effects of your bounty ; but do not think that vanity has made 
us abuse it. These clothes, what we could raise on which, has, for 
some time, been our sole support, were the purchase of happier 
times, and were now redeemed for much less than we must have 
given for the worst we could buy '. 

' Dear madam ', interrupted my master, taking her hand respect- 
fully, ' mention not anything of the kind to me, I beseech you. 
You will soon see such times again '. Then turning to her husband — 
' I have taken a lodging, sir, ' continued he ; 'it is convenient, 
but not large, as I imagined would be your choice. I will call a 
coach to take us to it directly. If there are any demands here, 
let the people of the house be called up, and they shall be paid. 
I will be your purse-bearer for the present '. 

' No, sir, ' replied the husband, ' there are not any. You have 
enabled us to discharge all demands upon us. People in our 
circumstances cannot find credit, because they want it ' 

My master would then have gone for a coach, but the daughter 
insisted on saving him that trouble, upon which he put the whole 
family into it, and walked away before them to their new lodging. 
It is impossible to describe what these poor people felt when they 
saw the provision he had made for their reception. The father, 
in particular, could not bear it, but sinking into a chair — ' This is 
too much, said he, as soon as a flood of tears had given vent to the 
fulness of his heart. ' This is too much. Support me, gracious 
Heaven, who has sent this best of men to my relief ; support me 
under the weight of obligations, which the preservation of these 
alone ', looking round upon his wife and children, ' could induce 
me to accept '. Then addressing himself to my master — ' My heart is 
not unthankful ', continued he, ' but gratitude in such excess as mine, 
where there is no prospect of ever making a return, is the severest 

pain '. 

My master, who sought none, attempted often to give the con- 
versation another turn ; but, finding that they could speak or think 
of nothing else as yet, he took his leave, promising to come the next 
day when their minds should be better settled, to consult what 
more was in his power to serve them, having first privately taken 
an opportunity to slip a couple of guineas into the daughter's hand, 
to avoid putting the delicacy of her father and mother to further 
pain. 



2a 



466 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 



CHAPTER XLVIII 

CHRYSAL GIVES SOME ACCOUNT OF HIS MASTER — REASON OS HIS 
HAVnrO BEEN BRED TO, AND MISCARRIED IN, A PARTICTTLAR PRO- 
FESSION — INTERESTING REMARKS ON THE DIEFERENT KINDS OF 
MERIT NECESSARY TO EMINENCE IN DIFFERENT PROFESSIONS, 
CONFIRMED BY STRIKING INSTANCES OP THEIR SUCCESS IN EACH 
— NATtJEAL CONSEQUENCE OP HIS BEING FORCED INTO A PRO- 
FESSION AGAINST HIS INCLINATION — HE IS COMPELLED BY DIS- 
TRESS TO EXERT HIS ABILITIES CONTRADICTIONS IN HIS CHAR- 
ACTER, AND THE PARTICULAR TURN OF HIS WORKS ACCOUNTED 
FOR — HE VISITS HIS NEW FAMILY — AFFECTING STORY OF AN 
OFFIOBE 

Fatigued in mind and body from the debauch the evening before, 
and the height to which his tenderest passions had been wound 
up by such a moving scene, my master went directly home, and 
throwing himself on a bed, slept tiU next morning, without disturb- 
ance from pain or reflection. The contradictions which I had seen 
in his character prompted my curiosity to take this opportunity 
of looking back to his past life, to try if in the occurrences of that 
I could trace their cause. Bom in the middle rank of life, his parents 
were iaduced by the dawnings of uncommon genius, which he dis- 
covered in his earliest youth, to give him such an education 
as might enable him to make that figure in some of the learned 
professions, for which paternal fondness flattered them that nature 
had designed him. But, however greatly he profited by his educa- 
tion, the end proposed by it was far from being pleasing to his 
inclinations, which the vigour of his mind and body turned to more 
active scenes. For this reason, when he was to quit the pursuits 
of general learning for those of some particular profession, his 
ardour cooled, and he entirely lost that spirit of emulative ambition, 
which alone can enable a man to arrive at eminence. Such a falling- 
off could not escape the anxious observation of his friends, but as 
it was not in their power either to remedy it, or gratify his inclina- 
tion in any other way, all they could do was to enter him into 
the service of religion, a profession in which, though the greatest 
abilities and application of the human mind are evidently and 
indispensably necessary, yet, by the perversion of man, the least 
are required. 

You seem shocked at the severity of this remark ; but a moment's 
reflection will open to you the reason upon which it is founded. In 
every other profession, success depends upon an opinion of that know- 
ledge, which is called merit in it, because mankind see the necessity 
of such merit to attain the object of the profession. But in the 
Church the case is quite different. Every man thinks that he 
knows enough of religion to serve his own turn, and therefore gives 
himself no trouble about the knowledge of those who profess it, 
as he concludes that knowledge can be of no service to him ; and 
therefore success in the Church depends not on a general opinion 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 467 

of merit, but on particular favour, which, for the reason given before, 
is not the necessary consequence of such merit. An attorney 
or surgeon, for instance, who is not thought to have some merit 
in his profession, will never be employed; but let him by any 
means get into the Church, and curry favour with those in power, 
and he may rise to the first dignities of it, though he has no more 
merit in his profession than he had in that which he was forced to 
quit for want of bread. And this is the reason why they 
who have least abilities for any profession are packed into this, 
and why they, again, who have the least of these, are generally 
most successful in it, as consciousness of their want of merit makes 
them take most pains to gain favour. The consequences of his 
entering into such a profession against inclination are obvious. 
An indignant sense of his own natural superiority to his superiors 
in station made him fall into the too common error of arguing from 
the abuse, against the use, and hold in contempt not only them, 
but also the very profession itself, in which they could have such 
success, and in which necessity alone obliged him to continue. 
He disdained to apply abilities which he thought above the end. 
He neglected duties which he saw abused, and at length sunk into 
a state of listless indifference, in which he would have died in ob- 
scurity, had not distress roused him, and extorted an exertion 
of his abilities which a mind soured by disappointment of its earliest 
hopes, and by domestic unhappiness after, turned to satire, with 
an asperity and strength that made vice tremble in the bosom of 
the great, and folly Mde her head in the highest places. As this 
domestic unhappiness was the immediate cause of those parts of 
his conduct which contradicted the general tenor of his character, 
justice requires that some account should be given of it. In the 
capricious levity of youth, he fixed his inclination on a female, who 
had no other recommendation beside beauty. Prudence would 
have forbidden a match, in which there was so little prospect of 
happiness, but men of great abilities too often think it beneath 
them to listen to her voice. He married her, though in the phrase 
of the world, evidently to his ruin, the return she made him for 
which proof of his love was infidelity to his bed. This is the deepest 
wound that can be given to a heart of any delicacy ; it sharpens 
the sting of ingratitude with insult, by giving a preference that 
reflects dishonour. He felt it so severely, that despair made him 
strive to drown the sense of it in wine, in the intoxication of which 
he too often was guilty of what, in a cooler moment, his reason 
would have blushed at and his priuoiples abhorred ; and this was 
the chief cause of that distress also, which, as I observed, forced 
him to exert his abilities, which he did with such success, as soon 
enabled him to quit a profession that had not been his choice, 
and at the same time indulge the natural disposition of his heart 
by practising some of the sublimest duties of it. 

As soon as he awoke next day, he went to visit his new family, 
where the happiness that glistened in every grateful eye at hia 
-approach made him happy. After some general chat — ' It is my 
duty, sir ', said the father, ' to give you some account of myseU, 
and of the cause of my falling into that depth of misery, from which 



468 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

your beneficence relieved me, that you should not think it haa been 
laviahed on objects altogether unworthy of it. I am descended 
from a good family, the fortune of which my father dissipated in 
supporting a parliamentary interest for the ministry, the only 
return he received for which, and for his voice upon all occasions, 
was a small pension for himself, and a pair of colours in the Guards 
for me, his only son, with promises, indeed, of further provision, 
which were all forgotten when he died, happily for himself, before 
the end of the parliament, which, as he had no prospect of being 
returned again, would have left him at the mercy of creditors, whom 
it was not in his power to pay. Though I was soon sensible that 
my best hopes died with him, I was so infatuated to a profession 
the most pleasing to youthful idleness and vanity, that I laid out 
the little fortune of this best of women, whom I had married in my 
days of better hope, in the purchase of a company, in a marching 
regiment, at the head of which I flattered myself that I should meet 
some opportunity, in the war just then broke out, of meriting further 
promotion. But I found the vanity of such a thought when it 
was unhappily too late. After several years careful service, in the 
course of which I had sealed some degree of reputation with my 
blood in several warm actions, without advantage to myself, or 
prospect of any to my family, who now multiplied the cares of lite 
ten thousandfold upon my head, I was driven by despair to exchange 
my company, which I had bought, and therefore could have sold 
again, the price of which would at least have kept us from absolute 
starving, for an higher rank in a younger regiment just then ordered 
on an expedition, the object of which raised what was thought 
rational expectation of such profit as should ease me from the 
anxieties that made Ufe a burden. Allured solely by this expec- 
tation, I went accordingly. The expedition was successful. I did my 
duty. I was wounded in the course of It, to the extreme danger 
of my life. I entirely ruined my constitution by the severity of the 
climate, and, on my return home, was reduced to half-pay, without 
receiving so much prize-money as defrayed the extraordinary ex- 
penses of the expedition and of the illness which I contracted in it ; 
while those above me accumulated such wealth, as, if divided in 
any degree of proportion, would have recompensed the labours of 
us, who had literally born the heat and burden of the day, and 
were now pining in ^content and misery, aggravated by a partiality 
so severely injurious. In this situation, I resolved to throw myself 
at the feet of my sovereign, and implore relief from the known 
goodness of his heart. But his throne was surrounded by those 
whose interest it was to keep the cries of his people from coming 
to his ears i ; and therefore as it was necessary for me to make my 
errand known, I never could obtain access to him. 

' The distress of this disappointment was still further heightened 
by the delays in the discharge of that half-pay, which was now my 
only support, and the drawbacks it was subject to from the fees 
of office, even when it should come to be paid, which were such 

'This reflection, notoriously so groundless, is alone su£Scient to 
vindicate the author from any allusion to present times. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 469 

that when I attempted to mortgage it, the wretch's last resource 
to put off starving as long as he can, what I oould get from those 
vultures, who fatten upon the sufEerings of a soldier, was scarce 
sufficient to satisfy our present wants. How, then, oould I look 
forward for a family, dearer to me than life ? What oould support 
resolution, when hope was gone ? Mine was unequal to the trial ; 
and I was beginning to meditate on putting an end to a life of such 
misery, without considering that the sufEerings of those for whom 
I felt so much more than for myself, must be still made heavier by 
such a base desertion of them, when Heaven, in its mercy, visited my 
family with a violent fever, which freed me from further fears for 
the future welfare of my three eldest sons, and with difficulty spared 
the two, whom you see before you. — Oh ! my poor boys, happy, 
thrice happier than us, whom you left behind ! — Excuse this weak- 
ness, sir ; nature will force the involuntary tear, in spite of reason ; 
for were they not the children of my love ? During their illness 
I lost every other care in my attendance upon them nor omitted 
any possible means to preserve lives, for which my fears foreboded 
nottung but unhappiness ; but, though their deaths freed me from 
a part of those fears, they left a melancholy void in my heart, which 
was more painful, if possible, than any fear. But I was not long 
sensible of that pain. My children were scarce laid in the grave 
when the fever seized myself with such violence, that I soon lost 
my senses, nor recovered them for above a month, and then only 
to feel the greatest wretchedness that was ever heaped upon human 
creature. 

' The expense of my children's and my own illness had not only ex- 
hausted all the money I had raised on the anticipation of my half- 
pay, but also obliged my wife to mortgage several of our best effects. 
Such a resource never escapes the watchful eyes of people who 
keep lodging-houses. Our landlady no sooner perceived it, than 
she seized upon the rest, and then turned us out, the moment I 
could be removed without instant death. 

' In this situation I must have perished in the street, had not a poor 
woman, whom my wife had been obliged to call in to her assistance 
when I sickened, shared with us her habitation, in which you found 
us, as she also did the earnings of her daily labour, till a chairman, 
who was carrying a beau to a ball, threw her down with such 
violence for not making haste enough out of his way, that she broke 
her leg, and was obliged to be taken to a hospital. Prom that time 
we supported life by mortgaging the few clothes we had brought 
upon our backs, without one ray of hope to tempt us to look forward, 
till they also were all gone, and the misery of cold added to that of 
hunger. In this condition we had been two days without tasting 
bread or feeling the warmth of fire, calling incessantly upon death 
to put that end to our distresses which a sense of religion, made 
stronger by my wretchedness, now prevented my daring to hasten, 
when my daughter stole out unknown to us, to seek for charity 
in the streets, where she wandered, without meeting anything but 
insults and solicitations to vice, till Heaven directed your steps to 
her. Such was the reward of more than twenty years' faithful and 
hard service, in which I had fought the battles of my country, in 



470 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

the opposite extremities of the globe, with honour, and been instru- 
mental in making princely fortunes for the several commanders 
under whom I served. This, sir, is the sum of my story, in which 
I have been as brief as I could, to avoid giving you pain. We 
are now your creatures. The lives we enjoy are immediately the 
gift of your benevolence — a benevolence so critically timed (for 
we could not have subsisted many hours longer without it) as to 
raise a hope that Providence, which sent you to our relief, will 
not leave its work unfinished, but save us from falling again into 
such misery, by means agreealDle to its own wisdom and goodness, 
though impossible for us, in our present situation, to foresee '. 

It was some time before my master, who had listened to the 
of&cer's story with S3rmpathetio attention, was able to speak. Re- 
covering himself at length — ' Fear not ', said he, in a broken voice, 
' never were the righteous forsaken ; nor — nor — ^nor — I have some 
friends, sir, who may serve. In the meantime take this ' — reaching 
him a bank-note for twenty pounds — ' I will not be refused. Business 
calls me for a few hours, but I will see you again in the evening '. 
Saying this, he hurried away, to hide his emotions, without waiting 
for a reply, which, indeed, their gratitude left them not the power 
to make. 



CHAPTER XLIX 

CHBYSAL's master CAEEIBS TTTM to visit AiT OLD ACQUAINTANCE, 
WHO BEHAVES IN CHARACTBK ON HBAEING THE OTFICEE's STOBT, 
AUD STJBPEISBS CHEYSAL's MASTBE WITH AN ACCOUNT OB HIS 
HAVING TUENBD PATRIOT— THE GBNEEAL MOTIVES BOB SUCH A 
STEP, WITH SOME EEMAEKS ON THE DIBBBBENOE BETWEEN PBACTICE 
AND PROFESSION, IN DIBBBEENT INSTANCES — INSIQNIBICANCr 
OB PEIVATB CHARACTEES IN ATTACKS UPON A MINISTEY, AXD WHY 
— EEELECTIONS ON THE OEIGIN AND USE OB SATIEB, AND THE 
ABUSE OB THE TEEMS GOOD AND ILL-NATUEE, WITH THE EEAS0N3 
WHY SO MANY CRY OUT AGAINST SATIRE — CHEYSAL CHANGES 
HIS SERVICE IN A COMMON WAY , j 

The most intimate acquaintance i my master had was the person 
who had been competitor with a former master of mine, for admis- 
sion in the higher order of the mock-monastery. To him he went 
directly, and relating the officer's story, while it was still warm 
on his heart, asked his assistance to do something more effectual 
for his relief. 

His friend was so afiected with the melancholy tale, that it was 
some time before he could speak ; but when at length he did, it 
was in a strain very different from what might have been expected. 

' And the girl was really so pretty ', said he, with a look of 
inexpresssible archness. 

> John Wilkes, with whom about this time Churchill entered into 
cordial relations, contributing to the North Briton, the profits of which 
according to the printer Kearsley went to him. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 471 

' Well said, my good Levite. I presume you satisfied your awn 
appetites with her at the tavern, before you provided for those of 
her family, though you sunk that part of the story, for fear I should 
■want to come in for a snack with you. The concupiscence of you 
parsons is truly catholic, whatever your consciences may be, 
and would engross the whole sex, if it was not restrained ; not 
indeed that women come within the meaning of the mortmain acts, 
as none do more good in their generation, and consequently 
are better represented to the state than those who are occupied 
by the clergy '. 

' Why, what a sensual brute you must be ', answered my master, 
' to talk of satisfying appetites with a wretch just perishing with cold 
and hunger. But it is all affectation. If you had been iu my place, 
you would have acted just as I did ; for, whatever airs your wicked 
wit may assume, I know your heart is strongly susceptible of 
charity 'I 

' Charity ! Ha ! ha ! ha ! I expected that. It is always the 
burthen of a parson's song. They make a cloak of it upon all 
occasions ; and, indeed, if it will really cover sins, as they say, 
they are in the right to have it ready, for multitudes enough they 
have, to take up every comer of it. But, why can you not throw 
ofi the cant along with the cloth ? However, that her hunger 
should not damp your desires any more, here ', giving him half 
a dozen guineas, ' is my help to allay it ' 

' I will not refuse your money, for your own sake, in hopes that 
your bestowing even this much so well may help to atone for some 
of the many thousands you have thrown away. But it was not 
with any view of getting it that I spoke to you. Their immediate 
necessities are supplied. I want your assistance and interest '. fij 

' My interest ? Ha ! ha ! ha ! You apply to a person of great 
interest, truly. Why, my very naming them would be sufficient 
to ruin their hopes forever. You don't know, perhaps, that I have 
turned a patriot, and attacked the ministry ' ? 

' Patriot ? For Heaven's sake, how long, and on what occasion 
have you taken this strange whim ' ? 

' Whim ! Pray, good sir, speak with more respect of the noblest 
principle of the human heart. The thought came into my head 
the night before last, and as I do not love to lose time, especially 
in things of such moment, I gave it vent yesterday, in the shape of 
a political pamphlet', in which I have proved to a demonstration 
that the minister and all his friends and countrymen are fools 
and rogues, and deserve to be hanged '. 

' Is it possible you can be serious ? What in the name of common 
sense could be your motive for taking such a step as this ? I thought 
you had expectations of favour from them ' 

' What motives should any man of honour or honesty have, but 

1 The famous XLV of the North Briton, issued the 23rd April 1763, 
attacking the King's Speech. It was pronounced by the law officers 
of the Crown to be a seditious libel, and as the author was not declared, 
general warrants were issued for the apprehension of the authors, 
printers, and publishers. 



472 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

the good of his country ; their neglect of which has ro jsed an 
indignation that will make them tremble '. 

' Or, in other words, they have disappointed your expeotationa^ 
and, therefore, you take this method of being revenged on them, 
and extorting for fear what they would not do for favour, the 
general motive of modem patriots, I acknowledge ; but with what 
face can you pretend to the title, prostituted as it is, I cannot think, 
as your very name is a burlesque upon everything that is serious '. 

' Pray, how so, reverend and grave sir ? If the most profligate 
sinner makes the best saint, as you say, why should not a moderate 
rake make a tolerable politician ? I believe you will hardly at- 
tribute it to the superior excellence of the latter character. But 
the truth is, though it is impossible for me to profess political prin- 
ciples more contrary to my practice than your moral practice is 
to your preaching, yet you would deny me the toleration which 
you avail yourself of, and have my words judged from my actions ; 
not my actions from my words, as you expect your own shall be. 
But my private character or practice signifies nothing to this under- 
taking, which is to rip up the practices and characters, public and 
private, of a set of people who have obtruded themselves into a 
station that exposes them to envy, and every accusation against 
whom will, therefore, be received implicitly, without regarding 
who or what the author of it is. Not but there is sufficient room 
to attack these, whose whole private lives have been such a continual 
series of vice and folly, and their public conduct of blunders and 
villany, that it is impossible to say or think anything bad enough 
of them, as I have already proved by incontestible instances in my 
pamphlet, and shall by many more in the course of the undertaking. 
If the tables, indeed, should turn, and I get into their place, then 
they may make the same use of my character, and perhaps not 
without effect ; but at present it is quite out of the question. And 
now that I have opened myself to you, I expect your assistance, 
in return for my confidence '. 

' Assistance in politics ? It is not in my power to give you any. 
I hate, from my soul, every political system under the sun, as a 
jumble of folly and villany (I mean as they are carried into practice, 
not ID. their speculative plans), and therefore never could throw away 
a thought upon them '. 

' That signifies nothing. The assistance which I want, you are 
qualified to give. While I detect their political blunders and villany, 
you shall lash their private vices and follies, till we make them 
equally ridiculous and odious to every man of sense and virtue in 
the nation, a task that will give you the pleasing opportunity of 
indulging that misanthropy which inspires the muse of a satirist, and 
is mistaken for virtue, because it rails against vice ; for, blazen it 
out aa pompously as you will, nothing but ill-nature can make a 
man take delight in exposing the defects of others, and the more 
forcibly he does it, the more powerful must that principle be with 
him. And by the same rule, it is good-nature that makes a man 
fawn upon folly and flatter vice ; and consequently, whoever does 
it, is virtuous '. 

' A most judicious way of reasoning, truly. Now, on the contrary. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 473 

I think it a much more just conclusion, that they who treat vice 
with tenderness approve in their hearts, and would practice it if 
they could, and that they who expose its deformities and dangers 
really detest it, though they may sometimes, through human weak- 
ness, fall into the practice. But I do not wonder at your remark ; 
it is an old and common one. All who are conscious that they 
deserve the lash desire to lessen its force, and therefore derive satire 
from ill-nature, in order to obviate the application of it to the proper 
object, and fasten upon the satirist the fault which is in them- 
selves. And this abuse of the terms good and ill -nature is the reason 
why some have been provoked to call the former folly. But, not 
to waste time in discussions, where prejudice only can find a doubt, 
I a,gree to your proposal with pleasure, and will hold folly up to 
ridicule, and brand vice for detestation, wherever you point them 
out to me, without regard to the rank or power of the person, or 
to any imputation of misanthropy and ill -nature, which may be 
levelled at myself, to shield against, and blunt the edge of my satire ; 
though I no more expect that I shall be able to reform the moral, 
than you the political conduct of the age. However, it is a duty 
to make the attempt, be the success what it will. But, by the by, 
are you not apprehensive that your undertaking may be attended 
with danger ? The people in power will certainly be provoked, 
and power, you know, has long arms, and will often reach over 
the fences of the law '. 

' I fear them not. I have friends who are able, and will defend 
the laws in me, while I keep within their fence, one of the principal 
of whom I expect every minute to call upon me, to communicate 
matter, and consult upon another stroke '. 

' Then I'll take my leave. You'll have things to talk about 
which you will not desire me to hear. Conspirators against the 
state always choose privacy '. 

' Conspirators against the state ? Our conspiracy, if such you 
call it, is for the state, against its worst enemies, traitors to the trust 
reposed m them, and fools to their own true interest, as members of 
the community '. 

' AE this I'll grant ; and yet it is well if they do not find means to 
make themselves pass for the state, and of course, you for the traitors 
against it. They who have the power can easily assume the name '. 

As he said this, a servant brought his friend a note, who, upon 
casting his eye over it — ' The gentleman I expected ', said he, 
' writes me word that he is not very well this morning, and, 
therefore, desires to see me at his house. If you are going my 
way, I'll set you down '. 

' I thank you ', answered my master, ' but ambition does not 
rise so high as that yet. I do not aspire to a pillory or prison, even 
injthe cause of my country. Shall we see you at dinner ' ? 

' Most certainly ; but hold ! Can you give me change for thi8_ 
note ? I have not time to call upon my banker '. 

' I believe I can ; but then it must be with the help of what you 
have yourself given for the ofllcer ; like other bankers, who make 
a parade of taking in charitable subscriptions, at the same time 
that they support their credit with the money '. 



474 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

' That's right. I'll mention him to the person I am going to. 
He has abilities to serve him effectually, and I am satisfied never 
wants inclination to do a generous action '. 

My master then gave him the change of his note, among which 
I was, and took his leave. 



CHAPTER L 

CHBYSAL SUMS tTP THE CHABACTEE OF HIS LATE MASTBE — DrETEBENT 
OPINIONS FOB AND AGAINST THE PEOPBIETY AND BENEFIT OF 
SATIEE — THE FOBMBE SUPPOBTED BY GOOD AUTHOEITY — ^SEASON 
OF SOME INCONVENIENCES ATTENDING THE INDULGENCE OF SUCH 
A TUBN — CHABACTEE OF CHEYSAL's NEW MASTEE CONCLUDED FBOM 

A FOBMBB SKETCH — ^HE WAITS UPON HIS PATEON CHABACTEE OF 

HIM, WITH HIS MOTIVES FOE SUCH A PATBONAGB — ^HB GIVES STBIK- 
ING BEASONS FOE OBJECTING TO SOME PABTS OF CHBYSAL'S MASTEE'S 
PAMPHLET, WHICH THE OTHBB MAKES SOME WEAK ATTEMPTS TO 
VINDICATE — CHEYSAL's MASTEE ENJOYS THE PLBASUBE OF TBACINa 
HIS OWN FAME 

The peculiar character of my late master made me feel regret at 
leaving his service, till I should see more of him. His abilities did 
honour to the age and country in which he lived, and the exalted 
sentiments of virtue, which broke from him spontaneously in the 
genuine effusions of his soul, gave sufficient reason to judge that 
his conduct would be entirely ruled by it, and his talents exerted 
in the more pleasing and extensive way of recommending it to 
imitation, by displaying all its advantages and charms, as soon, as 
time should cool the fervour of his passions, and apply its lenient 
balsam to the sores in his heart, the smart of which first gave him 
that poignant turn, and drove him for relief to excesses that too 
often drowned his better reason, and led him into actions which, 
in a cooler moment, he abhorred. In a word, his failings were the 
luxuriance of nature, as his virtues were her perfection. As I have 
said that he turned his poetical vein particularly to satire, I see 
your curiosity to know my opinion of the propriety and benefit of 
that manner of applying the powers of wit. But I have often told 
you that I am not permitted to determine controverted points. 
Many, with a plausible appearance of good nature, decry it, as 
proceeding from a malevolence of disposition, and tending only 
to spread the influence of bad example, by making it known, and 
harden people in vices they might forsake if not made desperate 
by detection. Many, with an appearance of virtuous indignation, 
vindicate it, as terrifying from vice, by showing it in its native defor- 
mity and correctiug folly, by putting it out of countenance, which 
latter opinion is supported by the authority of one of the most 
sensible and best men of his age '. But still the indulgence of this 

1 Would the anachronism admit the Bupposition, the editor would 
imagine that the author here meant the writer of Letters from a Persian 
in England, etc., whose words are these : ' If all the edge of wit is turned 
on those who are justly the objects of ridicule, wit is as great a benefit 
to private life, as the sword ol the magistrate is to public '. — Letter xl. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 476 

turn is attended with many iaconvenienoes and dangers, if it bo 
not guided with the greatest care. That imaginary superiority, 
which the power of making another ridiculous or detested flatters a 
man with, is so pleasing to the self-love inseparable from human 
nature, that it requires uncommon moderation to refrain from 
exercising it upon improper occasions, and makes him presumptuously 
conclude, that whatever happens to displease himself in any par- 
ticular ia a just object of public ridicule and censure — an error 
into which the impetuosity of my late master sometimes hurried him. 

I have given you a sketch of the character of my new master 
upon a former occasion, to which I have only to add here, that 
a wanton abuse of uncommon abilities inverted the end for which 
they were given, making them disgraceful to himself and danger- 
ous to his country, a licentious pursuit of everything called pleasure 
having wasted his fortune, and driven him to the despicable necessity 
of prostituting them to any purpose that .might promise to retrieve 
his affairs. The gentleman whom he went to wait upon the morning 
I came into his possession i, was one who had served his king and 
country with fidelity and success, while he was permitted to follow 
the dictates of his own reason in their service, but gave up the 
empty and disgraceful appearance of acting in it any longer, on 
finding his judgment disregarded and himself designed to be made 
only a cypher, to increase the consequence of another. The in- 
dignation, however, which had prompted him to take this step, 
led him not into those unjustifiable lengths which are too common 
on such occasions. He was faithful to his sovereign, though he had 
lost his favour, and watched attentively over the interests of hia 
country, though he was not permitted to promote them. The only 
instance in which his conduct could possibly be censured waslus 
patronising such a man as my master. But it is a maxim in human 
politics that the end justifies the means, be they what they will, 
He wanted to be restored to his former power, and thought this 
man's exposing the insufficiency of those who had supplanted him 
in it, the most likely way to effect that purpose. To this desire 
of power he was not stimulated by the usual methods of repairing 
a ruined fortune or making a new family. His wealth exceeded 
his very wishes, and he already enjoyed the highest honours^he 
could aspire to. AU he proposed was the glory of his sovereign 
and the advantages of his country, which that enthusiastic ambition 
from whence proceed the greatest actions, made him think himself 
the most capable, and wish to be the happy instrument of promoting. 

By this gentleman my master was received with that oiviUty 
which is commonly mistaken for esteem. After some general chat 
on the occurrences and humour of the times, in which my master 
modestly took to himself the merit of the people's discontent at the 

' Lord Temple, who applied for a writ of habeas corpus in favour of 
Wilkes, and on receiving the King's commands to deprive Wilkes of 
hia commission in the Militia, did so in such a complimentary manner 
that he was deprived of the Lord-Lieutenancy of Buckinghamshire. He 
was the brother of George Greuville and brother-in-law of Pitt, with 
whom he was always cordially allied, readily using his immense wealth 
in the campaign against Bute's government. 



476 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

ministry and their measures as raised solely by his pamphlet — ' I 
allow the good effects of it ', said the gentleman, ' and greatly 
approve the principles upon which it is written ; but I much fear 
that your zeal has transported you too far. You should of all things 
have avoided involving the master in your charge against the min- 
isters, because that alone can give them any advantage against 
you, and is therefore what they always feign, however unjustly; 
when they are attacked, in order to screen themselves behind him. 
Besides, the character of a sovereign is sacred, and should never 
be treated but with the highest respect, especially when the virtues 
of the man are such as would be respectable in any character '. 

Such disapprobation from his principal patron greatly disappointed 
my master, who was so little acquainted with his sentiments as to 
think he bore resentment against his sovereign for the loss of his 
favour, as well as against those who had deprived him of it, and 
consequently would be pleased with anything that might seem to 
reflect disgrace upon him. Recovering himself, however, before 
his embarrassment was perceived — ' I imagined ', answered he with 
his usual presence of mind, ' that it was impossible to accuse me 
of disrespect to one whom I have studiously sought every occasion 
of praising. As for what you take notice of, my charge is not 
personally against him, but through him, against those who had 
the baseness and insolence to abuse his goodness and confidence 
in such a manner ; so that I think it is impossible to wrest it to 
the purpose you apprehend '- 

' I wish you may not be mistaken, but I much fear that your 
argument will not have the weight you expect. Praise, given with 
an air of irony, is the keenest insult ; besides, in this particular 
case, the praises you bestow upon his goodness are all at the expense 
of his understanding. However, do not be dispirited at what cannot 
now be helped. As I think your intention was not in fault, you 
may depend upon my countenance and support, let what will 
happen '. 

This comfortable assurance restored my master to his former 
spirits. Not desiring, however, to continue the conversation any 
longer upon that subject — ' I have this morning ', said he, ' made no 
inconsiderable addition to our force. My friend, the poet, whose 
turn for satire I have heard you so much admire, has promised me 
to exert all his powers in our cause. He will attack the faults in 
their private, wliile I expose their public characters, and experience 
has shown that it is easy to overcome the minister, when the man 
is made ridiculous or odious '. 

' The former I'U grant you ; but we have too many instances 
in contradiction to the latter to build much upon it. However, 
bis powers are great, and may do much, if he will take care to avoid 
the rock upon which you have fallen ; and, therefore, I shall be 
glad to attach him seriously to us, especially as he does not seem to 
be utterly void of virtue, notwithstanding the libertinism of his 
conduct ia some instances '. 

My master would not miss so favourable an opportunity of doing 
justice to the character of his friend. Accordingly, he related the 
story of the distresses of the officer and his family, and his generosity 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 477 

to them, in so affecting a manner, that the gentleman directly gave him 
a considerable sum of money for their present relief, with a promise 
of providing for them himself, if he could not prevail upon those 
in power to do it. Pleased with a success which he knew would 
be so pleasing to his friend, my master took leave of his patron, 
and set out to trace his own fame from one coffee-house to another, 
and enjoy the applauses which the popularity and boldness of his 
attempt procured him from the multitude, wherever he went, after 
which he repaired to his usual haTmt, where he dined, and spent 
the evening in the usual manner. 



CHAPTER LI 

OHEYSAL's master EECBIVES AH" UNWELCOME VISIT AT AN TIN- 
SEASONABLE TIME — ^HIS EXTRAOEDINABY BEHAVIOUR BEFORE 
HIS SUPERIORS — HE IS SENT TO PRISON — CHRYSAL MAKES SOME 
UNPOPULAR REMARKS ON CERTAIN rNTEBESTING SUBJECTS — 
CONSEQUENCES OE HIS MASTER'S IMPRISONMENT, WITH AN ACCOUNT 
OF HIS BEHAVIOUR IN IT 

Confident as my master was of his safety, he soon found that the 
fears of his patron were too just. He had scarce laid him down 
to sleep, when his bed was surrounded, and himself made a prisoner 
by a num'ber of fellows, who, under the sanction of authority, com- 
mitted all the outrages of lawless ruffians, breaking open his looks, 
rifling his effects, and searching into all his secrets. It was in vain 
for him to expostulate with such people against so flagrant injustice, 
or claim the protection of the laws. They derided him and all 
he could say ; and having finished their work, dragged him 
away, with insults and abuse, to a magistrate^, where he had the 
comfort of waiting a considerable time in such agreeable company, 
before his worship was at leisure to see him. But this, though 
designed as an indignity, was of real advantage to him, as it gave 
him time to recover his spirits, and collect presence of mind for 
an interview of such importance. Accordingly, when at length 
he was admitted to the dread tribunal, instead of showing any de- 
jection at the danger which seemed to hang over him, he behaved 
in a manner worthy of a better man and a better cause. He asserted 
the violation of the laws in his person with so much resolution and 
appearance of reason, and returned the insolence of office with 
such contempt, answering illusively to the insidious questions put 
to him, and boldly demanding that right of being restored to his 
liberty which was assured to every individual of the community 

' Lord Halifax [Davis's Olio] one of the Secretaries of State who issued 
the general warrant. Lord Temple, in Wilkes' name, subsequently 
brought an action against Halifax and Under-Secretary Wood, who 
seized Wilkes' papers. Wood had to pay £1000 damages; but Halifax 
managed to delay the case against himself for six years, at the end of 
which his opponent obtained a verdict for £4000 damages. 



478 ADVENTURES OF A OVINE A 

by the essential principles of the constitution, that his judges ' were 
startled, and more than once wished they had left him unmolested. 

However, as there was no receding now, they concluded it to be their 
best way to go through with what they had begun, and bear down 
opposition with a high hand, with which intent they sent him 
directly to prison, in defiance of all he could say, where he was 
treated with uncommon severity, and the method which the law 
provided for his being restored to liberty eluded as long as possible, 
by finesses which power only could support. 

I see your indignation at such an infringement of laws procured 
by the blood of myriads, and established by the most solemn en- 
gagements, human and divine, for the security of the common rights 
of mankind. The part which every man feels in such sufferings, 
on a supposition that they may possibly one day fall upon himself, 
naturally interests you, as it did the multitude, in my master's 
cause. But when you come to examine coolly the maimer of his 
being taken into confinement, which is what gives you such ofience, 
it win not appear so contrary to reason and justice, the foundation, 
and, as I may say, soul of all laws, as popular opinion may presume. 

All power is delegated from the people for the mutual advantage 
of governors and governed. To support the use, and prevent the 
abuse of that power, laws are established by the consent of both, 
which are to be the rule of their actions. But, as it is impossible 
for human wisdom to foresee and provide for every oociirrence that 
may happen, there is essentially implied in the first trust a further 
power of applying unprovided remedies to unforeseen cases, for the 
safety and advantage of the whole. If it be objected that these 
remedies may sometimes be injurious to individuals, by being in- 
judiciously or wrongfully applied, the answer is obvious. The 
Bufferings of a few are not to be set in competition with the safety 
of the many. Beside, if the remedies were never to be appUed, 
where there was a possibility of a mistake, the evil might happen 
in the time necessary for inquiry and deliberation. For, though 
penal laws are designed only to prevent future by the punishment 
of past crimes, yet where such crimes, if committed, will exceed the 
reach of punishment and defeat the laws, the power of prevention 
must be exerted earlier, to anticipate them before commission. 

Without such power the trust of government would be imperfect 
and inadequate to the end ; as, if no punishment could be inflicted 
thus for prevention, but by prescribed forms, human ingenuity, 
€ver most fertile in evil, would devise expedients to evade it, till 
perpetration should secure impunity, as I said before, perhaps to 
the ruin of the state. For these reasons an extraordinary power 
must have been implicitly given for extraordinary cases, or the 
good of the community, which is the end of government, cannot 
be obtained. If this power, though, should be abused, the sacred 
spirit of the laws of your happy country will supply the inevitable 
defect of the latter, and grant redress to the sufferer, when a proper 
time comes for inquiring into the circumstances of the case, a redress 



^ Lorda Halifax and Egremont, the Secretaries of State. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 479 

which was not provided by the people ^ the most jealous of their 
liberties of any whoever united themselves into civil society, who, 
seiisible of the necessity of such a resource, made it a fundamental 
rule of their government, on any occasions of uncommon diflBculty or 
danger, to entrust the whole power into the hands of some one person, 
whom they called Dictator, as his word was to be the law, without 
subjecting him to control in the use, or account for the abuse of it, 
when his power should be at an end. 

As soon as my master's imprisonment was known, the populace 
all took fire, lley made his cause their own. They looked upon 
him as a martyr in the darling cause of liberty. They insulted all 
government, and committed excesses every hour, infinitely more 
illegal and dangerous to liberty, than that of which they complained. 
In the meantime, his confinement was far from sitting so heavy upon 
him as might have been expected. Though he wanted the approbation 
of his own mind and the enthusiasm of the principles he professed 
to support his resolution, and encourage him to look forward with 
hope, levity of temper supplied the place of that resolution, 
and saved him from sinking under misfortunes, by making him 
insensible of their weight. He rallied his jailors, mimicked his 
judges, cracked jests upon his own imdoing, and turned every 
circumstance into ridicule, with such drollery and unconcern, as if he 
was acting the imaginary sufierings of another, not actually suffering 
himself. How long he would have been able to support that spirit, 
though, came not to be tried. 



CHAPTER LII 

CHEYSAl's MASTER IS VISITED IN PEISON BY HIS PATRON, AND PROM 
WHAT MOTTVES — ^HIS CONDITCT ON BEING SET AT LIBERTY, AND 
THE CONSEQUENCES OP IT — REMARKABLE GROUNDS ON WHICH 
HE WAS SET AT LIBERTY, WITH A CONJECTURE AT THE REASON OP 
FIXING UPON THEM — CHRYSAL MAKES AN INQUIRY INTO CERTAIN 
MATTERS MUCH TALKED OP AND LITTLE UNDERSTOOD 

As soon as his friends obtained access to him, for the great severity 
of his confinement was the uncommon strictness of it, his patron 
went to see him. As I have taken notice of his disapprobation of 
what had brought my master into this scrape, you are surprised 
at his taking a step that seemed so inconsistent with his character. 
But his motives for it did honour to the man, however strange they 
may appear in the politician. He had admitted him to a degree 
of personal intimacy. He had approved of his engaging in a cause 
to which he was himself attached most sanguinely, and he scorned 
to desert him in distress, occasioned by what he thought an error 
of his judgment, not a fault of his intention. Beside the con- 
solation to himself, the honour of such a visit was of the greatest 
advantage to my master's affairs, as it lightened the personal 

' The Romans. 



480 ADVENTURES OP A GUINEA 

prejudices against him, and gave a good opinion of a cause which 
appeared to have the countenance of such a man. Intoxicated 
with the popularity he had thus acquired, v/hich, if rightly managed, 
might have done great matters, he was no sooner at liberty than he 
threw off all restraint, and ran into such licentiousness, as in a short 
time lessened its force, and lost him every trace of the good opinion 
of all who gave themselves time to think of the causes and con- 
sequences of such conduct. But his triumph was not long lived. 
He had been restored to his liberty, not as a right common to all 
the members of the community on a supposition of the Ulegality 
of the manner in which he had been deprived of it, but in consequence 
of certain immunities', annexed to a particular part of the legislature, 
to which he belonged. Though the abilities and integrity of the 
magistrate ^ who made this distinction were imquestionable, some 
persons, who looked further than the present moment, imagined 
they could trace it to a cause not commonly attended to. He had 
on former occasions^ been irwtrumental in depriving some people of 
liberty in the same manner ; to have condemned that manner there- 
fore, now as illegal, would have been condemning himself ; at the same 
time that upright obedience to the dictates of his present opinion 
obliged him to set him free. Such a difficulty must have been dis- 
tressing, but this distinction delivered him from it, and enabled 
him to save his credit and conscience both, as those people had 
borne no part in the legislature, and therefore had not been entitled 
to such immunity. 

I see your indignation arise at the thought that in a country which 
boasts of being governed by equal laws, any one set of men should 
enjoy immunities denied to the rest ; but that indignation proceeds 
from viewing the matter in a partial light. In the country where 
your lot has happily fallen, the end of government is better secxired 
by a division of its powers, than in any other under heaven. The 
great T^'isdom of those who made this division appears in the pro- 
visions made to preserve each part in it independent of the rest, 
the only means by which the division itself could be preserved. 
Now, as the executive power necessarily belongs solely to the prince, 
it was equally necessary to secure those who bore a part with him 
in the legislative from any undue exertion of that power, which 
might be attempted in order to break through that independence, 
and join the legislative to the executive ; or, in other words, vest 
both powers absolutely, and without limitation, in the prince. 
And this was the reason of immunities so much talked of, and 
so little understood. 

If it be said that these immunities operate also against fellow- 
subjects, from whom there can be no fear, and are sometimes (per- 
haps too often), abused to dishonest ends, the answer must be sought 

i Privilege of Pailiament. Wilkes was member for Aylesbury. 

^ Lord Chief Justice Pratt. 

3 Alludes to the case of Dr John Shebbeare, who was seized on a 
general warrant in 1758 for his letters attacking the government. 
Pratt, then Attorney-General, laid the information against Shebbeare, 
who was sentenced to stand in the pillory. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA ,481 

for in the depravity of the human heart, which will pervert the best 
institutions to the worst purposes, and makes it necessaiy to preclude 
every exception, that it should not be extended to serve them. 
As for instance, if the meanest subject of the state had a right to 
claim the assistance of the civil power in every case against any 
member of the legislature, wliile in his legislative capacity, that 
right might be suborned, or feigned, by the executive power in 
such a manner as to overturn his independency, and to prevent 
his discharging the trust committed to him : for which reason it 
is better that an individual should suffer (to suppose the worst), 
than an opportunity be given for ruining the whole community; 
according to the known maxim, that an evil which affects but one 
is preferable to an inconvenience which affects many. And this 
immunity, which is really the shield and safety of the state, can 
never be invaded, but from a design against the liberty of the state, 
nor absolutely given up without giving up that liberty along with it ; 
though the right may be waived in particular instances, which appear 
unworthy of the benefit of it. To actions, criminal in their own 
nature, between individuals, or immediately dangerous to the state, 
it was never designed to be extended, as in such cases it would have 
been destructive of the end for which it was instituted. While my 
master was running riot in this extravagant manner, some things 
happened which raised in his favour the indignation and pity of 
many, who disliked the man, and disapproved of his proceedings, 
because they saw him persecuted by unjustifiable means. It may 
be imagined that I did not remain long enough in his possession to see 
the conclusion of this affair, but as I had ample opportunity of being 
acquainted with it at the time, and see that your curiosity is interested 
in the event, I will continue the account here, especially as the 
principal oocufrences in my next service were connected with it 
in so particular a manner that it is necessary to explain one, in 
order to understand the other. 



CHAPTER Lin 

CHBYSAL's master takes a FOBEION TOTJR — ^EEMABKS TTPON NATIONAL 
KEFLECTIONS, AND ATTACKS UPON PRIVATE CHARACTERS — CHRY- 
SAL's master is CALLED TO AN ACCOUNT FOR CERTAIN IMPROPER 
LIBERTIES, BY A VEEY IMPROPER PERSON, WHOM HE TREATS WITH 
UNCOMMON PROPRIETY — CHRYSAL MAKES SOME OUT-OP-THE-WAY 
REFLECTIONS ON A QUESTION MUCH CANVASSED TO LITTLE PURPOSE 

When my master had in some measure exhausted the first flow of 
his spirits upon the recovery of his liberty, he made a short excursion 
abroad as if merely for amusement, but in reality to provide a place 
of retreat, in case of the worst, as his apprehensions could not but 
be alarmed, whenever he allowed himself time to think. 

I have observed that in the account he gave my late master, 
when he first told him of his attack upon the ministeri he said he 

1 Lord Bute. 
2h 



482 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

had included in it all his countrymen i. This he really had done 
on that, and continued to do on all other occasionis, with a licen- 
tiousness unexampled ; but which lost its force and became con- 
temptible, by sinking into scurrility. Attacks upon private characters 
unless forced by necessity, or designed to serve good purposes, 
auch as personal reformation, or caution to others, are literally 
abuse, and proceed always from a bad heart, but national reflections, 
as they can answer no good purpose of any kind, are abuse in every 
sense, and proceed equally from folly and malevolence — a folly, 
indeed, that is often punished by fools, who take to themselves 
that abuse which belongs not to them in particular, and would pass 
by, without lighting upon them, if not applied thus by themselves. 

My master had not been long abroad, when a countryman ^ of 
the minister's thought proper to call him to account for the liberties 
he had taken with his country. The absurdity of such a step in any 
man was still aggravated by the peculiar circumstances of this 
person, who had actually given weight to the severest part of the 
•charge against his country (indeed, the only part that would admit of 
weight, the rest being, as I have said, nothing but scurrility), by 
engaging in the service of the enemies of its present government, 
and fighting their battles against it. Such an antagonist, therefore, 
was beneath the notice of any man of reason, and accordingly 
was treated so by my master, who on this occasion behaved vsdth 
moral propriety and prudence much above the tenor of his general 
character. But his enemies beheld his conduct in a different light, 
and attributed to cowardice what was really the effect of courage. 

You seem surprised at my saying that his declining to fight was 
the effect of courage, but reflect a moment, and you will see that 
it is the motive of fighting, and not the mere fighting, that constitutes 
true ooui'age ; and that the fashionable courage of venturing life 
for punctilios of imaginary honour is real cowardice, as it proceeds 
solely from fear of the false censure of the world, and therefore, 
that to brave that censure in such oases is the highest courage. 
I would not be imderstood by this to declare absolutely against 
a man's fighting in his own cause, in all cases indiscriminately. 
Different circumstances make an essential difference in things which 
superficially appear to be alike. A man's venturing his life, as I 
have said, in vindicating empty punotihos of imaginary honour, 
or in support of injustice, is the highest and most ungratefiil insult 
to the author of that life, who has made the preservation of it the 
first principle of action, and conseqiiently an indispensable duty, 
when it can be preserved, without violation of those greater duties 
wliich he has thought proper to prescribe. 

' i.e. the Scots, against whom the Norili Briton was primarily directed. 

^ Captain Forbes, a Scot in the French service, who challenged Wilkes 
in the streets of Paris, for having attacked his country in the North 
Briton.. The French government putting them on parole not to fight 
in that country, Wilkes offered to fight this bravo in Asia, Africa, 
America, or any other country in Europe. Forbes followed his enemy to 
LoD-don, but received a hint from the government that he had better leave 
the country. He afterwards became a general in the Portuguese army. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 483 

But, as there are other things more valuable than life, because 
without them life would lose its value, reason, which is the voice 
of Heaven, permits to hazard the lesser good for the preservation 
of the greater, and this is the justification of war between different 
states. To prevent the evils, which such a recourse between in- 
dividuals in the same state must be attended with, laws are established 
to preserve those rights and redress injuries which they may offer 
to each other ; to these laws, therefore, it is an indispensable duty 
to recur for such redress and preservation, where they are able to 
effect them, but this duty does not seem to extend so far as ab- 
solutely and indiscriminately to preclude the other method of a man's 
striving at the hazard of his life to effect them himself, when 
the laws cannot do it, as is too often the case, it being impossible 
for human wisdom to make provision for every occurrence, which 
in the complication and extensiveness of human action may require 
it. An opinion so contrary to that professed by all who have under- 
taken to discuss this subject, however consonant to the sense of 
mankind in general, as shown in their practice, should be supported 
by the plainest and most convincing reasons. 

A good name is the immediate jewel of the soul ; it is the first 
fruit and the reward of virtue ; the preservation of it, therefore, is 
indisputably worth hazarding life for, where the laws have not 
sufficiently provided for its defence, as is the case in many of the 
most delicate and tender points. If a man, for instance, is un- 
justly accused of a fact that ruins his good name, at the same time 
that the accusation comes not within the reach of any law, from 
which he may receive redress, can reason say that he is not justifiable 
in striving for that redress himself, and vindicating his good name, 
at the hazard of his life, when that life would be only misery without 
it ? But here another difficulty occurs. Shall a man, it is said, 
put himself on a level with his injurer, and risk a second injury, 
in seeking satisfaction for the first ? This certainly is an evil, but 
must be submitted to, to prevent a greater. 

If a man were permitted to redress himself absolutely, without 
such a risk, the consequence would be that partiality to himself 
would make him think everything that should displease him an 
injury sufficient to merit such a redress, whereby mm'ders would 
be multiplied to the reproach of humanity, and ruin of the state. 
But where this risk makes the redress attended with danger, people 
are cautious not to run into it, but on what they at least think 
good grounds. Besides, risking life in an even scale is in some manner 
staking it upon the justice of the cause, and appealing to Heaven 
for decision, and consequently success clears the character in general 
estimation ; whereas killing insidiously, or without such equal 
risk, only confirms the first charge, on a presumption of conscious- 
ness, and aggravates it with the weight of new guilt. And this 
was the sense of mankind, till the remedy was perverted to such 
an excess, as to become worse than the evil, and therefore necessary 
to be abolished, as far as human laws can abolish a general principle 
of action. 

One particular, though, in the laws made to abolish it deserves 
remark, as it shows a striking instance of the sagacity with which 



484 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

human laws are often made. Killing a man in a deliberate duel, 
be the cause ever so important, and utterly unprovided for in the 
law, is accounted murder, and made capitally criminal ; but killing 
in a drunken broil, or ungoverned gust of passion, is only a pardonable 
offence, and called by the softer name of manslaughter. Now, if the 
makers of that law had but considered which action proceeded 
from the worst cause, and was liable to be attended with the worst 
consequences, from the possible frequency of it, they might perhaps 
have seen reason to reverse the case, and make the latter capital, 
and the former at least pardonable. In a word, he who takes away 
the life of another, or loses his own, in a trivial or unjust cause, 
or where the laws of his country have provided him redress, is guilty 
of murder ; whereas, he who kills, or is killed, in a cause of real 
importance, for which there is no remedy provided him by the law, 
sins not against the spirit of that law, however he may against 
the letter ; and consequently seems to be entitled to an immunity 
from the penalties of it. This reasoning, though, respects only 
the reason of the law, and is by no means laid dovm as a rule for 
practice ; it being the indispensable duty of a subject to obey the 
plain letter of the law, virithout presuming to oppose his private 
opinion to it, othervidse than by humble applications to proper 
authority to have it altered. 



CHAPTER LIV 

CHRYSAL's master's late COJfDTJCT DRAWS HIM INTO A NEW SCRAPE, 
US WHICH HE COMES OFF BUT SECOND BEST — HE TAKES ADVANTAGE 
OF HIS MISFORTUNE TO MAKE HIS ESCAPE FROM A GREATER — ^HE 
SUFFERS THE RESENTMENT OP HIS ENEMIES, AS FAR AS THEY CAN 
REACH HIM ; AND MEETS FROM HIS FRIENDS THE FATE OF ALL 
USELESS TOOLS, AFTER HAVING SERVED THEM WITH IMPROBABLE 
SUCCESS — A STRIKING INSTANCE OF THE ADVANTAGE OF Alf UP- 
RIGHT JUDGE, AND EQUAL LAWS — CHRYSAl CHANGES HIS SERVICE 

The opinion that my master's having behaved in this manner 
proceeded from a want of spirit soon laid him under a necessity 
of showing the contrary. A person who was involved deeper than 
he chose to appear in his accusr.tions against the minister i, 
though he was known to be his creature, thought he might safely 
invalidate the credit of the charge and curry further favour vrith 
Lis patron, by denjdng it in terms of such abuse as should make 
the accuser infamous, on submitting to them, as he imagined he 
would. 

But in this he found himself mistaken. The captiousness of 
false honour, that often passes for true resolution, which is the only 
result of virtue, was now piqued ; and two beings (for it was im- 
possible for the other to draw back), who called themselves rational, 
hazarded their lives in support of what neither could have supported 

^ Samuel Martin [see Introduction]. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 485 

by reason. The event proved immediately unfavourable to my 
master, who received a wound that for some time seemed to threaten 
his life. But he soon thought the danger amply made amends 
for, by the pretence it gave him to put off from time to time the 
resentment of that part of the legislature to which he belonged, for 
the offence which had occasioned his being confined, and at length 
to fly from it, when he found it could not be any longer prevented, 
by such finesses, from bursting on his head. Such a flight was an 
implicit acknowledgment of his guilt. He was, therefore, deprived 
of his part in the legislature, and consequently of all the immunities 
annexed to it, and given up to the common course of the laws, for 
that and others matters, whenever he should be found within the 
reach of their power. Nor was this all ? To show still stronger 
■disapprobation of his conduct, the breach of those immunities, 
upon which tlie magistrate had founded his discharge from con- 
finement, was overlooked, and such offences as his excluded from 
their protection for the future. 

You cannot be surprised at his meeting such a fate. The tools 
of a statesman, however successful they may have been, are always 
thrown aside with neglect the moment they have done their work, 
but when they fail, however blamelessly, or run into any error, 
though onlj' from excess of zeal, the weight of the neglect is made still 
heavier, by heaping all the blame upon them. But what will you 
think, when I tell you that, uneqiial as he must appear to have been 
to such an attempt, in consequence, cliaracter, and abilities, he raised 
so threatening a storm that the minister thought proper to retire 
out of its way ; as all his friends apprehended they should have 
been obliged to follow him, a success for which lie was in great 
measure indebted to the assistance of my late master, who repre- 
sented their private characters in such colours, in his satirical 
writings, as will make their memories pay a dear price for their 
power, the poetical merit of his works, in which their names are 
branded with indelible infamy, ensuring their immortality. Such, 
is the basis upon which statesmen found their greatness, and so 
easily is a jealous populace led away by anything that flatters 
their present humour. 

I say not this, as deciding upon the merit of the disputes in which 
he was concerned. I think too meanly of human politics in general 
to give my opinion in favour of any one scheme of them, in prefer- 
ence to another. They are all alike a jumble of villany and blunders. 
All I intend is to show on what a sandy foundation men who value 
themselves upon their wisdom wear out their lives in anxious toils 
and dangers, to build their hopes ; and what unworthy means are 
often made use of to overturn them, and work ends, reputed great 
on purpose, perhaps, to humble man in his own eyes. As for 
my master, he was no sooner removed out of the sight of the mob 
whose idol he had been in such an extravagant degree, than he was 
entirely out of their mind, and the storm he had raised subsided 
so totally as to leave no other trace behind it but his ruin. 

I have observed your anxiety to know whether he ever obtained 
redress for the injustice done him in his property, and the injurious 
treatment he received when he was first apprehended, as I said 



486 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

that the fellowa employed to take him, had, under the sanction 
of authority, committed all the outrages of lawless ruffians. The 
interest you take in the cause of such a man can arise from nothing 
but your love of justice, which should not be violated in the person 
of the most unjust. It will, therefore, give you pleasure to be 
informed that the laws of your country never shone with brighter 
lustre than in this instance. In despite of every artifice and effort 
which power and chicane could make use of to evade, or intimidate 
from the execution of them (a striking instance of the latter of 
which was depriving his patron of every degree of power and honour, 
of which he could be deprived without regard to his great services 
and personal consequences, only for appearing in his cause), an able 
and upright magistratei supported them with such resolution and 
judgment, that he obtained exemplary redress for all he had suffered 
that could be redressed, as did several others, who had been involved 
in the sa,me circumstances, as having been employed by him. 

In gratification to your curiosity, I have thus given you the 
general heads of his story. To have dwelt on the minute cir- 
cumstances, however curious in themselves, would have led me too 
great a length besides that they now come within my design, as I 
was not directly in his possession when they happened. To return, 
therefore, now to the regular chain of my own adventures, I must 
go back to the time of my leaving his service, which was not very 
long after he had been released from his confinement. Among the 
crowds that came to congratulate him upon this event, was a clergy- 
man 2 whose professions of personal attachment, and respect for his 
principles and abilities, were strained to such a fulsome height as 
would have disgusted vanity itself. 

My master saw through him directly, and played him off with 
humour peculiar to himself, till he concluded with telling him that 
he had a work then in hand, upon the same scheme with his, which 
he intended to publish by subscription. My master, who knew the 
man, took the hint, in the proper light of a modest way of begging, 
and clapped a couple of guineas into his hand, desiring to be 
inserted in his list, upon which occasion I left his service. 

1 Lord Chief Justice Pratt. 

2 John Kidgell, a profligate divine, 'chaplain ' to the Earl of March 
(afterwards Duke of Queensberry). By underhand means he procured 
for the government a second copy of the Essay on Woman, and then 
published an account of what he called ' a scandalous, obscene, and 
exceedingly profane libel ', the result of which was that he had to lea-ve 
the count) y. He was heavily in debt. Lord March, whose vices were 
maturing early, was a member of the Medmenham brotherhood. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 48X 



CHAPTER LV 

KBASOSr OF THE JOY WITH WHICH CHBYSAL WAS RBCEIVBD BY HIS. 
NEW MASTER — ACCOUNT OP A CURIOUS THOUGH NOT UNCOMMON 
WAY OP GETTING A LIVING — CONVERSATION BETWEEN CHRYSAL'S. 
MASTER AND HIS GUEST — THEY COMPARE NOTES ON THEIR DIPEEK- 
ENT ATTEMPTS IN THE LITERARY TRADE — CHRYSAL's MASTER 
IS ENCOURAGED BY HIS FRIEND FROM HIS OWN EXAMPLE — A RE- 
MARKABLE ACCOUNT OF A CERTAIN MATTER THAT MADE MUCH 
NOISE 

The joy my new master felt on the receipt of so small a sum, showed, 
the consequence it was of to him. He thanked his benefactor in 
terms of rapture, and vowing eternal gratitude and attachment 
to him and his cause, departed with a happy heart. Nor was his 
joy without cause. He had invited an acquaintance to sup and 
spend the evening with him, and had neither money nor credit 
to provide anything for his entertainment. Despicable as the vanity 
of making invitations in such circumstances may appear to you, 
it was one of his chief resources to support himself and his family, 
as he never invited any but such as he expected to borrow much 
more from than it cost him to entertain them. Your indignation at 
the mention of so mean a shift shows your happy ignorance of the 
ways of this populous place, in which there are numbers who keep 
up a decency of external appearance, and support life only by this 
method of raising contributions on their acquaintances, spending 
with one what they have got from another, in order to get from 
him too, and so on ; with this difference only from common beggars, 
that they seldom apply to the same person twice, and instead of 
prajdng for their benefactors with an appearance of gratitude,, 
wherever they meet them avoid their company, and are always seek- 
ing for new acquaintances, as quarry for them to prey upon. On 
this errand he had sallied out this morning, but met with such bad 
success that he had been obliged to have resource to the subscription- 
scheme, an addition which he had lately made to his former plan. 
His joy, therefore, at my late master's generosity was but natural. 
He returned home in high spirits, and giving his wife half his prize,, 
to provide two or three nice little things, secured me for future 
contingencies. Everything being thus adjusted, his guest i, who 
came punctually at the appointed time, was received with all the 
formalities and airs of politeness and high life. The conversation 

1 Dr John Douglas, afterwards Bishop of Carlisle, and then of Salis- 
bury. He distinguished himself by the aouteness with which he ex- 
posed several impostors: (1) William Lauder, who had accused Milton 
of plagiarism ; (2) Archibald Bower {see p. 488) ; and (3) according 
to Davis's Olio, Elizabeth Canning, whose disappearance and the charges, 
she brought against a family of gypsies for maltreating her form one 
of the most perplexing cases in judicial history. Fielding wrote an 
account of the case (she had appeared before him as Bow Street magis- 
trate), and Dr Hill a reply thereto. 



488 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

before and at supper ran on the usual topics of the weather, politics, 
and the secret history of the day, but when my master's lady had 
withdrawn and he saw his friend began to palate his wine with 
pleasure (for he never made his push till the heart was warm), he 
took occasion from some modest mention the other made of hia 
munificence in the relief of merit in distress, to lament his own inabil- 
ity to indulge that darling pleasure of his soul, as a proper introduction 
to his business. 

' I have wondered with much concern ', answered his friend, 
' at your languishing so long in this obscurity. It is all your own 
fault. Why do you not exert yourself ? There is nothing which 
spirit and diligence cannot conquer '. 

' Very true, my dearest friend ', replied my master, with a shrug 
of his shoulders and a heavy sigh. But what can diligence or 
abilities either do, when they cannot find emplojrment. I have 
offered myself to ministry and opposition, to booksellers and news- 
writers, and all to no purpose ; though, indeed, if it was not for 
the assistance of one of the latter i, who now and then takes an essay 
or a letter from me, I should be utterly at a loss. So that what 
can I do ' ? 

' What ? Why, anything rather than be idle. If one thing 
won't do, another may. There is not an article in the trade which 
I have not tried in my time. I have made bibles, magazines and 
reviews, sermons, ballads, and dying speeches, and though all failed, 
I never lost my spirit. The miscarriage of one scheme only set my 
invention at work to strike out another. No man can have greater 
difficulties to struggle with than I had, and yet you see I have got 
over them all '. 

' Yes ! But, my dearest friend, you had advantages — the counte- 
nance and assistance of such a patron ^ as yours ' 

' Were just as great advantages to me, as your patron's are to 
you, and no more. I had the honourable advantage of leading 
a bear ^ for a bit of bread, and betraying his secrets to his father 
and mother, for the hope of a church living, which I should not 
have got at last, but that it was not worth selling '. 

' You astonish me. Don't you owe all your preferments, all 
your affluence, to the interest of your patron ? ' 

' What I owe my preferments to is not necessary to mention ; 
but my affluence I owe to a very different cause. The detection 
of that impostor * was the thing that made my fortune. I might 

^ Dryden Leach, the printer and publisher. He was the first person 
arrested in the proceedings upon the publication of the North Briton, 
No. XLV, which, however, he had not printed. 

2 Lord Bath. 

'■' Lord Pulteney, sou of the Marquis of Bath. Douglas was his 
travelling tutor, and on his return to England in 1749 was presented 
to a living, which he resigned on obtaining that of High Ercall, 
Shropshire. 

* Archibald Bower, against whom he wrote a series of pamphlets. 
He continued to produce defences of the government and of government 
proii!gh for many years, earning suitable rewards. He was made a 
bishop long after, in 1787. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 489 

have remained in my original poverty to this day, if it had not been 
for that '. 

' For that ? Is it possible ? I cannot conceive that the profits 
upon the sale of a pamphlet or two (and that not a veiy extensive 
sale neither), could do such great things. My novel, I thought, 
bade as fair for a good run, as anything ; it was seasoned high to 
the taste of the times, and yet it did very little more than pay '. 

' The sale ! Ha ! ha ! ha ! No, no ! I did not depend upon that. 
My profit came in another way entirely ' 

' What can be your meaning ? If it be not too great a secret, 
I should be much obliged to you to explain this matter. It may 
possibly be of service to me '. 

' Why, on that account, and as I think I can depend upon your 
honour, I don't much care if I do. If you are so much surprised 
-at my saying that I made my fortune by that pamphlet, what will 
you think when I tell you further that I never wrote one line of it, 
nor was I any more concerned in the sale than you, who knew nothing 
■of the matter ? But not to perplex you with guessing at what it 
is impossible you should ever discover. You can be no stranger 
to the noise that impostor made when he first came here. While 
he did no more than tell his own story, it was thought, by his own 
fraternity, to be the best way not to give it consequence by contra- 
dicting it, but let it die away of itself ; beside, that possibly it might 
not have been so easy to contradict it to any effect, while the persons 
-concerned were all living, and the facts fresh in everyone's memory. 
But when he went so far as to attack the whole body, and was 
evidently undermining the foundation upon which they stood, by 
tearing off the veil of antiquityi behind which they hid themselves, 
and exposing all their mystery to light, the matter became more 
serious, and it was judged necessary to ruin his character 
in order to invalidate the credit of his work, the merit of which 
made a direct attack not only difficult, but also too doubtful of 
success to hazard an affair of such importance upon it. 

' For this reason, heaven and hell were conjured up, and every 
engine set at work to prove his story of himself false in every par- 
ticular, and make him appear the most complicated villain that 
ever existed. But the credit of those who made this attack upon 
him was too low for it to have any effect, as their principles, and 
the interested motives upon which they proceeded, were sufficiently 
knovni, so that it only did him service by showing his consequence. 
While they were considering how to repair this defeat, necessity 
suggested to me the lucky thought of offering them my assistance. 
I had already got some degree of credit by anticipating time in the 
detection of two silly impostors^, the absurdity of which would soon 
have discovered them without my help. This gave weight to my 
offer. Accordingly, they readily embraced it, and, desiring only 

' Alluding to Bower's History of the Pope?. Bower stated that he had 
intended to vindicate the doctrine of the Pope's supremacy, but had 
been converted by the evidence to take the contrary view. Douglas 
proved the authenticity of certain incriminating letters of Bower's 
that had recently been published, and exposed his private character. 

2 William Lauder and Elizabeth Canning [see  487]. 



490 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

the sanction of my name (for which, you may judge, I was well 
paid), took all the trouble upon themselves. 

' The reason which defeated them assisted me. Everything I was 
thought to say carried weight, as appearing to proceed from the 
highest candour and attachment to truth, as nothing else could 
naturally be supposed to have made me take such pains to detect 
an imposture, so favourable to the principles I professed myself. 
The public also had got enough of his story, and was ready to listen 
to one against him. The consequence you know. His character 
was ruined with the public, and of course a prejudice raised against 
his work, which ruined that also, without the trouble of a regular 
confutation, which, as I observed before, might not have been an 
easy matter; and now T hope the mystery is explained to you'. 



CHAPTER LVI 

cheysal's master makes some steiking bemabks on his feiend's 
accotjnt oe this mysteeiotts teansaction", and draws dteee- 
ences from it not commonly attended to — he entertains 
his friend with a citeiotjs song, who makes an important 
hit, jtrst in his own character, upon it — chrysax's master 

BOGGLES A LITTLE AT FIRST, AT HIS FRIBNd's PROPOSAL, BUT IS 
ENCOURAGED BY HIS EXAMPLE TO UNDERTAKE IT 

' I AM much obliged to you for such a proof of your confidence % 
returned my master, ' particularly as it clears up some points to 
me, which I own gave me equal concern and surprise, and of which 
delicacy prevented my desiring an explanation from you. These 
were the manner in which that attack was made upon him, and 
the arguments and proofs brought in support of it, which were so 
unfair, inconclusive, and in many instances contradictory, that I 
was astonished any man of sense and honesty could make use of, 
or be influenced by them '. 

' Why, that is very true. Their zeal often overshot the mark, 
to be sure. But that signified nothing. Set the public once upon 
the scent of scandal, and they'll hunt it like bloodhoimds, through 
thick and tliin. Nothing can be so gross as to stop them. You 
may as well whistle to the wind to change its course, as speak reason 
to the people when they have conceived a prejudice '. 

' But what is your opinion of that affair ? Is he, or is he not, 
the impostor they would make him ? For I confess, the arguments 
by which they would prove him one are so far from answering their 
design with me, that I think they prove the contrary, by proving- 
nothing, as it is natural to conclude that if there were any better, 
such would have not been made use of. But you certainly musC 
have had suflficient opportunities of being informed in the intercourse 
you necessarily had with them ' 

' As to that, I know no more of the matter than you do, nor ever 
gave myself the trouble to inquire. All the intercourse I had with 
them waa only to save appearances and get my money. Whether 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 491 

he was an impostor or not was the same thing to me. I was paid 
for seeming to prove him one, and that was all I cared for '- 

' But you continue to call him one still. Do they also pay you 
for that now ? ' 

'No. I do that for my own credit. Were I to retract all, the 
scandal that has been heaped upon him in my name would revert 
npon myself, so that whenever I mention him, I am obliged to do- 
it m the old phrase. I know some squeamish people would have 
scrupled the whole, but that is not my way of thinking. I hold 
nothing to be so great a reproach as poverty, nor anything a sin 
that can get over it. And so, here's my service to me. I wish you- 
could hit upon such another opportunity '. 

' And if I would scruple to make use of it, may I perish in my 
present poverty, and I defy the devil to find a heavier curse '. 

The conversation then turned to more general topics, in the course 
of which my late master naturally coming to be mentioned — 'That's 
right,' said my master, ' I have something to show you that will 
give you pleasurei. You may remember, I told you, that I am 
sometimes obliged to a printer of my acquaintance for helping me 
to a job, in the letter or essay way. Happening to call upon him 
this morning, to try if he could take anything from me, he showed 
me this ', pulling a piece of greasy paper out of his pocket, ' which 
I think really a curiosity. It is a proof of a bawdy song, which 
the gentleman we have been talking of wrote^, and had a few copies 
of printed for the amusement of his particular intimates. My 
friend got it from one of his journeymen, who sometimes works 
for that gentleman, and says there are a good many more of them, 
which are all printed together in a ballad. You'll find it worth 
your reading. Nothing ever was so highly worked up. It gave me 
ineffable pleasure '. 

' If you can prove this to be wrote by that person ', said the other, 
spitting and wriggling in his chair, after having poured over it for 
some time,' your fortune is made. You know his enemies are striv- 
ing to run him down by any means. Now, this will give them so 
plausible a handle against him, that they will not fail to reward you 
liberally for the discovery. All you have to do is to prove it 
plainly upon him '. 

' I am pretty sure that may be done ' answered my master, with 
some hesitation, ' but I — I — I — ^I hardly know how. I am under- 
personal obligation '. 

' Nay, if you let such things as that interfere, I give you up. What 
signifies past obligation, when put in competition -with present 

' The proof-sheet of a  of the Essay on Woman, which Kidgell 
obtained for the ministers (Sandwich and Dashwood, Lord Le De- 
spenser), through the mediation of the Earl of March. Eventually, he 
got hold of the remainder {see p. 492). 

'Wilkes. The Essay was an obscene burlesque of Pope's Essay on 
Man, and was equipped -with notes ascribed to Bishop Warburton. 
Thomes Potter seems to have been the author. Wilkes was charged 
with printing and publishing it, although only thirteen copies were 
struck ofi for private circulation. 



492 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

interest ? You know what my old antagonist says, that it is a rule 
among his former fraternity never to let any social or moral duties 
interfere with religion, of which he gives a remarkable instance in 
his own story. Now, my interest is my religion, and everything 
which interferes with that I abjure, as I have sufficiently proved. 
But I beg pardon, I would by no means press you to do anything 
against your conscience, if it is so tender '. 

' Wrong me not, my dearest friend, by such an opinion ; my con- 
science is as far from being tender as yours can be. I was only 
surprised that I had not myself seen what you mentioned. But 
now that your friendship has pointed it out to me, you shall see 
me pursue it as eagerly as you can desire. All I want is your 
■direction. Leave the rest to me '. 

The remainder of the evening was spent in consultation upon 
the plan proper to be pursued, the former of which my master sub- 
mitted implicitly to the superior judgment and experience of his 
friend, who was so pleased with this mark of his respect, and so 
sure of success, that on going away he took a modest hint and lent 
him five guineas, reminding him at the same time of the confidence 
he had placed in his honour, by disclosing his affairs to him, and 
■enjoining him to secrecy. ^ 



CHAPTER LVII 

■cheysal's mastbb ptjesttes his scheme, and violates moral 
honesty to serve the caitsb oe virtue and religion — he 
waits upon his patron, who honestly refuses a character 
to which he knows he has no right ; but undertakes the 
aefair from a more prevailing motive, in which he is 
bbjlarkably assisted by another person op less modesty, 
who pleads the cause op religion and virtue in vain, till 
honour at length turns the scale in their favour — 

CHRYSAL's MASTER IS DISAPPOINTED IN HIS HOPES, AND MAKES USB 
OF AN EXPEDIENT IN CHARACTER, TO ESCAPE FROM THE JUST 
REWARD OF ALL HIS LABOURS — CHRYSAL CHANGES HIS SERVICE 

Not to lose a moment's time, in a matter of such importance, my 
master went next morning to his worthy friend the printer, to 
whom he opened his scheme, and by his influence, ■B'ith the assistance 
of the bribe, and promises of much more, he prevailed on the fellow 
from whom the former paper was got, to betray the trust of hia 
employer, and steal the whole ballad^ The next thing was to make 

' The Essay on Woman had been privately printed, and however 
reprehensible the work was, the fact of non-publication made the pro- 
ceedings against Wilkes on the score of it a gross injustice, which was 
aggravated by the leading part taken by his boon companions. Sandwich 
■and Lord Le Despenser, m accusing him in the House of Lords. Sand- 
wich insisted on reading the Essay to the peers. The lines in the 
Beggar's Opera, ' That Jemmy Twitcher should peach me, I own sur- 
prised me ', fastened the nickname of Jemmy Twitcher on him for life. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 493- 

his honest acquisition known to those from whom he expected the 
reward of his pious pains. For this purpose, he waited upon his- 
patron, and having with diflBculty gained access to him, on repeated 
messages of important business, after the common cant of compli- 
ments — ' I am come, sir ', said he, ' on an errand that I know 
agreeable to you, as it will afford a signal opportunity of showing 
your regard for religion and virtue '. 

' Heh, ' answered his patron. ' My regard for religion and virtue ! 
Wh&t the devil does the fellow mean ? What regard have I ever 
shown for either, in word or action, that should put such a thought 
in your head ? If you are come to preach to me, you shall soon find- 
the effects of your piety '. 

i ' Pardon me, sir ; I know you better than to be guilty of such 
presumption. What I mean is this : fortune has favoured me with 
an opportunity of putting it into your power to establish such a 
charact-er, and as I know most people are fond of the name, when 
it can be obtained without the trouble of the practice, I thought it 
my duty to acquaint you with it, especially as it will enable you 
at the same time to do a particular pleasure to your friends in power '. 

' Why, there may be sometiiing in that, as you say ; but for the 
rest, I care as little for the name as I do for the practice, and would 
not give myself a moment's trouble to get it ; so, be quick, and let 
me hear what you have got to say. I have a match to ride to-morrow 
against a gentleman for a considerable wager, and must see his 
groom this morning in order to settle matters with him ; besides- 
which, I have an assignation with his wife, who expects me at 
this very time, so that I have not a moment to lose about religion 
and virtue ' 

My master, who knew him too well to attempt interfering with 
such engagements, politely wished him success, and then gave him 
in few words an accomit of the whole affair, only reserving to himself 
the honour of the thought, TOth which his patron was so pleased, 
that he promised to give him all the assistance in his power, if it 
was only for the fun of the thing. Accordingly, as soon as he could 
spare time from his own weightier concerns, he mentioned the 
matter to those more immediately concerned in it, who embraced 
the project eagerly, and .ewarded my master with the most liberal 
promises for his pains, of which they resolved to take advantage, 
in order to crush a person either hated or feared by everyone among 
them. 

In the attack made upon him for this purpose, the principle 
part was undertaken by one whose regard for religion and virtue 
was heightened by a motive not the most consistent with either.. 
This was the person who had been competitor with the culprit for 
the higher order of the mock-monastery. In the accoxmt I gave you 
of that curious transaction, I observed that he cherished a secret 
grudge against the other, which was aggravated so violently by 
the disgrace he suffered on that occasion, that he had prevailed 
to have him expelled the society. Such an opportunity, therefore, 
as this of completing his revenge, was not to be missed by one of his 
principles. Accordingly, though at the sight of the ballad he knew 
it to be no more than one of a collection of the songs which he had- 



494 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

himself often bore a part in singing at the monastery, and some 
•of the worst of which he had boasted of being the author of, ha 
inveighed against it with all the fervency and enthusiastic zeal of a 
modern fanatic, and displayed the danger of letting such an insult 
upon everything held sacred go unpunished, in such strong and 
affecting colours, aa afforded high entertainment to all who heard 
him, and were acquainted with hia life. But all his eloquence 
would have proved ineffectual to make such of his fraternity as 
were not, like him, stimulated by private motives, give the lie to 
their own practice in so flagrant a manner, as to censure the theory 
•of it, had not some particular expressions happened to affect the 
honour of one of them' ; whom all the rest of course espoused ; 
and thus, for once, honour turned the scale in favour of virtue and 
religion, too light by themselves ; and the ballad was condemned, 
as tending to debauch the principles of the people, though it was 
sufficiently known that it was not designed for publication, nor 
would ever have been heard of, had not this attack raised a curiosity 
about it. 

Through the whole of this important transaction, my master per- 
formed his part most cleverly, stopping at nothing that was thought 
any way necessary to bring it to effect. As soon, therefore, as it was 
concluded, he prepared to receive the reward of his labour, the en- 
joyment of wliich he had anticipated in imagination in every shape 
it could be given. But it was not long before he found his hopes 
had been too sanguine. Instead of being rewarded immediately, as he 
had been made to expect, the job was scarcely done when he could 
perceive the smiles of favour grow cooler upon him, as often as he 
went to pay his court to his patrons, in order to keep them in mind 
of their promises. A state of such uncertainty, severe enough 
upon any, was not to bo borne by one in his circumstances. The 
expectations be had raised, in the height of hia hopes, had opened 
the mouths of all his creditors upon him, with an importunity not to 
be quieted ; beside that he had embezzled some public money 
■entrusted to him, a demand for which he expected every day, and 
knew he could not shift off for a moment. 

Driven almost to distraction by such irresistible necessity, he 
had no resource but to throw himself at the feet of the person 
who had appeared most sanguine in the pursuit of his scheme, and 
consequently been most liberal of his promises to him, and implore 
bis assistance to extricate him from his accumulated distresses. 
But they who will most readily avail themselves of villany always 
detest the villain. All the return he received was a cold profession 
of concern, and a shameless excuse of wanting that power to relieve 
him which the caitiff suppliant well loiew he had. A new misfortune 
often light^ens the weight of those under which the mind was sinking 
before, by rousing it from listless dejection to an exertion of its 
powers. Such a disappointment of his only hope showed him all 
the horrors of his situation ; and made him instantly cast about 

'^Warburton, Bishop of Gloucester, the commentator on Pope. His 
notes to that poet's works were parodied in the Essay on Woman, and 
for this the Bishop accused him of breach of privilege. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 495 

how to escape from what he found he could not redress ; instead, 
therefore, of betrajdng it by his looks, which he knew were watched, 
he assumed an air of uncommon spirits, and telling every one that 
he had got a positive assurance of receiving the promised reward 
without any further delay, he went to one of his tradesmen i, by 
that time he thought the news might have reached him, and taking 
up goods to a considerable amount, for which he confidently engaged 
to pay at a fixed and short day, no sooner got them into his possession, 
than he sold them privately at half price, and packing up whatever 
he could carry with him, fled beyond the reach of lais creditors ; and 
80 proved how far his late conduct had proceeded, as he professed, 
from his high regard to moral virtue and religion. 

The agitation and horrors of his mind, from the time he had re- 
solved upon flight, till he had effected it, may be easily conceived. 
Whether the present safety it procured him gave him any lasting 
relief, I had not an opportunity of seeing, as I quitted his service 
at the inn, where he took a post-chaise to get off ; though it is most 
probable, that, after the first hurry of his spirits subsided, a sense 
of the various villanies, by which he had brought himself to such 
a state of exile, embittered the very blessing of liberty, and kept 
his mind in slavery, though his body was free. 



CHAPTER LVIII 

CHBYSAL AGAIN CHANGES HIS SERVICE — HIS NEW MASTER IS OBLIGED 
TO PAY EXPEDITION FEES, TO GET OVER ARTIFICIAL DELAYS — HH 
AND HIS MISTRESS SET OUT ON A LONG JOTTRNEY, TO DO WHAT 
MIGHT HAVE BEEN BETTER DONE AT HOME — CHRYSAL MAKES SOME 
INTERESTING REFLECTIONS ON A MOST IMPORTANT SUBJECT — STORY 
OP CHRYSAL's MASTER — CHRYSAL CONTINUES HIS BEICLECTIONS 
ON THE SAME SUBJECT, WHICH HE CONSIDERS IN A FURTHER AND 
MOST APFECTING POINT OF VIEW — CHRYSAL CHANGES HIS SERVICB 

My late master had scarce decamped, when a young gentleman 
came into the inn, ana ordering a chaise and four to be got ready 
with the utmost expedition, gave my new master a bank note to 
pay for it, in the change of which he received me. 

The anxiety which my new master expressed to have the grooms 
make haste was a sufficient reason for them to practice every delay 
they could devise, in order to extort expedition fees, at which they 
were so expert, that he was forced to give them almost as much 
as he paid for the chaise, before he could get it to stir. When at 
length everything was settled, he directed them to a particular 
place where a hackney-coach waited for him, out of which he 
rceived a young lady, with a couple of small bundles, and then bade 
the postillions drive on ; but they had no sooner got out of the 

' A bookseller [Davis's Olio]. Sandwich endeavoured to get him 
the fat living of St James's, Westminster, but failed, whereupon Kldgell 
fled the country. 



496 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

town, than he changed his orders, and directed them to take another 
road. This occasioned a new delay. The fellows alleged their 
being obliged to go where their master had ordered them, and 
nowhere else ; and made so many difficulties, that, as they expected, 
my master wag compelled to purchase their compliance at their 
own price. All obstacles being thus got over, he turned to the 
young lady, who sat trembling and panting by his side, and 
embracing her tenderly — ' Now, my dearest love ', said he, ' all 
our fears are over. Should we even be traced to the inn, this turn 
will effectually baffle all pursuit '. 

' I wish it may ', answered she, ' but I shall never think myself 
safe till I am absolutely out of their reach and all is over '. 

The conversation of lovers is agreeable only to themselves. The 
rest of theirs for two days, as they flew rather than travelled,, 
for which expedition they paid sufficiently, every set of postillions 
giving the word to the next, will not bear repetition. As soon 
as they got to the end of their journey, they put an end to their 
most immediate fears also, by a marriage which might have been 
performed with a much greater probability of success at home, 
had not a positive law prevented it. 

I see your surprise at my saying that a positive law prevented 
mamagei, as the prosperity of the community depends in the first 
degree on the promotion of that state. But so it happens in human 
affairs, that the true interest of the people is not always the first 
object of the laws made for their government. Though too general 
experience confirms this remark, it is necessary to explain the 
particular circumstance that gives occasion to it, in this instance. 
The first end of marriage is the propagation of the species, in the 
manner most agreeable to reason, and likely to produce the happi- 
ness of the parties, as well as the population of the state. As the 
passions which lead to this end are strongest before reason has ac- 
quired strength to direct them, it is necessary that they should 
be subject to the direction of others, who may be better qualified 
to discern and promote their interest. This right of direction 
naturally belongs to those who are most intimately concerned in 
that interest, as affecting a part of themselves ; and hence, among 
every people upon earth, however differing in other respects and cus- 
toms, this right of directing matrimonial choice has always belonged 
to the parents ; till maturity of age may be presumed to ripen 
judgment, and to remove the necessity upon which it is founded. 
But, however evident this right is, the passions of youth so often 
rebel against it, that it was found necessary to enforce it by express 
laws. These laws, though, the professed end of which is to make 
marriage happy, should never be perverted to the unnatural purpose 
of preventing it entirely, by clogging it with such imnecessary and 
unreasonable restrictions, as tend to subjugate not only natural 

' Lord Hardwicke's Marriage Act of 1753, which put a stop to Fleet 
marriages. The Bill encountered extraordinary opposition on such 
points as the predicted check to population, and the hardship to yoimger 
sons, who would be prevented from making runaway matches with 
heiresses. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 497 

Jiberty, but also the highest interest of the state, which 
depends upon population, to avarice, caprice, or pride of family 
in parents ; or to views of interest in those appointed to supply 
their place. The particular case of my master which gave occasion 
to these reflections was this. He was the youngest son of a noble 
family, to the honours of which his rising virtues promised to add 
new lustre. Youthful inclination had first attached him to this lady, 
whose merits upon acquaintance confirmed that attachment more 
than her very large fortune. Such a marriage could not fail to meet 
the approbation of reason and paternal prudence. Accordingly, 
every necessary preliminary was agreed upon, when the sudden 
death of her father threw in legal obstacles, which threatened to 
prevent it, at least for a longer time than youthful impatience 
could bear. For, as he had not actually signed to his consent, those 
to whom the care of his daughter devolved thought proper to exert 
the right which the law gave them of objecting to the disparity 
between her fortune and that of her lover, and so break off a match 
evidently for their mutual advantage. When the lovers found 
that all they could do to influence their compliance was ineffectual, 
they had recourse to this expedient (which the sage makers of the 
law had, perhaps, inadvertently, left open), to evade it by flying 
beyond its power ; and there solemnised a marriage which should 
be valid at their return home, though entered into without any of 
the prudential cautions for securing happiness, which are customary 
on such occasions, and he had in vain offered to come into ; so that 
the law which was professedly designed to prevent inconsiderate 
and unhappy marriages, in its effect deprived this, and the many 
marriages of the kind, of the means for procuring happiness, which 
former laws, founded on reason, had provided for them. 

It is not to be denied but the evils wiiich were immediately 
alleged as the occasion of this law called aloud for remedy ; but 
whether the remedy provided by it did not introduce an inconvenience 
of worse consequence to the public than those evils, is not so clear 
a case. Whatever restrictions might have been thought necessary, 
in worldly wisdom, to prevent secret marriages, by which either 
-the honours of families might be supposed to suffer diminution, 
or their fortunes fall a prey to mercenary design, where these con- 
siderations interfere not, such restrictions should never in good 
policy extend. On the contrary, every impediment and delay, not 
immediately proceeding from moral necessity, should be removed, 
and the state of matrimony encouraged by such honours and ad- 
vantages as should counterbalance the inconveniences of it to persons 
labouring under circumstances of indigence ; by which means 
the inferior ranks of the people, whose numbers make the strength 
of a state, would be delivered from the difficulties and fears which 
at present deter them from entering into matrimony, to the heavy 
loss of the community, and the immediate ruin of such numbers 
of both sexes, whose natural passions, debarred from this, their 
only proper resource, lead them into such vices as defeat the end 
x)f their creation, and make them a reproach to humanity. How 
many infants would daily be saved from the most unnatural murder, 
io the ornament and advantage of their country, could the wretched 

2i 



498 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

parents have saved their own shame by marriage ? How many 
females, who offer themselves in the highways to brutal prostitution, 
perishing with cold, hunger, and disease, might have been the happy 
mothers of many children, and performed all the duties of their 
station in virtuous esteem, had not their being hindered from marry- 
ing by impediments made by law betrayed them to destruction ? 
As soon as my master had thus accomplished the end of hia- 
journey, he set out on his return, to enjoy the fruits of it at home. 
But I continued not in his possession to see much of that mutual 
happiness which his marriage promised, being bon-owed from him 
on the road by a gentleman of his acquaintance ', who had been 
bubbled out of all his money at a horse-race, and was now fighting 
his way to town, by running in debt at every inn, and raising contri- 
butions thus on all he met, of whom he had the least knowledge. 



CHAPTER LIX 

CHEYSAl's new master STBIKES out an ADVENTtTEE — HE IS 
SMITTEN WITH A GIEL IN A TKAVELLING WAGGON, AND CHANGES 
HIS APPEAEANCE, TO GET ADMISSION TO HEE — ACCOUNT OF THE 
COMPANY IN THE WAGGON — A GOOD-NATUEED MISTAKE OP ONE 
OF THE PASSENGERS GIVES OCCASION TO A BEOIL, WHICH IS PUT 
AN END TO BY AN ACCIDENT THAT DOES NOT MEND THE MATTER 

DiSTEEssiNG as such a situation would have been to another, custom 
had made it so familiar to my new master, that he thought nothing 
of it, but travelled on with his equis, as unconcerned and 
ready to engage in any mad freak as if his pockets were fuU of 
money. Nor was he long without an opportunity of indulging 
his disposition. As he was rolling carelessly along, his chariot 
was stopped in a narrow part of the road, by one of those travelling 
waggons, whose unwieldly weight gives them the privilege of taking 
place of their betters. Such a circumstance naturally made the 
travellers in both carriages look out, when he was struck with the 
uncommon beauty of a young creature in the waggon, whose charms 
in the first opening of their bloom gave scope to imagination to- 
paint a prospect, if possible, beyond their present perfection. 

Such temptation could scarce be resisted by one who had reasoned 
his passions into the best subjection, much less by him who blindly 
obeyed them in, or rather, stimulated them to their utmost success. 
He no sooner sa,w, therefore, than he resolved to have her by any 
means. The first thing to be done, for this pious ptirpose, was to 
change his appearance, in order to get into her company, as the 
least suspicion of his rank would directly blow his design. But 
this was no difficulty. He was well accustomed to lay it down ; 
and the meanest character in life sat as naturally upon him as his- 
own. Accordingly, as soon as the chariot passed the waggon, he 
drove on furiously, till he was out of sight, when he alighted, and- 

1 Lord Deloraine [Davis's Olio']. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 49& 

changing clothes with one of his servants out of livery, ordering, 
them to leave the great road, and wait for him at an inn, some 
miles distance across the country. Thus equipped for his enterprise, 
he walked on leisurely, like a common traveller, till he was over- 
taken by the waggon, the driver of which plied him in the usual way 
to take a place, which, after some afEeoted difficulties, he agreed 
to. But the greatest difficulty arose not from him. The waggon 
was already so full that when the driver mentioned taking in another, 
the passengers all cried out against it with one voice. But his- 
authority was too absolute to be resisted. He fixed his ladder, and 
ordered them to make room, barely condescending to say that it 
was for a gentleman who had been taken suddenly ill, and wanted 
to go only to the next village. This circumstance, though treated 
with brutal disregard by the rest, had an immediate effect upon 
the tender disposition of his destined prey, who squeezing closer 
to her mother, he crept into his nest, and settled himself as 
conveniently as he could next to her in the straw. 

The company into which he had thus thrust himself seemed to 
be a representative of all the heteroolite characters of the age. Beside 
the young female whose appearance had attracted him, and her 
mother, a plain, good-looking woman, it consisted of a mountebank- 
doctor and his zany, a Methodist jircacher, a strolling actor and 
actress, a fat ale-wife, a servant-maid who was going to London 
to repair a cracked reputation, a recruiting sergeant and two re- 
cruits, an outlawed smuggler, and a broken exciseman. Though 
my master could not, at first view, distinguish all their different 
characters, some of them were so strongly mr.rked, that he promised 
himself the highest entertainment from the clashing which ho con- 
cluded must inevitably arise in such a group, and was resolved to 
promote upon the first occasion. But an accident soon gave him 
that pleasure without the trouble of planning it. 

Ab the weather was warm, and few of the company could be 
suspected of the delicacy of changing their clothes often, it may be 
supposed that every savour which arose among them wr.s not purely 
aromatic. My master had not been many minutes in his place, when 
the various odours fuming round him had such an effect upon his 
senses that he undesignedly breathed a wish for a bottle of spirits. 

As he had been introduced under the pretence of being sick, 
the ale-wife, who happened to be near him, mistook his meaning, 
and thought he wanted a dram, not once dreaming of any other 
use of spirits. Pulling out a fiask, therefore, from under a coat, 
in the height of good-nature, ' Spirits ! ' said she, ' they are poison- 
ous stuff. Here is what will do you more good by half ! ' Then 
drawing the cork, and taking a sup, to show him that it was not 
poison — ' Drink of this ', continued she, reaching him the flask, 
' and I'll warrant it will settle you. It is right Hollands '. 

Before my master had time to accept or refuse her offer, the actor, 
who sat between them, smoked her mistake, and intercepting the 
bottle, as she reached across him, cried out in triumph — 

* Bravo, my queen ! your gin from Holland pure, 
My stomach sooner than his head will cure'. 



500 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

Then taking a large go down or two — ' Here, Belvidera ', added 
he, giving the bottle to the actress, ' in this friendly cup di'own all 
your sorrows. Drink, as you love me, deep '. 

His faithful mate could not disobey such a command. She took 
the bottle, and lifting it to her head, ' Thus to the bottom ', said 
she, ' though it were a mile ' ! But she was interrupted in her 
intention by the smuggler, who lay at her feet, and no sooner smelt 
the dear liquor, than he raised his head, and perceiving what she 
was about, ' Avast hauling there ', cried he, snatching the bottle 
from her mouth, ' or you'll pump the scupper dry .' And then 
going to put it up to his own, ' Hold ', said the exciseman, catching 
his hand with the same design, ' I seize this in the king's name, 
till I know whether it has paid duty '. 

The mention of the word duty set the smuggler's blood on 
fire. ' Duty ! you shark ! ' said he, grasping the bottle faster, and 
catching him in return by the throat with the other hand, ' I'll 
seize you ! damn my eyes and limbs ! I'll pay you the duty, if you 
don't loose your hold this moment, you scoundrel ! That I will '. 

Though he gripped the exciseman's throat so hard that he could 
not return his compliment in woi'ds, he scorned to yield the prize 
without one effort. Giving a twist, therefore, with all his force, 
to wrest it out of his antagonist's hand, though he could not succeed, 
he prevailed so far as to tm-n the mouth of the bottle downwards, 
by which means the contents were poured full in the face of the 
sergeant, who lay snoring on his back, with Ms mouth -wide open. 

Welcome as such a guest would liave been in a proper manner, 
the intrusion thus unexpectedly was not so agreeable. He started 
up, half suffocated ; and belching his dose full in the face of one 
of the recruits, ' Blood anouns ! fire and fury ' ! sputtered he, 
' What's the meaning of all this ' ? 

Just as ho said this, one of the wheels of the waggon came into 
a deep hole Avith such a plump, that though it did not absolutely 
overset, it tumbled all the passengers on top of one another ; and 
instantly put a stop to the cries of the ale-wife for the loss of her 
liquor. The screams, oaths, and execrations of the whole company, 
on this occasion, would have given my master the highest delight, 
had he not been rather too nearly concerned to enjoy the fun, the 
fat ale-vnfe being thrown so full upon him that he was unable to 
stir, though almost smothered, so that he could not help adding his 
cries to the concert. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 501 



CHAPTER LX 

chkysal's master expeeibncbs some compoetable consequences 
feom the obliging disposttion of the waqqonee — he pursues 
his design, by paying common civility to his misteess's 
mothbe — conversation and behaviour ob the company — 

CHEYSAL's MASTER, IN THE PURSUIT OP HIS DESIGN, MEETS AN 
ADVENTURE THAT COOLS HIS PASSION, AND EB-ASSBMBLBS THE 
COMPANY, WHEN THEY ARE ALL LIKE TO BE AT A FAULT, TILL ONE 
OF THEM LUCKILY HITS OFF THE SCENT 

When the diiver had got his waggon out of the hole, and seen that 
all was safe about it, he came to know what was the matter with 
his passengers ; and having unpacked them, my master had the 
pleasure to heai the young woman propose to her mother to walk 
a little way, till some, not the most agreeable, consequences of the 
late disaster should blow oil, to which she readily consented, as 
he prepared to accompany them, both for the same reason, 
and in order to have an opportunity of making an acquaintance, 
which he found he could not so well do in the waggon. But the 
waggoner was not in the humour to give them that indulgence. 
When they called to him to let them down, he answered surKly, 
they had not above a couple of miles to their inn ; and if they were 
to stop thus every moment, he should not get in in time, and so 
without any further ceremony whipped on his horses. This was 
a severe disappointment to my master, who soon grew so sick that 
he could not hold up his head all the rest of the way. 

But the qualms of his stomach did not affect his conscience 
so as to make him in the least alter his design. On his arrival at 
the inn, he made a pretence of the compassion which the young girl 
and her mother had expressed for him, to attach himself particularly 
to them, and ply them with wine, by way of return, which false^ 
modesty made the mother take so freely as gave him good hopes 
of success. The conversation and behaviour at supper was strictly 
in the character of the company. The Methodist made a long grace, 
and talked of religion and temperance, while he ate more than 
any two at the table, and his eyes were gloating at the servant maid, 
his fellow-traveller, who seemed to listen to him with great com- 
placency and attention. The actor mimicked the Methodist to 
his face, and lolled out his tongue at everyone else, as they happened 
to look another way. The actre.ss spoke in heroics, and turned 
up her nose at everything and everybody. The smuggler and ex- 
ciseman sat growling at each other, as if they meant to make a 
further ^ial of their manhood. The sergeant talked of his exploits 
in the wars, and proved his valour by an oath at every word, which 
his two pupils listened to with looks of admiration, that showed 
they designed to imitate that part of his example at least. The 
ale-wife lamented the loss of her gin, which, she said, she could not 
replace with any like it on the whole road. In short, everybody 
ate and talked, and talked and ate together, except the girl 
and her mother, who were quite lost in astonishment, at a scene 



S02 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

so new to tliem, and my master, whose thoughts were too much 
taken up with his own scheme to mind anything else. Accordingly, 
he stepped out when supper was ended, and engaging the chamber- 
maid in his interest, by a present of half-a-crown, she showed him 
where his mistress was to lie, and promised to settle all things in 
the manner most convenient to his designs, by putting her and 
her mother in the bed next to the door, there being two in the room, 
and placing in the other the servant-maid, who paid for a bed to 
herself, as her modesty would not permit her to sleep with a stranger. 

As soon as the house was quiet, and my master thought the wine 
which he had forced upon the mother had secured her, he got up, 
and stealing in his shirt to the door of their chamber, found it open, 
upon which he entered and crept to the bed, where he expected 
to find his mistress, without ever considering what must be the 
consequence of surprising her in such a manner. Opening the 
curtains, therefore, softly, to feel by the difference of size on which 
side she lay, he had scarce put his hand upon the clothes, when 
it was seized and gripped so hard that he soon lost all thought of 
everything but disengaging himself. For this purpose he made 
two or three efforts, but finding them ineffectual, and provoked 
at the pain his hand suffered in the struggle, he discharged a blow with 
the other full in the face of his antagonist, who springing directly 
out of bed, returned it with such usury, that my poor master fell 
sprawling on the floor, where he roared out murder with all his might, 
in which he was immediately joined by those who lay in the other 
bed, whose cries not only raised the house to his rescue, but also 
saved him from further violence, his antagonist desisting to beat 
him in order to make his retreat in time. 

When those who lay nearest were assembled at the door, half 
clad, and worse armed with whatever they could catch up in their 
confusion, prudential regard to personal safety made them all stop 
short, everyone finding some pretence to excuse himself from going 
in first, and pressing the post of honour upon his neighbour, till 
they at length raised their fears so high that it was uncertain whether 
anyone would venture in before daylight, though the cries still 
continued, had not tlie smuggler, who did not wake to join them 
at first, put an end to the debate. 

' Damn you all ', said he, snatching a candle from one, and a 
poker from another, ' for a pack of cowardly lubbers ! Will you 
stand jawing here, while the people are murdering ! ' Then rushing 
in, ' Hallo ! ' continued he, ' what's going forward here, in the 
devil's name ? ' 

The first object that presented itself to his view when he entered 
was my master, who was still upon the ground, unable, between fright 
and beating, to arise. Advancing to him, therefore, ' Hip, mess- 
mate ! ' said he, giving him a kick on his naked posterior, ' what 
cheer ? Speak if you are alive ' ! 

The entrance of light restoring my master to some spirit, he 
raised his head at this salute, and making an effort to get up, ' I 
scarce know whether I am or not ', answered he, ' I have been so 
beaten by that bitch of Babel ; but she shall pay for it, if I ever 
recover ', 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 503 

The place where he was found directing this accusation to the 
person in that bed, while some of them helped him up, the rest 
gathered round it, and asked the servant-maid, who lay there, 
what had induced her to treat the gentleman in such a manner ? 
But the mention of her name saved her the trouble of a reply. 
Before she could speak, ' It was not she ! ' exclaimed my master ; 
' I mean the old beldam, mother to the young witch, whose baby- 
face brought mo among you, and who lay in this bed. It was she 
who abused me thus ; or rather some porter in woman's clothes, 
who passed for her, for no woman ever had such strength '- 

' I believe you must be mistaken, sir ', interposed the exciseman, 
' the people you mean are lying quietly in the next bed, and seem 
to be as much frighted as you are hurt '. 

' How ' ! returned my master, ' did they not lie in the bed next 
the door ' ? 

' No ', answered the other, ' Mrs Margery lies here, as grave and 
•demure as a whore at a christening '. 

' Then the jade of a chambermaid played me a trick ', replied 
my master. ' But who the devil lay with her ? For I am sure she 
was never able to do what I have suffered '. 

' As for that ' ! said the actor, who had all the while been peeping 
round the bed, ' I believe it will be no hard matter to find it out. 
These breeches ', pulling a pair from under tlie bolster, ' must 
belong to somebody, and will certainly point out her bed-fellow, if 
the lady, like a true Amazon, did not wear them herself '. 



CHAPTER LXI 

THE ADVANTAGE OF A READY ASSTJEANCE — THE METHODIST ACCOITNTS 
CUKIOTJSLY FOB WHAT HE HAS DONE ; AND TUBNING THE TABLES 
UPON CHBYSAL'S master, CHABQES HTM WITH BOBBBEY, WHO IS 
THEBEUPON OBLIGED TO DISCOVER HIMSELF, BUT IS CONTEADICTED 
BY ONE OF THE COMPANY, WHO BOASTS OF A CUEIOUS ACQUAINT- 
ANCE VnTU HIM IN HIS OWN CHARACTER — HE IS LUCKILY RECOG- 
NIZED BY A FOOTMAN, WHOSE MASTER EXTRICATES HIM FROM HIS 
DISTRESS, AND MAKES OUT THE MISTAKES THAT HAD CAUSED 
SO MUCH CONFUSION 

As the breeches were immediately known to belong to the Methodist, 
they marched away directly to his bedside, for he had not joined 
them, and asked him how he had come to use the gentleman in that 
inhuman manner, showing him my master, whom they had dragged 
along with them. 

' Who ? I ' ? answered the Methodist, affecting all the surprise 
of innocence, and determined to deny what he thought could 
not be proved, ' Heaven forbid that I should use any fellow- 
christian ill. I engage not in such broils. My warfare is with the 
spirit '. 

' And sometimes with the flesh, too, I believe, doctor ' ! inter- 



504 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

rupted the actor. ' Nay, it is in vain to deny it ! Do you know 
these breeches, doctor ' ? 

' Breeches ' ! exclaimed he, starting up in real affright and 
fumbling under his bolster. ' Oh, they are gone ! they are gone ! 
I am robbed, ruined, and undone ' ! 

' No, doctor, they are not gone, as you see ! but the question is, 
how they came under the young woman's bed's head, where this 
gentleman received this abuse '. 

' Let him answer that ' ! replied the Methodist, never at a loss 
for an impudent lie. ' Let him answer that ! all I know of the 
matter is this, being disturbed in my rest, I then knew not, but now 
plainly perceive by what cause, I arose to pray, as is my custom, 
when hearing somebody go softly out of the room, I watched, as 
was my duty, to prevent any ovil, and following the footsteps into 
another chamber, caught a man in the very fact of attempting 
the virtue of some female, who lay there : upon which, expostulat- 
ing with him upon the heinousness of such a crime, he fiew at me 
so furiously that I could scarce defend myself from him, and if 
in the fray he received any hurt, he must charge it to himself, as 
he was the aggressor ; but this is not the whole. I now perceive 
that I was disturbed out of my sleep by his stealing my breeches 
from under my head, which he accordingly took with him into the 
room of that damsel, and therefore I demand justice against him 
for the attempt, as well as for any loss I may have suffered '. Saying 
this, he took his breeches out of the actor's hand, and searching the 
pockets, ' It is too true ' ! continued he, gnasliing his teeth and 
wringing hia hands in a perfect agony. ' It is too true ! I 
am ruined and undone ! I am robbed of all the money which I had 
collected in my pilgrimage to relieve the poor of the Lord. Twenty 
golden guineas, besides silver, and other monies ! Let him be 
searched ; let everybody be searched this moment. I must have 
my money ! I must have my money ' ! 

As my master was a stranger to them all, and not blessed with 
a face that could bespeak much favour, they began to give credit 
to the charge against him, especially, as the servant-maid con-o- 
borated it by saying that he had also been rummaging for her 
pockets, when that worthy gentleman interrupted him (for women 
and all were now gathered to hear the matter canvassed) and talked 
of carrying him before a magistrate in the morning, that he might 
be sent to jail. At another time, such a scene would have given 
him the highest pleasure, but he had no taste for fun now. Enraged, 
therefore, at the iniquity of such a charge, and the insolence with 
which they were proceeding to treat him, ' Unhand me, at your 
perils, you scoundrels', said he, telling them who ho was. ' Unhand 
me, this moment. As for that infamous villain, -and his trull, I 
charge you to secure them directly, and send in my name for a 
magistrate. I'll make examyjles of them, at least '. 

You may conceive with what surprise they were all struck at 
hearing this. However, as he gave only his bare word for it, all 
were not equally ready to believe him. 

' You, my friend Scapegi-ace ' ! said the actor, coming and looking 
him full in the face. ' No, no, sir ; say that to those who don't 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA SOS- 

know Urn. I am his intimate companioQ ; hia chosen among ten 
thousand. There is not a fine girl upon the town but we have 
bilked, nor a house in the hundred of Drury where we have not 
kicked up a dust together. Hp and I are Pylades and Orestes — 
sworn friends and brothers. No, no ! that stroke won't pass upon 
me '. 
_ This made matters worse than ever with my master, adding 
ridicule to insult, which was poured upon him in such torrents from 
every mouth, that he could not speak a word in his own defence. 
But his di.s tress lasted not long. The servants of a gentleman who 
luckily happened to lie at the inn that night, being raised by the 
uproar, one of them knew my master through his disguises. 

' By your leave, there ' ! said he, rushing through the crowd, and 
shoving aside some of them, who had already laid hold of him, 
' are yon all mad, to use a gentleman in this manner ' ? 

Then addressing himself to my master, ' What is the matter, 
please your honour ? I am sorry to see your honour in such a 
pickle. My master ', naming him, ' is in the house, and will do you 
justice. I'll run, and call him directly '. 

Such a testimony instantly turned the scale, and made those 
who were most insolent to him before, now most oificious to pay 
him respect and attendance. Accordingly, he was removed, without 
asking his leave, into his own room, where they were preparing to 
humanise his appearance, when the gentleman entered. 

Much as my master was above the weakness of shame, he could 
not avoid feeling something like it, on being caught in such a con- 
dition. He was sitting on the side of the bed, covered only with 
the ragged remains of his shirt, which had been torn to pieces in the 
fray, daubed all over with blood and dirt, and beaten to such a 
degree, that he scarce retained one feature of the human face divine, 
wMch had not lost all likeness of the original. The gentleman 
started at such a spectacle, and stopped short, in doubt whether 
it could be he, till my master's voice satisfied him : when he gave 
orders to have everyone concerned in the aifair secured, and then 
seeing the poor sufferer taken proper care of, and put to bed, he 
proceeded to inquire into the matter, the circumstances of which 
appeared to be these : the Methodist having agreed with the 
servant-maid, his fellow-traveller, to have some spiritual conver- 
sation with her that night, she promised to lie in the bed next the 
door, and, therefore after the chambermaid had assigned them 
their quarters, as she had settled with my master, feigned some 
pretence to desire a change, which the others readily consented to. 
Accordingly, as the Methodist was secure of his reception, he came 
soon, and was got in to bed to his disciple, when my master made 
his attempt, whose hand he seized, in the manner I have related ; 
and would have beaten him still more severely for his intrusion, 
had it not been for his crying out, upon which he retreated to his 
own bed, in such a hurry to escape detection that he forgot his 
breeches, which he had taken with him, for fear some of his chamber- 
fellows should search them, and rob him of eight or ten guineas, 
that he had picked up in the course of his preaching about the 
country, and the actor had made bold to take as lawful prize. 



.506 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

when they fell into his hands, and afterwards found means to con- 
vey to his wife, for more security. Everything being thus cleared 
up, the gentleman advised my master to drop the affair, as prosecut- 
ing it would only expose him still more, to which he willingly agreed, 
having no inclination for any further trouble about it. 

The Methodist, though, was far from being so easily pacified for 
the loss of the fruits of his summer's labour in the vineyard, which 
he thought worse of than a thousand beatings, and was resolved to 
recover if possible, in spite of all their scoffs and insults. But the 
detection of the other part of his story had so entirely destroyed 
his credit that he found it in vain to persist, especially as the actor 
offered to make oath that he had that very evening applied to him, 
*to borrow a shilling to pay his reckoning. Cursing them all, there- 
fore, in the bitterness of his soul, he changed his route, and went 
upon another preaching progress in order to retrieve his loss, in 
which pious work he prevailed upon his disciple and fellow sufferer 
in shame, the servant-maid, whose pockets had escaped the pillagers, 
to accompany him. 

By this time the waggon was ready to set out, when the rest of the 
company departed, except the actor and his lady, who were so tired 
of that vulgar way of travelling, that they thought proper to con- 
tinue their journey in the stage coach ; and my master, who was 
laid up in salves and fiannels, had lost both ability and inclination 
to pursue his enterprise any further. 



CHAPTER LXII 

CHEYSAI. GIVBS A STBIKINO ACCOUNT OF HIS MASTER — HE ARRIVES 
IN LONDON AND PAYS A VISIT TO HIS MISTRESS — HIS CTTEIOUS 
METHOD OP COIjTITING — HIS MISTRESS MAKES HIM A PRESENT OF 
HALF HER FORTUNE BEFOREHAND, IN RETURN FOR WHICH HE 
PROMISES TO MARRY HER NEXT DAY, AlTD THEN GOBS TO HIS GIRL — 
DIFFERENCE IN HIS BEHAVIOUR TO THE TWO NATURALLY ACCOUNTED 
FOB— AN UNCOMMON GUEST AT A WEDDING, WITH AS UNCOMMON 
A MANNER OF CELEBRATING A NUPTIAL NIGHT, SHOW A SIUJL 
MORE UNCOMMON INSTANCE OF MATRIMONIAL COMPLAISANCE — 
CHRYSAL CHANGES HIS SERVICE 

The singularity of my master's character gave me a curiosity to 
take a view of his life, while he was sleeping off some of the effects 
of his late adventure. He was born in a rank that supported the 
fair hopes of honour and advantage, which the first opening of his 
youth universally raised. But an error in his education blasted 
all those hopes in the bud, and drove him into every extreme of vice 
and folly, which it was designed to guard against. The bad conse- 
quences which are seen to attend indulging the passions too far, 
often lead weak minds to attempt suppressing them entirely, with- 
out considering that the crime is only in the excess. The (fifficulty 
.and pain of this attempt throws such a gloom over the whole appear- 
ance, as hides the native beauty of virtue, and makes it seem to be 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 507 

the source of unhappiness to those who view it only in these effects, 
so as to terrify them from the pursuit of it. 

On this error pretended enthusiasts have in every age founded 
their influence, by enslaving the mind to groundless terrors which 
they never fail to turn to their own advantage. To the conduct 
of such blind and base guides, the mother of my master, to whom 
the sole care of his education had fallen by the death of her husband, 
implicitly resigned herself, and of course her son, in return for which 
they flattered her fanaticism and vanity together, with promises 
of breeding him up in the perfection of sanctity. For this purpose 
he was debarred from every innocent recreation, and harassed with 
studies improper for his age. His appetites were mortified b}' fasting, 
his rest was broken to chant hymns, and pray ; nor was he allowed 
even to speak but in Scripture-phrase ; and all as the indispensable 
■duties of virtue and religion. Such a slavery naturally gave him 
so great an aversion to everything that bore their names, that the 
moment he became his own master he placed the supreme 
pleasure of his life in acting in contradiction to them, by every 
instance of expensive and vicious excess, in which he squandered 
away the inheritance of his ancestors, and broke his constitution 
■with a rapidity that gave scandal to vice, put folly out of counte- 
nance, and made his name a byword in an age of excesses. And in 
this situation he was when I came into his possession. Though it 
was near noon before he awoke, the gentleman whose presence had 
so luckily relieved him the night before waited to see him, when he 
completed liis kindness by lending him money to defray his expenses 
up to town, upon which he sent for his equi, and set off without 
further concern at what had happened. On his arrival in London, 
he drove directly to the last place which any other man in his 
circumstances would have thought of going to. This was the house of 
a lady of large fortune ^, to whom he had paid his addresses, since 
his extravagance had dissipated his own ; and with this peculiar 
honesty, that he never even pretended a regard to herself. The 
success of such a courtship must appear improbable, but there 
is no accounting for the caprice of woman. She had taken 
a liking to him which seemed to rise in proportion to the slights 
he showed her, and was resolved to gratify, if only nominally, 
for she could expect no more at the hazard of every happiness of 
life. 

It may be supposed that the sight of him, in such a condition, 
struck her severely. She flew to him, threw her arms around his 
neck, and bemoaned his misfortune in the most passionate terms. 
But that was not what he wanted. Shaking her off, without 
feigning tlie least return to her fondness, ' Pshaw ' ! said he, ' leave 
off this stuff ; and let mo know whether you have got the money 
I told you I should want to pay off those debts of honour : if you 
have, and will also give me up the rest of your fortune, without 
reserve, I'll marry you '- 

' Will you ' ! exclaimed she, in rapture, ' then you h?.ve it, if it 
■were ten times as much. Here it is ', opening a bureau, and reaching 

1 The Hon. Mrs Knight [Davis's Olio]. 



508 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

him a handful of bank-notes, ' I sold out half my fortune to raise 
it the very day you spoke to me '. 

' I wish I had known that ', said he, putting the notes in his 
pocket, ' and then I might have made my excursion into the oountry 
longer. Farewell ! I'll call upon you to-morrow evening, and con- 
clude the job. Dn you have the hangman and halter ready '. 

' 'WTiat do you mean ? I don't understand you '. 

' What should I mean but the pastor and the ring. Is not that 
a halter, and does he not hang us up with it for life ? 

' But can't you stay a few moments ? I want to know how you 
came in that condition ' ! 

' It was only a scrape about a wench. I'll tell you the particulars 
another time. My girl would not forgive me, if she knew I was 
so long in town without going to her '. 

' But will you certainly come to-morrow ? 1 am afraid you will 
disappoint me now you have got what you wanted '. 

' Never fear, I have not got what I wanted while you have a 
shilling left in the world '. 

Saying which, he walked away, without deigning to take any 
further leave. But his behaviour was not so cavalier where he- 
was going. The moment he entered his mistress's room, she flew 
at him, not with the fondness of a dove, ' So ', said she, ' what 
bawdy-house have you been breaking up now ? You do well to 
come to me in such a jiickle ; but I'll see you damned before I'll 
take the trouble of nursing you '. 

' Don't be in a passion, my love ', said he, taking her in his arms,, 
and giving her a kiss. ' It is no such thing. I fell among a gang of 
foot-pads, who abused me in this manner because I made resistance '. 

' A very likely story truly, invented, I suppose, to excuse your 
not bringing me money ! but if that is the case, you may go to the 
devil from whence you came. I'll not be troubled with your company'. 

'No, my dear, I never come to you empty handed, let me do as I 
will elsewhere '. With which words, he pulled out one of the bank- 
notes he had just got from the other, and giving it to her, put her 
at length in good humour. 

I see your indignation at a man's acting in such a manner ; but 
j'ou could expect no other. The same baseness of temper which 
could treat the other woman with insult naturally submitted to b& 
insulted by this. You imagine that his mistress must have uncom- 
mon attractions, to give her such power over him. You judge 
right — her's were uncommon indeed ! She had lost her hair 
and teeth in a salivation, and was allowed to be the most pro- 
fligate of her profession — charms sufficient to attach a man of his 
taste ! 

My master having thus happily made his peace, the loving couple 
sat down to their bottle, as usual, over which happening to mention his 
intended marriage the next day, her delicacy took such offence, that 
she positively refused to consent to it, till he promised not only that 
she should be present, but also to return and spend liis wedding night 
with her, to prove her triumph over the happy bride. Accordingly, 
he took her with him the next evening, and introducing her to the 
expecting fair one, ' I have brought my girl ', said he, ' to grace our 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 509 

nuptials. The dear creature iasistsd upon it; and you know I 
can't refuse her anything '. The bride elect was go enraptured 
at the thought of her approaching happiness, that she had no sense 
of the insult, but received her with politeness, perhaps not without 
a mixture of pride, on the occasion. 

There are some scenes, th.- extravagance of which beggars de- 
scription. I shall, therefore, only say that the behaviour of the 
company was in character during the ceremony and entertainment, 
at the end of which the bridegroom, alleging his promise to go back 
■with his mistress, the convenient bride not only consented ; but 
also proposed preparing an apartment for her in her own house, to 
save him that trouble for the future, and procure for herself the 
pleasure of his company — a scheme that was actually carried into 
execution while she had a house to receive her ; which was not very 
long, a continuance of the same extravagance that had dissipated 
his own fortune, soon dissipating hers also. It may be imagined 
that T did not remain long in the possession of such a master. He 
lost me the next evening after his marriage, on a bet that he could 
repeat the Lord's Prayer, which ho laid on purpose to lose, in order 
to prove how entirely he had got rid of the prejudices of education. 



CHAPTER LXIII 

CHRYSAt, M.1KES SOME EEFLECTIONS, NOT LIKELY TO EE MUCH P.E- 
GAEDED — HIS MASTER PAYS A LOVE VISIT TO A YOUifG LADY, 
WHOSE FATHER INTERPOSES UNPOLITELY, AND MAKES SOME OUT- 
OF-THE-WAY OBJECTIONS — OHKYSAL'S MASTER HITS UPON A SCHEMTS 
FOB GETTING OVER THEM — HE PROPOSES MARRIAGE ON CERTAIN 
TEEMS, WHICH ARE AGREED TO, AND THE DAY FIXED AT A LITTLE 
DISTANCE 

I HAVE, on former occasions, given you a sufficient description how 
people of fashion spend their time in gaming houses, where, though 
every meeting produces new misfortunes to some of the company, 
there is such s, sameness in the manner, as will not bear repetition, 
and must cloy any creature not absolutely under infatuation, or 
obliged to make a trade of it for bread. As neither of which was 
the case of my new master, he left the company early, to pursue 
pleasures more in his own taste. 

In no instance are the contradictions in human conduct so strongly 
shown as in that of man to woman. He who would lose his life 
rather than violate the strictest principles of honour or honesty (as 
they are absurdly distinguished from each other) in his intercourse 
with another man, not only ecruples not to study deceit, and practise 
the blackest and basest villanies against woman, but will even glory 
in the success of them, when accomplished, without showing remorse 
in himself, or meeting reproof from others. The reason of this is 
generally said to be man's partiality to his own cause, which, as he has 
the power of judging in his hands, whether by usurpation or right it 
matters not, makes him pardon in others the crime he would be 



610 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

glad to commit himself. But, without exculpating him in the least, 
woman bears a heavy share in the blame of her sex'a ruin. I mean 
not by her immediate consent in her own case, but by the countenance 
which she shows to the perpetrators of it, in that of others ; it being^ 
as certain in fact, as it is gross and absurd to thought, that the surest 
recommendation to the general fav our of woman is the fame of having 
ruined numbers of them. 

Whether this proceeds from a vain ambition of triumphing over' 
the triumpher, or an affectation of disdaining to espouse the cause 
of the fallen, aa having forfeited the common regards of humanity, 
makes no difference in the consequence, whatever it may in the- 
crime, as it opens an opportunity to the spoiler to extend his con- 
quests often upon themselves, in the midst of their security ; 
whereas, would women show a true sense of the honour of their 
sex, by refusing every kind of intercourse with such as had violated 
it, man's partiality to himself would lose its effect, and all his designs- 
upon them be restrained within the proper boundaries of virtue. 

From the place where I came into the possession of my new 
master', he went to pay a visit to a young lady of uncommon beauty 
and merit, with whom he was violently in love ; that is, he was^ 
earnestly bent upon gratifying his desire for her, at the expense 
of her ruin ; an enterprize for which he was eminently qualified, 
being posessed of all the advantages of youth, fortune and address, 
and absolutely free from every restraint of principle, as he had 
proved on severnl successful occasions of the same kind. The recep- 
tion he met with showed that he had made an interest in her heart ;• 
but all his experience in the science of intrigue could not 
elude the vigilance of her virtue for a moment, nor find the least 
opening for any attack upon her honour. Such difficulties only 
redoubled his ardour. As ho was considering, therefore, next 
morning, how he should proceed, he was interrupted in his medi- 
tations by a visit from his mistress's father. After some time 
spent in common chat, ' I have taken the liberty to wiit upon you, 
sir ', said the father ' about an affair, the importance of which 
to my happiness will apologize for any seeming unpoliteness in it. 
I have for some time taken notice of the frequency of your visits 
to my house, the honour of which I am justly sensible of, but not so 
far dazzled by but I can see the motive of them through it : and 
therefore must for many reasons beg leave to desire that you will 
discontinue them '. 

' I — I — I don't understand you, sir ' ; answered my master, a good 
deal disconcerted at so unexpected an address, ' I have no motive 
that I desire to conceal, or is any way inconsistent with the character 
of a gentleman '. 

' Pardon me, sir ', replied the other, ' I mean no such thing. But 
yet, what may be thought consistent with that character in some 
things, may be very inconsistent with the happiness of a father. 
To be plain, sir, I am not so unacquainted with the world but I 
can see all your visits are paid to my daughter ; and as she is- 
not upon a level with you, either in family or fortune, for a wife, 

'Sir Charles Coote, K.B. [Davis's Olio]. 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 511 

I must repeat my request, that you will drop a pursuit which 
must, therefore, have another view '. 

' You do injustice to your daughter ', returned my master, recov- 
ered from his surprise, and convinced that it was in vain to 
dissemble any longer, ' to say that she is not upon a level with 
any man alive. I am above the vain pride of family ; and as to 
fortune, my own satisfies me, without hazarding my happiness to 
seek for more '. 

' These ' , said the lady's father, ' are truly the sentiments of a 
gentleman, nor have I any doubt of the sincerity with which you 
declare them. But there are other considerations that make it- 
impossible to carry them into execution. You and my daughter pro- 
fess different principles of religion ; and as I can by no means expect 
that you should change yours, so, I hope, she is too firmly established 
in hers, to quit them for any worldly honour or advantage '. 

This was a stroke my master was not prepared for. He acquiesced, 
therefore, seemingly, with the best grace he could, to avoid entering 
more explicitly into the subject, till he should have time to concert 
measures for getting over this new diflBculty, for his honour was 
now piqued, and he resolved to stop at nothing, if only to punish 
the insolence of her father, in presuming to forbid him his house. 
Accordingly, after revolving a variety of schemes, he fixed upon 
one which he thought could not fail. Big with this hope, he went 
next morning to wait upon his mistress, notwithstanding the inter- 
diction of her father, and finding her alone, after some moments 
of mutual confusion, on the circumstances of such a meeting. ' I — 
I — I — I am come, madam ', said my master, hesitating and blushing 
as he spoke, ' I am come in consequence of what passed between 
your father and me yesterday, of which I presume he has informed 
you. It never was my design to disavow a passion, upon which 
depends the happiness of my life. I only waited till some particular 
circumstances should enable me to declare it with more convenience. 
But, as he has made the discovery, that reserve is no longer necessary. 
If therefore, madam, I can be so happy as to find favour in your 
sight, all his objections, I presume, will be removed, by my offering 
to marry you directly ; on this sole condition, that our marriage 
shall be kept inviolably secret, till I have accomplished some affairs, 
to which you must be sensible the difference of our religions would 
be a prejudice. The ceremony shall be performed by any clergyman 
you please, in the presence of your father, and any other witnesses 
in whose secrecy we can confide, and every thing done that can 
convince you of the sincerity and honour of my attachment. Speak 
then, dearest madam, and make me happy, by complying with 
a proposal that has your happiness in view equally with my own '. 

' I should be unworthy of the honour ycu do me ', answered she,, 
the blush of true modesty heightening the charms of her beauty, 
' if I could let it interfere with superior obligations. When the 
approbation of my father gives a proper sanction to your appli- 
cation to me, you will probably find no great difficulty in making 
my inclination go hand in hand with my duty '. 

Her father just then entering relieved her from the embarrassment 
of any further conversation upon so delicate a subject ; and she 



.612 ADVENTURES OP A GUINEA 

withdrew. But my master was under no such difficulty. Encouraged 
by a reply so favourable to his hopes, he directly repeated 
his proposal to her father, who promised him a decisive answer 
next morning. As the manner of his reception left him no room 
to doubt of has success, he went again at the time appointed, when 
the father gave his consent without difficulty, as did his mistress, 
stipulating only for a short delay, till she should return from the 
wedding of a young lady, her cousin, who lived at some distance 
in the country, and had engaged her to attend her upon that occasion. 
As he could make no just objection to this, however disagreeable 
suspension of his hopes, he consented with a compliment, that his 
resolution was too firmly fixed for any time to make him change 
it, and then took his leave, exulting at the success of his project. 



CHAPTER LXIV 

CHRYSAL's master is PKIVATELY married — NOT SATISFIED WITH 
ONE WIFE FOR LOVE, HE WANTS ANOTHER FOR MONEY — HE PRO- 
POSES THE MATTER TO HIS WIFE, ON WHOSE REFrrSAL HE DISCLOSES 
HIS GRAND SCHEME ; IN WHICH, DEEP AS IT IS LAID, HE HAS THE 
MORTIFICATION TO FIND HIMSELF ANTICIPATED, AND HIS OWN 
WEAPONS TLTRNED UPON HIMSELF — CONSEQUENCES OP THIS DIS- 
COVERY — CHRYSAL's MASTER TAKES A COMMON METHOD OF SILEN- 
CING SCANDAL — CHRYSAL CHANGES HIS SERVICE 

The smiles of hope make the sunshine of life ; as the mind is then 
too intent upon the object in expectation to see the inconveniences 
which afterwards embitter the enjoyments of it. The absence of 
hia mistress, though considerably longer than he had apprehended, 
passed away pleasantly in the thought of his approaching happiness. 
As soon as she returned, therefore, he directly cla,imed the perform- 
ance of her promise, to which all parties consenting, they were 
married by his own chaplain, in the private manner he desired. 
Possessed thus of his wishes, his next care was to enjoy them with 
the most convenience to himself. For this purpose he took a house 
next to his own ; and opening a secret communication between 
them, he removed her thither, as he could not take her directly 
home, without declaring his marriage. 

Mortifying as the mysterious appearance of such a situation 
must have been to her, she made no objection, but complied im- 
plicitly, in that and everything else, as if she had no will but 
hia. Passions merely sensual are soon sated. Though the resem- 
blance of this intercourse to an intrigue heightened the pleasure 
of it, he had not carried it on long, when an opportunity of marrying 
to great advantage, in the phrase of the world, awoke his ambition, 
and gave his wishes another turn. After some little conflict with 
himself, in which, however, the object in view proved too powerful 
for that in possession, he resolved to break the matter to his wife. 
Accordingly, as they sat together one morning at breakfast, after 
some expressions of uncommon tenderness, ' The regard which my 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 51» 

dearest girl has always shown for me ', said he, blushing at his 
baseness as he spoke, ' convinces me that she will not only take 
pleasure to hear of anything to my advantage, but also forward 
it as far as may be in her power '. 

' I hope no action of my life ', answered she, surprised at his 
speaking in such a manner, ' since I have been married to you, has 
given any reason to doubt either my duty or affection, that you 
should imagine such a preface necessary to introduce whatever you 
think proper to command '. 

_' Very true, my dearest life. But — but — but there are some 
things, the nature of which requires delicacy, even to you, whose 
understanding is superior to the foibles of your sex. You know 
the young lady Worthland ! I have received intimation that my 
addresses would not be unacceptable to her. Now, as her rank and 
fortune would entitle me to expect the first honours in the state, I 
have that confidence in the attachment and love of my dearest 
girl, as to think you will not oppose my interest '. 

_' As how ' ! replied she eagerly, alarmed at the hint, but un- 
willing to think so meanly of him as to understand it, ' as how ! 
What interest can you possibly have in her rank and fortune '. 

' The interest which the law gives a husband. Possession — 
absolute possession of the whole '. 

' A husband ! Good God ! how can that be ? Are you not 
already married ' ? 

' True, my dearest life ! But as that marriage is a secret, if it 
can be kept so, it will be no obstacle. You shall remain as you are, 
the wife of my love, and I will be only the husband of her fortune '. 

' How you men, whose minds are stronger, take pleasure in play- 
ing with the weakness of women ! The very mention of such a 
thing even in jest (for it is impossible you can be serious), strikes 
me with horror '- 

' In jest ! I am serious, upon my honour, and expect your 
immediate compliance, as a proof of your duty and affection '. 

' And can you mention honour in the same breath with such a 
base proposal ? What » profanation of the word ! But, whether 
you are serious or not, I must be so on such an occasion ; and therefore 
I declare that I never will sacrifice both honour and conscience, by 
giving what you are pleased to call a proof of duty and afieotion, 
but what would really prove that I had neither '. 

' This romantic spirit, child, much as you think it becomes you, 
is all thrown away. I am determined, and you must submit. But 
let me tell you, that on the manner of that submission depends 
your future welfare. If you comply properly with my proposal, 
I will make a settlement upon you that shall exceed any 
expectation you could naturally have had in life, and remain 
your husband in everything but the empty name. But if you 
attempt making the least opposition to my will, I cast you off from 
this moment to beggary and shame ; nor shall any late repentance 
ever bring me to receive you again ; so, consid"r the consequence, 
before you rashly run upon your ruin ; I shall expect your final 
resolution to-morrow ' 

' For that you need not wait a moment. I fear no consequence 

2e 



514 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

that can attend my doing what is right. The duty of obedience I 
have fulfilled, in its utmost extent, by immuring myself thus, and 
forfeiting my good name to keep your secret ; but while my con- 
science witnessed for the purity of my heart, I regarded not the 
present censure of the world, no more than I do now, from the same 
principle of virtuous resolution, your vain threats, for in such a light 
the laws of my country enable me to hold them '. 

' The laws of your country, madam ! Then claim their protection, 
if you please ; but you will find that they afford none to you. Such 
marriages as yours between people professing different religions, 
are made void by those laws, and therefore, if you think proper to 
depend upon them, I give you this notice, that you have nothing 
to expect from me but what they shall procure you '. 

' And was this your motive ', returned she, with a spirit raised 
by indignation, ' for desiring a private marriage ? Impossible ! 
you could not, can not, be so base. You only have a mind to try 
my resolution, which you shall ever find immovable in this and 
«very cause of virtue and honour ' 

' Madam, I have no more time to trifle in this manner ; therefore, 
once more I desire you to let me know yovir final determination ; 
for notwithstanding this behaviour, I still have such a regard for 
you, that I am unwilling to take an answer which must separate us 
for ever. Think then, before you speak ; and let my making you 
this generous offer, and preventing your exposing yourself in vain, 
teach you a proper return of gratitude '- 

' I want not a moment to determine between virtue and vice 
— infamy and honour '. 

' Then take the consequence ; and blame yourself when it is 
too late '. 

' I will, if any blame falls on me. And now that I see you are 
serious, in return for the notice you have so generously given me, 
I let you know that I have obviated the advantage you flatter 
yourself you have over me, by conforming legally to your religion, 
before I was married to you '. 

' Confiasion ! what is that you say ? When, where did you 
conform ' ? 

' When I went to the wedding of my cousin, as you will find upon 
inquiry, which I advise you to make, before you proceed furflier 
in a scheme that can only expose you to worse infamy than that 
with which you threatened me '. 

' Infernal witch ! Was this your love ' ? 

' No ; it was the prudence of my friends. My love could harbour 
no doubt of you, but they knew you better ; and took this honest, 
wise precaution, to guard against villany, which I now am sensible 
they foresaw ; and, therefore, as you have thought proper to refer 
me to the law, I now tell you that I will immediately claim 
its protection, and declare my marriage ; nor suffer any longer 
in the opinion of the world by a secrecy that was enjoined 
for 30 base a purpose ; by which I shall have at least the satis- 
faction of saving another woman from falling into tlie snare laid 
for her '. 

' Saying this, she flung out of the room, to conceal tears which 



ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 515 

Bhe thought would betray a weakness unworthy of her, and could 
no longer restrain. 

The nature of my master'a meditations on this discovery may 
be easily conceived. He cursed that foolish fondness which had 
thus led him blindfold into his own snare ; and damned all woman- 
kind in revenge for being foiled at his own weapons by one of the sex. 

When he had vented his rage in this manner for some time, a 
sudden gleam of hope flattered him, that what she said might 
possibly have been only the instantaneous suggestion of resentment 
and despair, without being really true. Pleased with the thought, 
he sent directly to make the proper inquiry, the result of 
which confirmed the defeat of all his designs. But this was not 
the only mortification he suffered. His wife, the moment she left 
him, went to her father, and discovering to him her husband's 
baseness, he supported her in her resolution of declaring her marriage, 
as the most proper means to prevent his forming any further schemes 
against her. 

The consequence is obvious. The public received such a curious 
piece of scandal with pleasure ; and paid respect to his wife, if only 
to show contempt for him ; particularly the women, who made 
hers the cause of the sex, as he had precluded all further designs 
upon himself, by marriage. 

This, though, however flattering to her vanity and resentment 
at the time, only widened a breach that she wished to close. His pride 
was piqued to disappoint her design, as she had his, and he left 
her to languish out the rest of her life in worse than widowhood, 
and repent of the folly of attempting to attach herself to a man 
who, she knew, had betrayed others of the sex. 

As for my master, this detection made him desperate. He threw 
off every appearance of regard even to common decency, which 
he thought could no longer be of use to him, and determined to 
bear down scandal, by glorying in his vices ; in the performance 
of which gallant resolution he gave me to a stage dancer, who gave 
me to a half-pay officer, who gave me to a Jew. 



CHAPTER LXV 

CHEYSAL COMES ISTTO THE POSSESSION OP A PAWNBROKEK, BY WHOM 
HE IS GIVEN TO THE AUTHOE — ^A MOST UNHAPPY INSTANCE OP 
HUMAN INPrEMITY — THE CONCLUSION 

I DID not remain long in the possession of the Jew ; he passed me 
off to a pawnbroker, in the purchase of old clothes, which he was 
going to carry abroad. Strange were the scenes, anfiinexpected 
the faces, which I saw in this place, where every necessary utensil 
of life, every ornament of luxury, was deposited, as in a place of 
security, by their respective owners ; but your own experience 
makes any particular description of this place, or its manifold 
mysterious trade, unnecessary to you. 

The misfortune of my size (which had been continually lessening 



516 ADVENTURES OF A GUINEA 

ever since the depredations committed on me by young Aminadab), 
Ijept me a prisoner here till Saturday night, when my master always 
puts ofE his light coin, just before he shuts shop, to the poor people, 
whose necessity requiring an immediate supply for the support of life, 
caimot wait to return it on Monday, and so must even bear the 
loss. Such a person did he think you, and accordingly he gave me 
to you : but the moment I came into your possession, and found that 
you were the chosen of ten thousand, the first-born of science, whom 
wisdom had instructed, and art led by the hand through the dark 
labyrinths of nature, till the coy fugitive, unable longer to elude 
your pursuit, had been obliged to consent to a revelation of her 
most occult wisdom, and to entrust you with the command of that 
chain which links the animal and material worlds together ; the 
moment, I say, that I perceived who you were, and that I was the 
intelligence to convey this favour to you, I entered your heart 
with the greatest of pleasure, and waited impatient for the moment 
when I should confer this completion of human happiness and 
honour upon you — a pleasure that was heightened by the noble 
constancy you showed, when the smell of the hot ox-cheek, aa you 
came by the cook's shop, raised that conflict between nature and 
knowledge, whether you should purchase some of it to satisfy your 
hunger, or preserve me for this last experiment, in which the latter 
was so gloriously triumphant. 

The auspicious moment is arrived ; nature labours in the throes 
of mystic birth ; and lo ! the philosophic king arises in all the glory 
of the morning. Attend to my words ! receive the consummation 
of human knowledge. 

To apprehend the secret cause, you must know. 

doleful and deplorable event ! never to be told without wailing ; 
never to be read without tears. Just as the spirit had arrived 
at this most interesting point, human weakness, unable to 
suppress the impulse of internal vapoiir, which the mention of 
the fatal ox-cheeli set in motion in my empty bowels, by the longing 
it raised in my stomach, emitted an explosion that filled the room 
with a foetid steam. The spirit started at the unpardonable offence 
to his purity, and looking at me with ineffable contempt, indignation, 
and abhorence, vanished from my sight, without deigning a word 
more. 

The misfortune was more than I could bear ; I sunk under its 
weight, and swooned away upon the floor, where officious humanity 
found me, and restored me to a life that was a burthen under such 
a disappointment. The labour of my life being lost the one moment 
in a thousand years slipped away in vain. But such is the conse- 
quence of human weakness ; such is the end of all the works of 
man. 



CONCLUSION 

And now, my brother in disappointment, who readest this 
most lamentable catastrophe, whether thou art a tailor, whose 



ADVENTURES OP A GUINEA 517 

principal debtor is made a lord — a physician, whose nostrum is 
■discovered — a cobbler who sleepest over thy last, in hopes of dreaming 
of hidden treasure — a poet, whose play is refused — or a senator, 
who hast mortgaged thine estate to purchase a seat in 
parliament just before its dissolution, attend to the instruction 
of my words and learn from my example. Seize the present moment, 
nor depend upon the future ; let reason curb expectation ; reduce 
imagination to common sense ; and bring your wishes within the 
bounds of your real wants ; so shall Industry banish Necessity 
irom your habitation, and Content turn all your possessions into 
Gold. 



THB END 



INDEX 



Albemarle, Earl of, 299 
Amboyna Massacre, 205-208 
'Amelia', 11 et seq. 
' Aminadab ', 157 et seq., 202 ei seq., 

280 
AyUffe, John, 411-413 

Bath, Lord, 488 

Beard, John, 373-378 

Blakeney, General, 368 

Bolton, 6th Duke of, 27 

Bosoawen, General George, 427 

Bower, Archibald, 242, 488, 489 

' Brimstone, Mrs ', 169 et seq. 

Burgh, Mr, 432 

Burke, Edmund, 371, 372 

Bute, Lord, 481 

Byng, Admiral, 363 et seq. 

Calceapt, John, 416 
Camden, Lord, 369, 480, 486 
Campbell, Captain, 307-309 
Canning, Elizabeth, 489 
Chesterfield, Lord, 52, 53 
ChurohiU, Charles, 169, 377, 411, 

459 et seq. 
• Cole, Mrs ', 169 «< seq. 
Colville, Lord, 369 
Coote, Sir Charles, 510-515 
Cumberland, Duke of, 302, 409 et seq. 

Dashwood, Sir Francis, 384 et seq. 
Deloraine, Lord, 498 
Derry, Bishop of, 342, 343 
'Discount, Mr'. 37, 38 
Douglas, John, Bishop of Carlisle, 

487 et seq. 
' Douglas, Mother ', 169 et seq. 

Basay on IKoma/i, 390 et seq., 491- 
494 

Fbedinand of Bruniwiok, Prince, 

253 
Fitzpatrick, Richard, 371, 372 
Foote, Samuel, 168 et seq. 



Forbes, Captain, 482-485 
Fowke, General, 364 
Frederick the Great, 211 e« seq. 

Gabeick, David, 373-378 
George II, 197, 198 
George, Prince of Wales, 194 
Granby, Marquis of, 256, 257 

Halifax, Lord, 477, 478 
Hamilton, Captain, 369 
Hay, Lord Charles, 346 
Hell Fire C[uh, 382 et seq. 
Hesse, Landgrave of, 211 et seq. 
Hill, Dr John, 371, 372 
Holland, Henry Fox, Lord, 404-406 
Horner, Mrs, 405 

Howe, William, Viscount, 345-348 
■Hunchback, Dr', 169 
Huntingdon, Selena, Countess of, 
176, 181, 182 

Ilchester, Stephen Fox. Lord, 
406 

Jesuits, 19 et seq. 
Johnson, Sir Wm., 349-352 

Kenzib, Dr, 165, 166 
Keppel, Commodore, 298 
Kidgell, John, 486 
Knight, Hon. Mrs, 507-509 
Knowlea, Admiral Sir Charles, 296 

Laudbe, Wm., 489 
Leach, Dryden, 488 
Lennox, Lady Georgiua, 407 et seq. 
Lestock, Admiral, 367 
Ligonier, First Earl, 65 et seq. 
Loudoun, Fourth Earl of, 345-348 
Lowther, Miss (afterwards Duchess 
of Bolton), 200 

Mansel, Lady, 4'23 
Manael, Sir E. 425 
Mai-lborough, Duke of, 253 



62i) 



INDEX 



Martin, Samuel, 484 
Mathews, Admiral ThoB., 343 
Medmenbam Abbey, 384 ei seq. 
Melcombe, Lord, 401 et seq. 
Mindeu, Battle of, 232, 255 
The Minor, 169, 170 
' Motherly, Mrs ', 65 et seq. 

Newcastle, Duke of, 366 

Pabis, Abb6, 397 et seq. 

Pitt, Wm. (Earl of Chatham), 195 

et seq. 
Pooock, Admiral Sir George, 295 

et seq. 
Pombal, 277 

' Poundage, Thomas ', 38 et seq. 
Powlett, Captain Harry, 27, 293, 

294 
Prestago, Mr, 448 et seq. 
Pratt, Lord Chief Justice, 369, 480, 

486 
Pulteney, Lord, 488 

E.ICHMOND, Duke of, 407 



Saokville, Viscount, 255 et seq. 
Sandwich, Lord, 383 et seq. 
Seven Years' War, 163, 211 et seq. 
Shebbeare, Dr John, 480 
Socii Jesu, 19 et seq. 
'Squintum', 169 
' Standard, Captain % 66 et seq. 
Stephenson, Miss, 434 et seq. 
Sum, Dr, 417 et seq. 

Temple, Lord, 475-477 
Thompson, Dr, 402-404 
Townshend, Charles, 305 
'Trafac', 5 et seq. 

Waebtjeton, Bishop of, 494 
Westmorland, Seventh Earl of, 395 
Wheeler, Captain, 433 
Whiteiield, George, 167 et seq. 
Wilkes, John, 386 et seq., ilOet seq., 

491-495 
Wolfe, General, 198 et seq. 
•Worthland, Sir John', 38 

yAEMOtJTH, Countess of, 150 et seq. 



