LETTERS 
BETWEEN 
EMILIA 
AND 
HARRIET. 
ON 
I A¥a»iety of Familiar and Ihterefting : 
OCCASION& 
DUB LI N : 
Printed for Peter Wilson, Johw Exshaw, HeNR-s 
Saunders, and James Potts, 
MDCCLXll. 
ADVERTISEMENT
To the READER. 
THE Editor affures the 
Reader^ that the following 
Letters are pullijhed^^ with the 
Confent of the fVriters. The 
Lady^ who ftgns herfelf Har- 
riet, is defrous to have them 
printed^ that Jhe may atone (to 
ufe her own Exprejfton) for her 
former Folly^ hy deterring other 
giddy Girls from encouraging a 
Sir G SMD R G E To w N L Y, and 
hazarding the Lofs of a L o v e - 
WELL. 
CONTENTS. 
LETTER I. 
Harriet to Emilia Page 13 
LETTER II. 
Emilia to Harriet — ao 
LETTER m. 
Itarriet to Emilia — 27 
Inclofed in the foregoing. 
I FASHION ■ — 38 
( 
LETTER IV. 
Emilia to Harriet — 4I 
LETTER V. 
Harriet to Emilia — ^"^ 
) 
CONTENTS. 
LETTER VI. 
Emilia to Harriet — 5^ 
Indofed in the foregoing. 
An ODE to SOLITUDE 6^ 
LETTER Vn. 
Hatriet to Emilia -»— — — 6^ 
LETTER VIE 
Emilia to Harriet '— — — So 
LETTER IX. 
Harriet to Emilia — — — 95 
LETTER X. 
Emilia to Harriet — — — 1 14 
Inclofed in the foregoing. 
An ODE to CHARITY. - — iz6 
^ t 
CONTENTS. 
LETTER XI. 
arriet to Emilia — — — 131, 
LETTER Xn. 
ddfed in the forgoing — — — 137 
LETTER Xra. 
lilia to Harriet — — 141 
LETTER XIV. 
ifrict to Emilia -— r — — 154 
LETTER XV. 
lilia to Harriet — 16$ 
LETTER XVI. 
rriettoEmiUa ,— »; "— ?^ i74 
L E T T E R S 
BETWEEN 
EMILIA and HARRIET. 
L E T T E R I. 
Harriet to Emilia. 
YOUR obliging Defire of hearing from 
me, my deareft Friend, has drawn on 
yourfelf the Inconvenience of being troubled 
with a 'great deal of Nonfenfe. 'Tis your 
{ own Fault , for what elfe can you expedt 
i frorn. fo trifling a Correfpondent ? I find, 
my dear, you can really quit the Town 
when it begins to be moft agreeable, and 
chufe to accompany your Mamma to an old 
B Country 
^4 LETTERS between 
Country Seat, where you will hear nothing 
but the Whiffling of Birds, the Imperti- 
#aence of Country Boobies, and be obliged 
to have Recourfe to Books, to divert the 
tedious Time. — How can you, Emilia^ with 
Youth, Beauty, and Fortune, confent to 
facrifice yourfelf in this Manner? I vow I 
am angry with you, for leaving Town. 
To have no Mafquerades, no Routs, Ope- 
ra6) n6r any delightful Amufement to par- 
take! — To rife with the Sun, and to retire 
to Bed when he fets ! — Why, Child, the 
very Thoughts of fuch a Life ftupify me; 
and yet my good Mamma often wifties I 
was not fond of public Diverfions, and 
regrets your being out .of Town, as (he 
knows I prefer your Company even to 
thefe Amufements. Well, I muft tell you, 
(he would not let me goto the Mafqueradc 
laft Night, though the engaging Sir George 
Townly came in his Coach for mec^UDo 
you think I was not angry ? Upon my 
Word I have hardly fpokc fince, and am 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 15 
ftill out of Humour.^— To be denied fo 
innocent an Amufement — ^'tis barbarous ! 
And I aflure you, Lady Toywell and Mifs 
Sparkk were there in remarkable Dreflcs. 
My Mamma fays, I am too fond of Com- 
pany, and a(ks me if I deCgn to live in 
this Manner when I am married. Lud! 
what .ado is here about Nothing ? — How 
can I look forward to fuch a Period, who 
feldom think of more than the Amufe- 
ments of the prefent Day. — I told her I 
had no Intention of marrying. — Indeed it 
is much better to be univerfally admired, 
than to become the Slave of a Hufband. 
There is fortiething horridly difagreeabfc 
in that Name! It conveys to my Mind, 
Confinement, Q^iarrels, and a Succeflion 
of Carf s. I believe I (hall never marry 
, at all. You need not, however, mention 
this as a petermjnution, becaufe I may pof- \ 
ftbly change my Opinion v and one would 
IBt, you know, lofe the Pleafure of So- 
licitatioiis, nor be forced to continue in 
.^ . B 2 an 
j6 letters between 
an unproteHed State (as my good Mamma 
phrafes it, whcii (he is difpleafed with her 
whimfical Daughter.) 
I know you'll join in condemning me ; 
but I won't bear it, Child! Remember that, 
and write nothing that has -the Appear- 
ance of Difapprobation of my Condud, 
for I (hall certainly (kim it over, and pay 
no Regard to it. 
Mr. Lovewell ftill continues his Vifits, 
though I ufe him in fuch a Manner, as 
I am fure I would not bear, was I in his 
Blace. The Man is certainly a Foolj^ and 
yet, I don't know, he talks fenfibly enough 
fometimes ; but then he diflikes the Town, 
and fpeaks with fuch Raptures pf the 
Country!— Suppofe he was to pay his Ad- . 
dreflfes to you ? — 'Tis an excellentThought. 
—sWill you have him, my dear; Pofitively, 
I give up all Right and Title to him, aflpt 
I am certain he would find the Change 
advantageoi^. 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 17 
advantageous. How happy would he be ! 
Each delights in the fame Amufements^ as 
you call them, and both hate London. If 
Conformity of Sentiment be requifite to 
render the Marriage State happy, Mr. Love- 
well and you would be the happieft Pair 
in the Univerfe; while with me, he would be 
continually uneafy and diflatisfied. — -Thofe , 
Strings can produce only Difcord, which . 
are not in Unifon. 
I fometimes think- 1 may be happy with 
Sir George. — He is always merry, loves the 
Town, and would not debar his Wife from 
the Diverfions of it. He is rich, young, 
agreeable, genteel, and always drefies in the 
Faftiion. Do not imagine I like him great- 
ly neither; for I really am free from any 
particular Regard that can difturb my Tran- 
quillity ; but, as I think, I fliall never marry 
Juf Love, I may as well accept a Title and 
4 Coach and Sfx. 
B 3^ t:v:\^}^ 
I^ LETTERS BETWEEN 
Think of it and give me your Opinion. 
I believe you have feen Mr. Sinclay here, 
and muft inform you^ he is added to the 
Number of my Admirers ; but I don't like 
him, for the Coxcomb entertains me with 
nothing but the Number of Ladies he has 
captivated. Indeed, he always concludes, 
with a Compliment to me, of the Preference 
he favours me with ; but he feems to think 
I am ib much indebted to him for this Pre- 
ference, that I fomctimes have Thoughts 
of difcarding him. Yet it hurts me to 
leflen the Number of my Admirers^ as 
they certainly give a Woman an Air of 
Dignity. I am fi> envied, fb gaz^d ^^, as 
I walk in the Mall, furrounded by hum- 
ble Enamoratos, that furely no Plfeafum 
can equal the Joy I then feel; Ikftow not 
whether it is a Satisfaaidn, that ,will bear 
Refledtion/ — I doubt it i^ not lauckbij^ 
but I have not Time at ^efcnt for Coii- 
fideration. 
-- Sir 
EM LIA AND HARRIET. 19 
Sir George h this Moment come in, and 
I muft defer any farther Communication 
of Sentiments, than the Aflurance of my 
being 
Moft fincerely your*s^ 
HARRIET. 
B 4- 
29 LETTERS BE-fWEEK 
LET T E R II. 
Emilia to Hariet. 
I Thank you, my dear, for your kind 
Letter, and Wifties to have me with 
you ; but you muft forgive my telling you, I 
do not at all defire to lee London at prefent. 
You know I never was fond of the Buftle 
and Noife of a Town Life j and had it not 
been for the pleafure of your Society, fliould 
have rejoiced at quitting it long ago. 
Give me Leave, my dear Harriet^ to hiame 
you for that paflionSti; Fondnefs you ex- 
prefs for public Diverfions, e{pecially as 
you find it difagreeable^ to your Mamma, 
who finc^rely loves you, and is willing you 
ftiould partake of them in a reafonable 
Manner. I will not fay much on this Sub- 
jed, as your own good Ser^will foon make 
you fee the inftability of thofe Pleafures, 
which 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. zi 
which you now confidcr as your higheiit 
Enjoyment. 
You defire I will giv^ you my Sentiments 
of an Union with Sir George Townly^ and! 
will do.fo fmcercly. I have not, 'tis true, 
fcen much of him, but enough to know, 
he can never make you happy. He is^ 
doubtlefs a great Rake, and I am certain. 
it is a difficult and fluocking Talk, to rc» 
fp^m a Man who has Fortune and Youtb 
ihfficient to enable him to continue the 
Way of Life he is now fo fond of A 
Lib|6rtine is a Charadter truly detefta]blel 
Nothing ftiould ever prevail on me to giv«r 
my Hand to a Man,, whofe Mind as well 
as Per<gp would be alienated from me.. J^ 
^zs a celebrated Noyel Writer avers in.one 
of his Charadters) "Amours /j^t;^ nothing;. 
to do with^the Heart," yet they corrupt 
sthe Mindi ami wHat. Saii^faiftion could a 
virtuous Woman be gapaRIe of receiving, 
-fcom pofiefling. the real Efteem of one. 
zz LETTERS between 
who whilft Youth and^ Health lafted^ would 
abandon her for the Company of thofe, 
whofe only Recommendation is their Sex, 
and would expoie her to continual Uheafi- 
nefs ? But it is impoflible a Libertine fhonid 
properly love a truly amiable Woman. 
Vice may reverence^ but it nafturaHy fears 
Virtue. A PerfoJl -has little ReRfe for 
thax Merit in another, of which he finds no 
KefemWance in his own Breaft. To mar- 
ry a Libertine with the hop6 of recfeifmkig 
him^ is; too dangerous an^ Escperimenti 
^d infteardof producing the defined E^faSt, 
is mtore likely to involve both Parties in 
endlefe Mifery. To Ifve in the moft in- 
timate Connedtion with tf Man o^abandon- 
. ed Principles, how dreadful is the 'sbought 
to a Woman, who has .Qualifications to 
adorn the conjugal State! Ought a vir- 
tuous Woman (o dii^enfe^ with Morality 
m an HufbancJI^er tetn]||ral and eternal 
Happinefe depend upon her Choice. By 
an Union with a Libertine, a Woman (a- 
crifices 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 23 
crifices her moft eflential Duties, and for- 
feits Eafe and Tranquillity for a Ltfe of 
continual Care and Solicitude. 
In a Word, my dear Harriet^ I know no 
one I would fo foon rerommend to you, 
as Mr. Lovewell. His good Senfe, and 
amiable Qualifications, muft render ydu 
happy, and his Fortune is fufficient to pro- 
cure you every Pleafure a prudent Wom^jti 
can defire. How can you trifle with fuch a 
Man, who loves you fo fincerely, and at the 
fame time give Encouragement to a Train 
of Fops, who difgrace you by their Com- 
pany ? Take Care, my Dear! this Behaviour 
will certainly leflen you in Mr. LovevJelPs 
Efteem/# and that of the more ferious Part 
of the World. You^ have too juft a Senfe 
of his; Merit to refign him, though your 
Kvely Turn ^diilpofes you^ to raliyon the 
Subjje^k Do 1^ gayly ' trifle with your 
Happinefs. B^enfiblg of^and enjoy it. 
I love 
24 LETTERS BETWEE^f 
I loYC you fo much, that I intcreft my- 
felf deeply in all that concerns you.. 
Since I came into the Country, I have 
created an Acquaintance with the Widow of 
Sir fVilliam Friendly^ a young Gentleman 
who died of a Fever about three Months 
after he was married. He was fnatched early 
from the' Enjoyment of as much temporal 
Happinefs, as human Nature can poflefe, 
and left his Lady deplorably wretched. 
Her Converfation is extremely, agreeable, 
and I pafs great Part of my Time with ^ec. 
She always mentions her Hulband in the 
tendered Manner, atid declares ftie will 
never marry again, though her Youth and 
Beauty may render her Refolution fufpedt- 
cd by thofe, who are uiiacquainted with 
her Delicacy and Solidity of Sentiment. 
Her Father a!id Mother have lived with 
her'^ce the Death o^^r pflUmi, and 
are very feniSble and ^gBRjble. ^ 
Yott 
i 
\ 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 15 
You may imagine, my dear Harriet^ that 
I am not very unhappy ; and though you 
will call me ftupid for relifhing a Country 
LJfo, I muft ftill avow the fame Inclination. 
My Father is very hearty ; and^thinks the 
Country agrees with him : another Reafon 
for liking it. I have not yet received 
much Company, but expedt fome few Vi- 
fitors this Week. However, to confefs the 
Truth, by what I have feen, I am not 
defirous of an Intimacy with any, but La^ 
dy Friendly^ and Mifs Trainwelly the Cler- 
gyman's Sifter, who is very fenfible and 
good-natured 
We amufe ourfehres with riding, read- 
ing, walking, iSc Lady Friendly generally 
reads >#hile I fit at my Needle. A Life 
like this can afford you no Plcafure; yet I 
flat^myta^ou will receife foftiftDegree 
of^SrofedW^in vifiting your Friend; and 
' ^' s ^ in 
e6 LETTERS between 
in the Summer Seafon, the Country furely 
will have fome Attradtions. 
Once more let me repeat my Cautions 
on Sir George's Account, and renew my 
Advice to difmifs the train of Coxcombs, 
who attend your Levee. If I do not of- 
fend you, I would alfo prefs your (peedy 
Acceptance of Mr. Lovewell. 
I hope (bon to have the Pleafure of 
knowing you forgive me; and that you 
believe me to be, what I really am, 
Your's mod affedlipnately, 
EMILIA. 
% s- 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 27 
LETTER in. 
Harriet to Emilia. 
WELL, well, my dear, you defired 
I would forgive you, and I do fin- 
cerely ; nay, I ought to think myfelf obliged 
to you, but you are very fevere on your 
poor Harriet. And you really would per- 
fuade me to marry Lovewell! — Soon too! 
Fie ! Emilia^ how can you give fuch Ad- 
vice } Why, he would force me to live in 
the Country, and do you imagine I could 
endure Reftraint ? I fliould never furviyc 
Half a Year, the Lofs of the Town Di- 
verfions, notwithflanding the Attra6liom 
you mention in the Country. That a Girl 
of your Age, and who poflefles fo refined 
an Underftanding, fhould harbour fuch a 
romanlj^ un£Aionable Tafle, is to me 
aftonifhing! I^is Man wants a Wife let 
him fcek out for one, who could content- 
edlvf 
zi LETTERS betweei^ 
ediy be immured with him. For ray Part^ 
I have a Mind to enjoy my young Time. 
I pofitively cannot marry at prefent, that*s 
certain. Why, Child, you would not have 
me render him infolent, by confeffing a 
Regard for him, if a little Kind of a — 
lurkiQg fomewhat, does lie dormant,, which 
I really cannot perceive any Symptoms of. 
Difficulty endears Conqueft. What is gaia- 
ed with Eafe is generiilly defpifed The 
Sedulities of Love prefer ve it. A Man 
who has nothing to fear,, naturally be- 
comes indifferent. Love is nouriflied by 
Oppofition. I really think, if my Mother 
had difliked Lovewdly he would have been 
much more in Favour with me. But while 
I indulge thefe Reflections, I fliall draw 
upon myfelf your Cenfure. Let me, how- 
cver> have your Opinion on what I. have 
faid. 
. I like Lady Friendly s cSffaft^r, but! arar 
furprized (he does not c^it tlie Country:, 
and 
} 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 29 
and come up to Town. At this Time 
of the Year, 'tis (b contrary to the Cuftom 
of People of Fa(hion to bury themfelves \n 
Solitude, I cannot reconcile it to my Idea 
of Happinefs. Riding and walking too 
at this Seafon are horrid Exercifes. For 
what dp you walk ? To promote an Ap- 
petite for your EMnner ? Oh! Lud^ me- 
thinks I. fee you muffled up to fecure you 
from the Severity of the Froft, croffing 
Fields and Meadows, difrobed of their ver- 
dant Beauties, and prefenting only a barren 
and gloomy Appearance. Then, rioing, un- 
lefs inJIyde-Parkj where one can fee and be 
. feen, is no x\mufement. In wbat^Manner 
can you^jafs your Evenings? — You read, 
I fuppofe. But this is rather tircfome 
and quite unfafliionable, and one muft con- 
form to the Methods of People of Fafhton. 
The Repetition of this Word, puts me 
in mind of a Compofition of a Lady's, 
wTlo (hewed ^me the other Day. It 
will pleafe you I make no Doubt, for 
Ihe, 
30 LETTERS between 
flie is equally fond of the Country with 
yourfelf, and came up to Town only for 
a few Days on Bufmefs. She ieems to 
have the famt Notions, yet I cannot help 
faying, I think the Piece tolerably clever. 
I inclofe it for .your Perufal. 
What a Prude you are grown ! At your 
Years, Child, to moralize in the Manner 
you do ? — So I muft not marry Sir George^ 
becaufe he is a Rake! What an antiquated 
Notion! He is young and may reform; 
and a Woman with a Title and hand- 
fbme Fortune, need not mind what Amufe- 
ments her Hulband purfues. However, 
in ferious Truth, I have no Manner of 
Inclination for him ; but then, his Rank, 
Equipage and Fortune, render him a de- 
firable Admirer, and poor Lovewell is un- 
eafy. I muft tell you, my Dear, he came 
into the Dining Room yefterday Morning,. | 
where I fat in ExpedtatA of Sir George 
and Mifs Eareit^ to call me to walk in| 
thc^ 
J 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 31 
the Park. 'Tis an iinufual Happinefs, 
^yadam, faid he, to find yon alone. Why, 
indeed, anfwdred I, I expeft Sir George will 
call me prefently to take a Walk in the 
Park. You wcMi't be of our Party, I fup- 
pofe, Mr. Lfrvewelly continued I, with an 
Air of Indifference. Sir George is fo hap- 
py in your good Opinion, Madani, faid 
he, very gravely, that I am not certain 
my Company will be agreeable. Nay^ 
juft as you pleafe, replied I. Surely, Ma- 
dam, faid he, ybu behave in this Manner 
only tatry your Power ; for I cannot think 
it your natural Difpofition to delight in 
occafioning Mifery. You exercife this Ty- 
ranny only to have Proofs of my Regard. 
Why will ycMi encourage the Addreflcs 
of a profeflfed Rafc'e, and the Flattery of 
idle Coxcombs .? Your good Senft, lam 
iUre, muft make you defpife, while you 
feem to Hften to them with Pleafure. 
Upon my Wor^ Mr. Love^ellj faid I, one 
would imagine you have a Right m pre- 
fcribe 
I 
$2 LETTERS BETWEEN 
fcribe Rules for my Condudt ; but as t 
have a Parent who knows how to dit^Sr 
me, I muft tell you, you take too great 
a Liberty, and I defire you'll forbear this 
Sort of Difcourfe for the future. I will do 
fo, replied he, tho' J might reafonably hope 
a different Behaviour from your natural 
Sweetnefs of Difpofition, but I fee the Rea- 
fon. Sir George Townly is fo agreeable 
to you, that He was proceeding, when 
that Gentleman and Mifs FJareit entered 
the Room. I was rejoiced to fee them, 
as their Appearance hindred the Progreft 
(if a Converfation, I was not much pleafed 
with. 
I beg Pardpn, Madam, faid Sir George^ 
for being fomewhat later than the Time 
I mentioned ; but this Lady not being 
ready, occafioned my Delay. Oh ! 1 for^ 
give you both, aafwered I, with the gayeft 
Air I could affume ; but^ indeed, I have 
been wiftiing for you fome Time. Well, 
my 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 35 
my dear Flareit^ we will go now if you 
'^ Mr. Lovewelly I imagine you'll 
Q./e us your Company. I am fbrry. 
Madam, replied he, that Bufinefs pre- 
vents my longer enjoying thePIeafure of 
your's. He then took his leave with a 
moft melancholy Air, — I know you will 
blame me > but why is the Man fo imper- 
tinent? 
Sure, cryed Sir George^ Mr. Lovewell is 
a Perfon of prodigious Bufinefs, who can 
deny himfclf the Happinefs of attending 
the Ladies! For my Part, I always make 
my Bufinefs fubfervient to my Pleafure. 
Certainly, anfwercd Mifs i7<7m/, all well- 
bred People do fo ; but I think Lovewell 
a poor 'ftupid Fellow, and I can't imagine, 
Child, why you receive his Vifits. But 
come, my dear Harriet^ get ready, for wc 
lofe a delightful Morning. When we re- 
turned from the Park^ we fet Mifs Flareit 
down at her own Door, and Six George zc- 
conjfv s 
f 
34 LETTERS BETWEEN 
companicd mc Home. We repaired to the 
i Dining Room, and entering into Co*- 
fetion on indifferent Matters, he ch-.^ 
it to a particular Subjeft. He inveighed 
againft Matrimony, wondered what Fool 
firft introduced the Cuftom. I alked him 
if he fpoke ferioufly ? Certainly, Madam, 
anfwered he, and I hope you are no Ad- 
vocate for, it. It is abfurd for a Woman 
of Beauty and Merit, to be fubjedted to 
the ill-ufage of a domcftic Tyrant. Find- 
ing I was difpleafed with ,his Difcourfe, 
he turned it off with a gay Air, and 
vowed that with me he could always be 
happy. 
He foon after took his Leave, and I 
own I have thought of this Converfation 
^ver fince. What can he mean ? Surely, 
he does not imagine — No, he cannot, 
dare not, think me fo contemptible. — 
He faid it only to hear my Opinion. — 
I am perfcftly eafy again, and as I don't 
defign 
EMIUA AND HARRIET. 35 
de(ign to marry at prefcnt^ I do not care 
' -^ he means. 
Mr. Sinclay came in fbon after, jjnd gave 
me an Account of a moft beautiful Lady, 
who fell in love with him at the Play. 
The Coxcomb is fo vain, I am half an- 
gry with him. He profefled a violent Re- 
gard for me, andwiflied I would give him 
leave to hope. I told him, I rather thought - 
I fhould never marry. My Mamma, who 
had been abfent all the Morning, came 
in before he went away, and. as he is 
no Favourite of her's, (he behaved very 
coolly, and gave him many Hints to be 
gone, which he difregarded for fome Time. 
As foon as he went away, my Mother . 
began to upbraid my Condudt. . I am 
furprized, Harriet^ faid (he, when I have 
io often defired you not to receive the 
Vifits of this egregious Fop, that you 
will continue to do fo. I mfift on your 
difmiflina him. 
. s ^ - 'As 
f 
56 LETTERS BETWEEN 
As to Sir George^ I am afraid he docf 
ndt mean honourably. I (hould be " 
py, if you would, by marrying 
Lovewellj remove my Fears of the^other, 
who is his Inferior in every Refpedt but 
Rank and Fortune, yet has a Sufficiency 
of the latter to enable you to live gen- 
teely. Confider, ray dear Child, I have 
no Hopes but from you, and my fond- 
nefs makes me defirous of feeing you' 
fettled in the World before I leave it. 
I am much obliged to you, Madam, an- 
fwered I, 'for your Care of, and Goodnefs 
to me i but really you injure Sir George. 
'Tis true he is not fo formal and fpe- 
cious in Appearance as Mr. Lovewell^ but 
he is not the worfe on that Account. I 
could never be happy with Lovewell^ for 
I know he hates the Town, and would 
confine me to the Country, which I al- 
ways detefted, and I am fure, his Com- 
pany would never compen(ate for the 
Lofs of all other. s As to ISAr. Sinclay^ 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 37 
Man is filly to be furc, but it gives 
infinite Pleafure to be attended by 
j ^ 
rain of Lovers -, and Flattery, my dear 
mrj^, delights, even from a Fool. Sure, 
I (he, you imagine me very indulgent 
^our Foible, but, you may be affured, 
ill difmife Mr. Sinclay^ and for Mr, 
jewell^ I will not imagine you can be 
id to his Merit. I command you, Har- 
, to be always on your Guard in your 
laviour to Sir George^ for I am afraid 
ir too gay Converfation may encou- 
e a Hope of obtaining you on very 
j Terms. Anfwer me not, purfued (he, 
ng me change Colour, but let your 
edience manifeft your Regard to my 
vice. 
[ was glad (he left the Room immc^ 
tely, for I was quite angry, and don't 
Dw what I might have faid. And (lie 
; really defired poor Sinclay^ never ;to 
it m£^j||in. 
C ' I am 
38 LETTERS betwben 
I am greatly vexed, but I can't help 
myfclf, and I know you wiH only l^- 
at me. I wi(h^ Child, you were h 
in Love, that I might return the Civi- 
lity. Upon my Word, it is a fad Thing 
to lofe a Lover in this manner; and as 
I find I can write on no other Subjed, 
I will- break ofFabruptly^ and add no more, 
than that, I am, ray dear, 
Moft afTedtionately your's, 
HARRIET. 
Inclofod tn the fc^^oing— — 
FASHION. 
Frftught with eacb Fafhion in its hi^heft Tafte;^ 
The Millcners from Town return in Hafte; 
The Young, the Old, the Homely, and the Fiir, 
To Mrs. MoMffs Shop in. Crowds repair. 
Vers*d in th* hnportant Article ot Drefs, 
She ne'er defpairM of meeting with Sffllefs. 
I 
EMDJA AVD HARRIIT. 39 
} 
Flirtilla Wrw each Box viih Tranfport o'er 
— rric&t This Suitof Lwn I adore! 
le* dear M%diljf prithee ihew us more. 
iliere yoi|Ve brought the Cweeteft Falhions dowa» 
Fray tell us what is chiefly worn in Townf , 
Why, Ladiesy I believe you'll dl agree^ 
That none has more Variety than me. 
Pray did you ever fee a better Lace ? 
ThisHead drefsy Mero> would much become your Face; 
Look at thefe Ear* rings, at this Necklace tc>o> 
I think I never faw fo fine a Blue. 
Here are gre^t Choice indeed, D^rinda faid» 
Modelyy V\\ take thefe Ruffles a^d the Head. 
1 End chey make their Cloaks extremely fliorr» 
And pink'd til oyer : what a pretty Thought f 
Thefe Hats too, I fuppofe, came lately down? 
Yes Mem, no other Sort is worn in Town* 
I was at the Rehearfal, Mem, and there . 
Saw how the Ladies dref( and wore their Hair; 
To Ranelagb two nights I Kkewifc went; 
I To mind th^FaAions, was my chief Intent i 
And I aiTure you, Ladies, I brought down. 
What was mod worn, by Quality in Town. 
The Ladies with a Smile her Tafte approv'dy 
While o'er each Box, tbetr Eyes with Tranfport rov'd. 
The various Faflitens charm their raptur'd Sight, 
And each new Ohjedt adds too their Delight. 
Q t U 
40 LETTERS between 
In fhort, each Purfe of its Contents waseas'd* 
And every Perfon wit)i her Dealing pleas*d. 
Would you* ye Fair, a lading Conqueft gain 
Let graceful Eafe, and decent Neatnefs reign ; 
Contemn the Arts, th' Extravagance of Drefs, 
The Prudent ne'ei arfc guilty of Excefs. 
What tho' MtUnda by her Airs could fix 
A Man of Faihion, in his Coach and Six? 
And gay Bel/aria with fuccefsful Art* 
Has triumphed o*er the proud Lorenzo*^ Heart ? 
They never knew the Sweets of true Content* 
In Cards and Viiits all their Lives are fpent : 
Irkforoe and tedious pafs their Hours away^ 
They are but in Appearance always gay. 
Bat ye, who wiih the real Joys to prove^ 
That flow from conftant, and from artlefs Love* 
Know* Ign*rance only runs into Excefs* 
For Eafe and Neatnefs are the Height of Drefi. 
In elegant jSimplicity alone, 
True Tafte in Drefs* and prudent Thought are ihow 
Does any Fair a Man of Merit bind* . 
Her Form is artleisj and adorn'd her Mind. 
► 
EMIUA AND HARRIET. 41 
LETT e'r IV. 
Emilia to Harriet. 
INDEED, my de^v Harriet^ I do, and 
muft blame you for your Behaviour 
) Mr. Loyewell, efpecially as your Mamma 
fo defirous you fliould be his. Though 
can fcarcely expe6t my Arguments can 
ave any Weight, where her's have fail- 
I, yet I will once more venture to give 
tCfSt Sentiments you dcfire,. and. my 
rieftdftiip prompts. Difficulty, you fay, 
idears Conqueft. I grant, ,that where 
le Difficulty arifes froni any other Caiife, 
lan real or afF§6led Diflike in the Ob- 
a beloved, it calls forth every Idea 
s Tendernefs, which otherwife could 
)t be excited. We are, perhaps, nc- 
jr fo fenfible of the Merit of Perfons, 
when on the Point of lofing them for 
^er. The Mind, foftened by the Anguifti 
C 3 of 
42 LETTERS between . 
of Parting, feels. the tendered Emot»'^*^* 
which cannot be dil^layed, when the I -,^ 
is no longer labouring under the Pangs' 
of Uncertainty, iior the Shock of a final 
Separation. But depend on it, my dear, 
tvhere the Difficulty proceeds from Af- 
f<^£tat!on, it leilens Efteem^ where from 
i'eal Diflike, it is criminal to give any En- 
couragement. 
Sir George's Behaviour is but too cafily 
underftood, and I am (lirprized that a 
Perfon of my dt^r Friend's Difcerngacnt, 
(hould not perceive he does not intend 
jto marry. Why ^e you fo blinded by 
your good Opinion of him ? Or rather, 
why are you indifferent in a Matter (o 
highly efiential to your Happinefs ? Take 
Care, m^ Harriet ! Too great Confidence 
in our own Strength, weakens our Re- 
liance on the Supreme Being, whofe Affift- 
ance is abfolutely neceiral-y to preferve in 
us, a conftant Attention to our Duty. 
I am 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 43 
1 am glad your Mamma has difmifled 
Hfr. AWiT^ry, and am certain, on ferious Re- 
flexion you will be fo too; for by giving 
Encouragement to Coxcombs, you depre- 
ciate yourfelf in the Opinion of Perfonc 
of Merit. 
The Verfes you inclofed, plcafed my 
Tafte, and I am glad you allow them to 
be tolerable. — You affcdt to be furprized 
at Lady Frkndlfs Fondncfs for Solitude. 
I aflure you, her natural Di(pofition in- 
clines her to Retirement; and if (he will 
give me leave to impart to you an Ode 
of her*6, on Solitude, you will find, it is 
really from a Motive of Choice, that (he 
iecludes herielf. 
Thus far I wrote Yefterday, when I littk 
imagined a moft interefting Subject would 
demand my Pen. ^-^ You heartily wilh I 
was in Love, you fay. -— Upon my Word, 
my dear, I am afraid -it is even fo, for I 
C 4 have 
44 LETTERS between 
have fecn a Man, who appears to me more 
amiable, than any I ever heard conveiJk 
I dined at Mr. TrainweirSy and amongft 
the reft of the Company^ was one Mr. 
Sydney^ a young Gentleman, who lives near 
♦♦♦* with his Uncle. HisPerfon is agree- 
able ; but to hear him fpeak, delights both 
the Ear and the Underftanding. My Me- 
mory was faithful to the Impreffion his 
Difcourfe made on my Heart ; and I will 
relate to you the Subftance of his Com- 
verfation, which I committed to Paper ira- 
- mediately on my Return. 
One of the Gentlemen obferved, that not- 
withftanding a general infatiable Thirft af- 
ter Knowledge, there were few who appli- 
ed to the moft ufeful Study, the Know- 
ledge of themfclves. This Obfervation 
produced many others, which had nothing 
ftriking enough to fix my Attention, till 
Mr. Trainwell^ addrefling himfelf to Mr. 
Sydney^ defired him to give us the Pleafure 
of 
EMIUA AND HARRIET. 45 
of hearing his Sentiments on this Sujbjed. 
%fter a little Hefitation, " I own, Sir, faid 
he, it is a Matter which has engaged my 
moft ferious Confideration -, I will C9mply 
with your Requeft,, aad fatisfy in thp b^ft 
Marnier I am able, the iilent Expedlation 
of the Company, as I find your and their 
-Diffidence really prevents a full Knowjedgp 
of yourfclves. — To know one's felf, whep 
taken, in its moft wide and comprehenftvc 
Scnfe, is a Tafk which includes all the 
Knowledge human Nature can acquire, and 
all the Duties human Nature can perforno. 
It dircdts us to enquire, whence we are, 
or to whom we owe our Being, where 
wc are, or, to what. End we were produced^ 
and what we arc. 
Under the firft Head is comprehended, 
the Knowledge our Faculties are able to 
arrive at, concerning the I3feity, and the 
Duties we owe to him; under the fecond 
Head, ho^y we Hand related to our Fellow- 
C 5 ' Creatures^ 
46 LETTERS between 
Creatures, and what Duties we owe to them ; 
tnd under the lad Head, is comprehende4| 
the Knowledge of our Attainments and 
Weaknefles, confidered as human Creature^, 
and the Knowledge of our Accomplifli- 
taents and Imperfections, more fmm^- 
atelyrehitingto one's (elf, as an Individual 
t)f Society. But as the Precept wiaswc^te- 
mended to us, by a Philofopiier of Qrtea^ 
in the Youth of the Wc^ld, ^nd Iflfiwdy 
^ Lcaminfg ; it is probabfc, that he did 
not coiffider it in this e^^dfive Senfe, 
Init confined k wholly to tte dCnowfedge 
of ourfekes as Individuals. When itfe 
rd^teed to thefe narrow Limits, the Talk 
isiiot ib^difHcult, ^s is generally miagiDed^ 
and I have often thought, that morcPfeoplc 
know themfelves, than is commonly be- 
lieved. For was it not fo, how 4:ould 
Afieftation pofiefs fo wide a Dominion 'as 
every one's Experience evinces ? Could 
Cunning eJfe ufe every Art to detra^ from 
Excellence ? Moft afTuredly, fuch Minds 
as 
ENflLIA Avn HARRIET. 47 
as tfaefe ace fSenfible of their own Mean- 
me&f The AflTeded know tbemfelxres de- 
ficient in the QiiaAities they would flpfKar 
to poilefs ; and the Cunning, from a Con- 
IbbuffneE of dieir own Want of Merits 
endeavt>ur to leflen what they cannot at* 
uin. I will juft lay down two Methods^ 
by which we raay knowourfelvesj not 
that I look \spon them as the beft, jkit 
Ibecaufe they ace the leaft taken Notice 
4>f. All Merit is comparative. To know 
ourfelves^ therefore, it appears to me |ie- 
ceflary, that we ihould know others. He 
who baa the feweft Frailties, and poflefles 
ihetgreateft Virtues, is th^ beft Map ; and 
how nearly we are arrived ^ that Charac- 
ter, can only be known by 'Compa?rmg our- 
iblves wi^b the Virtuous. Tht pther Me- 
diod t$, either^ by fornmng inourlqiagin^. 
tioos a ;pcrfcfit Cliarafter, or taking qnc 
AS dr^wn by the glo\ying Fancy of a ]Pcct ; 
comparing pur omx Qiialific^tions with 
48 LETTERS beI'ween 
which, we may attain a pcrfedl Knowledge 
of ourfelves. Thus may Imagination be 
made fubfervient to Reafon, and FidlFon 
become the Handmaid of Truth. And by 
thefe Methods, we fliaU hot only in the 
End, but even whilft in Purfuit, attain to an 
Improvement in Virtue. For, in the former 
Cafe, the Charadters of our Acquaintance^ 
will become fo many Lights, by which we 
ihall fee to avoid dangerous Rocks, or direft 
Hs to fecure Havens. In the latter Cafe, 
captivated by the Beauty of the ObjeQ, 
we (hall infenfibly imitate its Perfedions/*^ 
Whether I have done Juftice to his 
Manner of Expreflion I am not certain ^ 
but I am well convinced, I have not omit- 
cd any of his Sentiments, however they 
may have fufFered from being deprived 
of the Grace and Elegance with which 
he delivered them. I liftened with (b fixed 
an Attention, that I loft not a fmgle Word. 
The Company joined in applauding his 
juft 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 49 
juft Turn of Mind, and rejoiced in having 
referred to his Sentiments, for a ConviAion 
of their own fuperficial,, or miftaken Ob- 
fcrvations. 
I thfnk Mr. Sydney the moft amiable 
Man I was ever acquainted with, and I 
had the Pleafure of perceiving in his Eyes 
that he viewed me with particular Regard. 
My Pappa aflced him to favour us with 
his Company, and I was infinitely pleafed 
to hear him promife us a Vifit. We took 
a Walk in the Garden after Tea, and 
Mifs Trainwell and I happening to be 
behind the Reft, (he alked how I liked 
Mr. Sydney ? I felt a Blufh mount into 
my Face, and anfwered with forae He- 
fitation, I thought him an agreeable Man ; 
then carelefsly enquired into his Circura- 
ftances and Family. She told me his Fa- 
ther had been an eminent Attorney in 
London^ but had lived in fo expenfive a 
Manner as to be' quite reduced > that he 
and 
so LETTERS betweew 
and his Wife had been fome Time dead, 
and left two Sons wholly unprovided for ; 
that the eldeft had been fome Y^ars in the 
ff^eJi'lndieSf where he had gained axonfider- 
able Fortune; and that this young Gentle- 
man lived with an Uncle who fupported 
him, rather from Oftentatfon, th«i real Af- 
fection, and whofe Fortune was very fmal^ 
but bis Family Pride infupportably trou-- 
blefome. She was here in^terrupted in her 
Difcourfe by the Sulgeft of it, and as 
we foon after left Mr. ^rainwelfsj nothing 
elfe happened worth conamuriicating. You 
can*t imagine, my dtzt Harrm^ how much 
Mr. Sydne/s Merit has affefted me. I am 
impatient to fee him again, and yet I fear 
his Want of Fortune will be an infur- 
moon table Bar. ■ — But I am riot yet cer- 
tain that he likes me* ; 
Now you will have the Opportunity 
you have fo much wifhed for, of laughing 
at mej but let me tell you, I do not 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 51 
think you have much lefs Regard for Mr. 
LovewelL The Delight you take in teizing 
liim, is to me a convincing Proof, and 1 
hope you will (bon give me a more con- 
vincing one, by rewarding his Merit and 
Paffion. 
Akbough «ny Heart is engaged by an 
Objedt narortliy its tendercft AfFedlbn, it 
ftill retains, and will ever feel, rhatEfteem 
and R^«'d for my dear Harriet^ whi^h 
has from earlieft Years aftuatcd the fireaft 
Her's fincerely, 
EMILIA. 
52 LETTERS between 
LETTER V. 
Harriet to Emilia. 
I Give you Joy, my dear ! You arc in for 
it indeed, Child ! I am glad to find you 
are not fo infenfible as I thought you, but 
I am afraid you will have a few Obftacks 
in your Way. However don't let me dit 
courage you. Goon, andprofper. .. 
Upon my Word I am really angry \mh 
you.for endeavouring to perfuade me I like 
Lovewell Impoffible, Child ! It cannot be. 
Why we don't think alike in any one Cir- 
cumftance. Prithee no more of thefe In- 
finuations. I declare you half frightened 
me when I firft read your Letter. Sure,, 
faid I, it can't be fo -, but I examined my 
heart, and really caa find nothing in it 
like Love. You wicked Creature, how 
could you alarm mcfo? 
And 
EMILIA AND HARRIET.* 55 
And you redly would not have mc 
fuflfer Sir George's Vifits! Why, my dear, 
his Rank and Fortune make him the moft 
envied Lover I entertain. I cannot part 
with him indeed ; and befides, as I have 
given up Stnclay without a great deal of 4;^ 
Regret, there is no Occafion for my dis- 
carding Sir George. 
I have not feen Mr. Lovewell fmce I 
wrote to you laft. Surely the Wretch will 
not abandon me, after fo many Years of 
Scddlijy. I know .you will fay,, he would 
treat rrfe as IdeferveS ; biit, dear malicious 
Girl, I mud not part, with him fo neither. 
However, I (hall not give myfelf any 
Trouble about him. 
Since my laft, I have taken a Maid Ser- 
vant, with whom I arn extremely pleafed. 
She is a handfome (enfible Girl, but feems 
melancholy, and loves to be alone. You 
will perhaps be furprized at my troubling 
54" LETTERS between 
you with this Account of a Servant ; but 
I have an odd Circumftance to mention. 
She was in my Room the other Day, when 
Sir George called me to go to the Opera. 
At Sight of him, a vifible Confufion fpread 
itfclf over her Face. Her Eyes were filled 
with Tears, and flie begged I would give 
hei "Leave to quit the Room, as ftie found 
herfelf not well. He immediately caught 
the Infection, and turned as pale as Death; 
but his natural Gaiety foon regained 
Poflfeffion of his Features. What their 
Behaviour means, I know not ; but I am 
determined to find out. I fhould have 
imagined there had been too great an 
Intimacy between them ; but her ftrong 
Recommendation from a Perfon of Cha^ 
radter, her engaging Modefty and Sweet* 
nefs of Behaviour, prepoiTds me in het 
Favour. I interrogated her after I came 
Home, but could learn nothing ; for Ihe 
affirmed, Ihe had rei^y been ill, which 
had <x:qafioned the Change in her Coun- / 
tenance. I 
J 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 55 
tenaAce. I know not what to make of 
this ASair ; Curiofity renders me inqui- 
fitive. True Woman, my dear. Natu- 
rally Eve-i(h. 
What do you think, my Emilia ? I have 
had a fecond Lecture from my Mamma, 
on Sir Georgis and Mr» LoveweWs Ac- 
count, which toded with ftridt Injunftions 
to be careful of my Behaviour to the for- 
mer, and with her moft earncft Wifties 1 
would accept the Hand of the latter. Lud! 
I believe my good Mamma and you find out 
Qualities in the Man, which I am unable 
to perceive, and which I cannot think re- 
ally exift ; OT you have a defire to fee me 
married, in Hopes that Engagement will 
correft my extravagant Love of Diverfions, 
and Fondnefs of Admiration, and render 
me as grave and demure as yourfelvcs. 
But, Child, if I am certain Matrimony will 
not have this Effeft : Am I not in the right 
to deftr entering into a State which requires 
a So- 
S6 LETTERS between 
a Solidity I am not capable of? I think 
my Determination is founded on Rea- 
fon. s 
But, to wave my own Affairs, which 
have engaged too much of my Attention ; 
the Sentiments of your gentle Swain 
pleafe me infinitely. Indeed they do ; 
for though I am gay and naturally incon- 
fiderate, yet when I chufe to perufe a 
ferious Subjedt, no one can be more at- 
tentive. 'Tis true, it does not make 
that lafting Impreflion on me, as on the 
Minds of the thoughtful and fagacious 
(I have a particular Perfon in my Eye) 
but perhaps I may, fome Years hence, be 
as prudent anci fententious as my Advi- 
(ers. You muft not be "too grave, and 
ril endeavour not to be too light and 
flippant. 
Mamma has invited Mr. Lovewell to mtet 
% Relation of h^r's at Supper. I muft 
1 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 57 
be ready to receive him ; and as 1 intend 
to put on my moft becoming Appearance, 
that he may be concerned for his late Info- 
lence (Infolence I repeat, my dear) and fub- 
mit to any Penance I (hall chufe to enjoin, 
I muft fubfcribe myfelf in Hafte, 
Your afTcdionate and faithful 
HARRIET. 
58 - LETTERS betweeji 
LETTER VI. 
Emilia to Harriet. 
AS you inform me^ my dear, you can 
be fcrious upon Occafion, I will 
make you the Confidante of my unea- 
finefs, and do not doubt your kindly 
fympathizing, though the Gaiety of your 
Heart will overflow, even when it has 
real Caufe to be depreffed, and is afFefted 
with the Miferies of the Unfortunate. 
I rpentioned to you my Efteem and 
Admiration of Mr. Sydney^ which in- 
creafed every Time I faw him. It afflidted 
me to obferve a penfive, melancholy Air 
always appeared vifiblc in his Face. If 
Icatched his Eyes, they were immediately 
withdrawn, and a deep Sigh ifllied from 
his Breafl. I am willing to hope he loves 
me, and declines revealing his Paflion for 
fear 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 59 
fear of a Repulfc; but my Uncertainty 
renders me as thoughtful as he is. My 
Father and Mother admire him very much, 
and frequently invite him, but he always 
refufes, yet in fo polite a Manner, as can- 
not poifibly ofiend. 
I was Yefterday at Lady Friendly\ and 
Mr. Sydney came in the Afternoon. He 
coloured at Sight of me. We took a 
Walk after Tea, and as he and I happened 
once to be (bmewhat behind Lady Friendly 
and her Mother, his Confufion returned, 
and he in vain endeavoured to afTume 
Courage to entertain me. Surely this 
muft be Love! On our Return, he ent^- 
ed into Conveirfation, and his Sentiments 
on every Subjeft were perfectly juft. 
He breathed forth the true Spirit of Be- 
nevolence, and the ftridteft, and moft ex- 
alted Piety. With a refined Uriderftand- 
ing, he poffeffes a truly generous, and 
tender Heart. Lady Friendly mentioned Sir 
miliam 
6o LETTERS between 
fFilliam in a Manner that drew Tears from 
bur Eyes. She expatiated on their happy 
Union, and alked Mr. Sydney if he did not 
think Marriage, where Love was proper- 
ly founded, the moft blifsful State of Mor- 
tality. The Qneftion feemed to embar- 
rafs him; but foon recovering himftlf. 
Yes, Madam, faid he, where Love is 
founded on Efteem, and fupported by a 
mutual endeavour to pleafe, the moft glow- 
ing Imagination cannot paint a Scene of 
more perfedt Felicity. That there are few 
happy Marriages, is owing to ill-judged, 
and too precipitate Engagements. For 
my own Part, continued he, foftening his 
Voice, was I not fo circumftanced, that it 
would appear an unpardonable Prefump- 
tion to addrefs a Woman of Merit, I 
would foon convince- the World of my 
Sentiments. But in my Situation, thfe moft 
pure and difinterefted Regard wouI4 ^ 
miftaken foj a lucrative Defign ; and pjl 1 
can prove the Sincerity of my Paffion, it 
^ t^lhall 
EMBLIAt AND HARRIET. 6i 
fliall ever be concealed within my own 
Bread. He fighed, as he pronounced 
thefe Words, and I found myfelf in a very 
odd Situation. I could not reprefs my 
Hopes, that the Lore he mentioned^ was 
what I wifhed to infpire^ and I flattered 
myfelf, he would accompany me Home, 
and convince me I was the Object of his 
AfFedlron. But how was I difappoint^d ! 
when he foon after took his Leave, faying 
he expe£ked a Gentleman at his Uncle*«. 
This Behaviour has occafioned me great 
Uneafmefe, but I will not trouble you 
with any Complaints. 
I hope Mr. Lovewell and you have ac- 
commodated Matters, and fhall rejoice to 
be informed you intend making that wor- 
thy Man happy. Liften to the Advice of 
your Friends, and the Impulfe of your 
own Heart, and do not render yourfelf and 
him miferable by a continued Ill-ufagc. 
As 
As to Sir George 2£&A Laurinday I am 
afraid there has beofi too great an Intima^ 
cy between them, and her Excufe of Illneis 
was too fliaBow not to be feen through^ 
was you not blinded by your good Opinion 
of her and your defigning Lover (as I muft 
call him.) I am not apt to judge by Ap- 
pearances, which are often deceitful^ but 
in this Cafe, 1 think there is a Foundation 
for my Sufpicions. Let me intreat you 
to examine t^is AfStir, and difijuu'ge her, 
if there is any Truth in my Fears; 
Sir George fownly^ if guilttefs in this Re- 
fpedt, cannot be worthy of you, and is dis- 
agreeable to your Mamma. 
Let me. hear from you foon. Your 
Letters are.alway^ pkafing, and will in my 
prefent Situation be doubly welcome, as in. 
your FfiendOiip I find. Relief from thofc 
anxious Fears which hayejately difquieted 
the Heart of 
Tout's unalterably, i 
EMILIA, 
EMDJA AND HARRIET, 6j 
I inclofe Lady Friendfy*s Ode, with an 
lnjun£lidii from h^^ that you will not 
ihew it to any Pei&a but your Manual 
and Mr. Lovewell 
Indofed in the foregoing. 
An ODE to SOLITUDE. 
Oh! Solitude] celeftial M^id! 
Wrap me in thy fequefter'd Shad^ 
And fdl my Soul employ ;' 
From Folly, Ignorance, and Strife^ 
from all the giddy Whirls of Life, 
And loud unmeaning Joy ! 
While, in the Staiefinan^s glowing Dream, 
Taney poartrays the high-wrought Scheme, 
i^nd plans a future Fame ! 
What is the Phantom he purfues ? 
What, the Advantage that accrues f 
Alas an empty Name! 
Dit To 
64 LETTERS between 
To him, the Grove no Pleafure yields. 
The mofly Bank, nor verdant Fields, 
Nor Daify-painted Lawns ; 
In vain, th'ambrofial Gale invites. 
In vain all Nature (beds Delights, 
Her geuine Charms he (corns! 
Pleafure allures the giddy ThroBg, 
The Gay, the Vain, the Fair and Youi 
All bend before her Shrine j 
She fpreads around dclufive Snares, 
The borrow'd Garb of Blifs (he wears 
r 
And tempts in Form divine, 
Fa(hion, with wild tyrannic Sway, 
Diredts the Bufinefs of the Day, 
And reigns without Controul; 
The Beaux, and fparkling Belles, confe 
She animates the Modes of Drefs, 
And chains the willing Soul^ 
EMIUA AND HARRIET. 6$ 
Can thefe, the Slaves of Fa(hion*s Pow'r, 
Enjoy the filent, tranquil Hour, 
And bloom with Nature's Glow? 
Or, to the Votaries of Senfe, 
Can Solitude her Sweets difpenfe. 
And Happinefs beftow ? , 
How wretched that unfurnirti'd Mind, 
Which to each vain Purfuit inclined, ' 
Is ever bent to roam! 
Oh ! be that reftlefs State abhorr'd ! 
Seek not for Happinefs Abroad, 
She's only found at Home! 
Ye Sages, who with anxious Care, 
Rov'd thro* the fleeting Tracks of Air, 
A Vacuum to find ; 
Wifcr had ye employed your Skill, 
With (olid Senfe, and Worth to fill 
The Vacuum of the Mind I 
D 3 ' Let 
i 
jte LETTERS between: 
Let Gioice, not wrinkled Spleen eng^ 
The Mind to quit the World's gay Stagey 
Where Fdl/s Scenes are play'd. 
Sour Difcontent and pining Care^ 
Attaint the Fragrance of the Air^ 
Difturb the dent Shade. 
Not wounded by Misfortune's Dart^ 
I feek to eafe the rankling Smart 
Of thorny-feft'ring Woe ; 
But far remote from Crowds and 'Noiie, 
To reap fair Virtue's placid Joys^ 
In Wifdom's Soil they grow. 
I afk not pageant Pomp^ nor Wealth, 
For blcft with Competence and Health, 
*Twere Folly to be great ! 
May I thro' Life ferenely Aide, 
As yon dear Streams that fdent glides 
Nor quit this lov'd Retreat. 
Benei 
EMHiA AND HARjRflET. f 7 
Beneath this J®fy Ardi ireclin'd, 
I tafte m6re trae Content cif Mind 
Than froHc Mirth can; gtvc; . 
Here to the bufy World unknown^ 
I feel eadi blifeful Hourmy own>. 
And learn the Art to live ! 
While turning Nature's Volume o'er^ 
Frefh Beauties rife unfeen before. 
To ftrike ih'attonilh'd Soul ! 
Our mental Harmony improves. 
To mark each Planet how it moves,. 
H^w all in Order roll ! 
From Nature's fix'd unerring Laws,. 
We're lifted to th' Eternal Caufc, 
Which moves this lifelefs Clod ; 
This wond'roiis Frame this vaft Defign^ 
Proclaims the Workmanfliip divine,. 
The Architedt, a God] 
D4. Oh! 
68 LETTERS between 
OhiTacred Eifsf thy Paths to trace^ 
And happieft they of hum^ Race, 
To whom this Pow*r is giv'n. 
Each Day^ ki fomt delightful Shade^ 
By Contemplation's foftVing Aid, 
To plume the Soul for Heaven! 
EMILIA. AND HARRIET. 69 
L E T T E R Vir. 
Harriet to Emilia. 
TO let you fee what a good-naturerf 
Creature I am, I take the earlieft 
Opportunity of anlwering your's ; butyou' 
muft Forgive my laughing at you; for i 
really cannot help it! What an odd Kind 
of a fighing^ Hufliing Lovcf have you 
got ! I could not bear to keep him Compa- 
ny ; but you have caught the Infeftion^ 
and are in a& bad a Way, poor Thing? 
You'll never come together,, take my 
Word for it. Impoffiblc l fof he'll never 
be able to fpeak, and you can't a(k him,, 
you know.— Then ta-leave you to go Home- 
by yourfelf ! wl^ the Man muft abfolute- 
ly be a. FooL Yoa. can't perfuade me 
sto the contraBy^ Would not any other 
Lover have rejoiced at an Opportunity 
of entertaining his Miftrefe alone? To be 
, D 5 fure^. 
70 LETTERS betweek 
(lire, what he faid of Love was clever 
enough, and I do fuppofe, he meant you 
Ihould apply it. But unlefs he is more 
explicit, what will his difinterefted Palfion 
avail ? However, I really pity you both,, 
and wi(h you happy in each other ; for 
I cannot help fayipg, he feems defigned 
for you. I propofed poor L&uewell to you„ 
but you have found a Fjslbw Mind, and) 
will bear no Motion of any other. 
^ Poor Laurmda has prorhJ&d to con^ 
municate fbmethtng of Confequence, and 
defires I will decUcate To-morrow Mornii^ 
to her. She has fieen very ill, but is now 
in better Health and Spirits. 
I beg you yaltmake my Acknowledge^ 
«ents to Lady FriemMy^ for the Favour of 
her Ode. I like the Poetry, and the Sen- 
timents are very good, but 1 dp not chufe 
to adopt them. 1 had Leave to (hew the 
Gde to my Mamma, and to Mr. LoveweBH 
>Jnfe I 
EMBLJA A^i> HARRIET. 71. 
Not I^uely, my dcar^ for three Rwfons. 
Id the fkft Bace, it would %Bake him. 
too Q^^fiderabk^ if he was iHtrmfted with a. 
Secret ^.andfeoofidly^th^ Sentiments AvouM^ 
. I^rengthen hfeFctfid£ie& for a<^uim-y Life. 
£pUd { Child^ I (hould have been condemn-^ 
^ h^ n^ own finprudence. You findt 
in (bpie C^% I think more deeply tha^* 
ytti imfi^ed, but I have a (Irongec Rea-r 
&» tliaa I have yet g^ven.. 
thave de£errc4*itt^ now acquirintihgTdus 
with the Refiilt of Mr* £roi?torifs Vifit^, 
fty locally, am a^ little iafliamcd/ of rayr 
B<^avto^, bvOi he was monftroufly pro- 
voking^ I wwt to communicate^ and ye& 
I^i^ead ^our Cenfure, efpecially aSter whati: 
l^have (aid/of ycwr <5wai^. You will now*^ 
be reVwgcdt fi)r all rty Trifling, H^d K 
b^ua my Letter, with the Account, h 
&ould not have had Courage t& ha^^^e: 
lallici^-you. Butta^myStorf^, foe it ranuit 
72 LETTERS between 
Mr. LovewcB came early in the After- 
noon, and found me alone, ki the Par- 
lour. After the u(ual GonipKments, I 
(hould make (bme Apology, Madam, faid 
he gravely for my fong Abfenee, did I 
imagine you have thought it tedious; ; but 
your Behavioiu- has convinced me,anExcu(e 
is not necei&ry. What would you have 
me fay, Mr. L&vewdl? angered I with a 
gay Air ; to be (lire you expe£t a Com- 
pliment, but I have not the Art of de- 
livering theiDv' My Mamma wilfaed to fee 
you, and £bnt for you, imagining, I fup^ 
pofe, you ftood upon Ceremony, bdng (b 
great a Stranger. Can you blame me, cry- 
ed he warmly, for not coming oftener, when 
the cool Reception you gave me^ affiires. 
me my Company is troublelbme? I had 
almoft determined not to pay another Vi- . 
fit, but could nbt reftife your Mamma's] 
kind Invitation, and vwly flattered my< 
ifelf, you would not be difpleafed to fee 
me. 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 73 
Lord blefs me! replied I, what Fancies 
your Head is filled with ! In what Maa- 
»er do you expeft to he received 2 
Not as you receive Sir George Townfyj, 
Madam, interrupted he i I am but too fen- 
fible of the different Sentiments you en- 
tertain for him and me. The Knowledge 
of his being out of Town on a Party 
of Pleafure, made me more readily wait 
on you, knowing by fatd Experience^- 
had he been here, I muft have been ne- 
gledted. You give yourfdf nwft impor- 
tant Airs indeed. Sir, anfwered I, and I 
know not what Right you have to ia- 
terfere with my Condinft. I behave as 
pleafes myfelf. Ah!' Madam, cryed he, 
if I.kave faid more than appears con- 
fiftent with the Charaftcr of a Lover, 
impute it to the Vblence of my PaffioB. 
After the j^onvincing Proofs you have 
given me of your Jealoufy, replied I grave- 
ly, I Ihould be to blame to imagine your 
Regard 
74 LETTERS betwebi^ 
Regard fmcere, and I have often told you 
I am not mdined to marry. It muft be 
a different Behaviour which only can pro- 
duce the defireable Effedt. Have I not^ 
iaid he^ had Reafbn to be jealous ^ Re- 
call to mind the many Occafions you have 
given me by your Preference of Sir Gforge^, 
andceaie to blame me. Oh! would you. 
kindly midce one Gonceilion,. I (hould in- 
deed be happy. Wkhout prc^nifing to 
grant, answered I, Itt me know your Rt- 
queft. Difmi& Sir George Taamfy^ repli^ 
he, and I fhaU then,, deareft Harrutj be^ 
convinced my Sufpicions- are iII^oun<kt£ 
You frown, and I fear you think laik 
too much. Indeed, Mr. Lovewell, return- 
td I, you are much too prefumptuoitfi^ 
and muft excufe my abfoliite Refufal. Sir 
CwgeTownlffi Addrefles do me Honour,, 
and" though I do not tell you I intend ta> 
reward his Piaffion,, yet I wiU confefs, hia^ 
Afliduities are more likely to infpire aa. 
equal Regard,,, than the bold Demands of' j 
the: 
\ 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 75 
the infolent Mr. Lovewell To be fure^ 
my dear, this was rather too much, but 
why did the Man provoke me ? 
You have now given me an Anfwer^ 
Madam, faidhe, which will fuffice, and 
I will take Care never to give you another 
Opporiimity of triumphing over a Heart^,^ 
which you know not the Value of, and 
which has too long been your Slave. 1 
will trouble you no more. You have been, 
too indifferent to my Paflion, to regard 
the Lofs of him you; efteem the leaft wor- 
thy of your Admirers. But let me in- 
treat that you will not put yourfelf into> 
Sir Geor^e^s Power. You know not what: 
fiich a Villain is capable of. There ir 
no Occafipn for this, Sir, anfwered I, my 
Conduft has been irreproachabfe, I have 
Qo Fears on Sir George's Accotmt, nor am- 
I fuch a Baby as to need your Inftruftions.. 
As to your Refolution of vifiiing me no. 
xxx>t:e^ 
76 tETTERS between 
more^ I am perfe&ly ca(y; you are at 
Lfcerty to do as yoa think proper^ 
He was preparing to anfwer, when my 
Mamma entered the Room. She iaw we 
had been quarrelling, and begged Mr. LtnyH 
v)tU to tell her the Occafion. My great 
Afiedtion for this Lady^ Madam, (aid he,, 
and your Goodnefs to me, encouraged me 
to pay my Addrefles to her, and I hoped 
a kind Return, but find myfclf difappoint- 
ed, and have lately beea fojll treated, I 
am determined ta trouble her no mor^^ 
Excufe me if I dedine palling this Even- 
ing ha'€, fince it can be agreeable to nei- 
ther of us. I am extremely concerned, Sir„ 
anfwered my Mamma, that//^rr/>/'s iil-jud* 
gpd Behaviour fliould occafion you to form 
fo unalterable a Refolutiou; Believe me,, 
nothing coyld have conduced fo much to 
my Happinefs as an Union between you 
and her; but I rauft, though unwillingly, 
acquiefce in your Determination. Your 
great. 
\ 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 77 
great Merit has gained my high Efteera, 
which I (hall always preferve. You .arc 
infinitely obliging. Madam, returned he, 
and your Goodnefs renckrs me unwilling 
to give up my Title to a nearer Claim. 
But I muil not indulge fuch Thoughts. 
Excufe my abrupt Departure, and believe 
me ever difpofed to your Service. He 
then left us, filled with very different Sen- 
timents of his Behaviour. My Mamma^ 
prejudiced in his Favour, loaded me with 
Reproaches^ which I knew not how to 
bear, though confcious of deferving them. 
I believe her Harangue would have been 
much longer, had Hot my Coufin's En- 
trance interrupted her. I left the Room, 
not doubting fhe would acquaint him with 
the Affair, and fo it proved, for on my 
Return he got up, and taking one of my 
Hands, It gives me great .Concern, dear 
Coufin, faid he, to hear Mr. Z(?^«e;^// has 
reiblved to difcontinue his Vifits, but I 
hope it is in my Power to make up 
Matters 
78 LETTERS between 
Matters between you. Ah ! for Heaven's 
Sake, Sir, interrupted I haiftily, do not (peak 
to him on this Subjeft. He muft imagine 
I defired you to mediate between us, and 
I fliould dic^with Confufion. He chufes 
to give himfelf Airs, but his Behaviour 
occafions me no Manner of Uneafinefs. 
I have not Co mean an Opinion ot yoUr 
Underftanding and Senfibility, replied he, 
as to imagine you indifferent to fuch Merit, 
though the unjullifiablePleafureof Wound- 
ing a worthy Heart, influences your Con- 
duct. You need not fear my interpofinjg^ 
as you diflike being reconciled, but I am 
certain you'll repent your Ul^e of Tiim. 
I (hall fay no more. 
I will own to you that I am a little 
uneafy j but Lord blefs me ! how this Sex 
sexpeft to be humoured : Well! all is over, 
fo I will not repine, and I defire you will 
not chide me, for I cannot bear it from 
you, though I mufl fubmit, and Irftefn 
to 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. ^ 
to my Mamma. She has told me I (hall 
never receive fmy more of Sir Geargis 
Vifits. 1 could x:ry from Vexation, but 
you will only la^^h zt me. 
I fhall be pleafed to Icnow your Sir^bon 
has made more diredt Advances, but I 
would not have you^xpeft it, for I cannot 
imagine even his Love will get the -better 
pf bis ns^tural Timidity. 
J^rpt44t b^gs to fte me, therdPore I . 
can only repeat that, I am, my ^ecu*. 
Tow fincei'ely affedipnatc 
HARRIET. 
So LETTERS between 
LETTER VII!. 
Emilia to HarrieIt. 
My ever dear Friend ! 
I Have fo melancholy an Account to 
fend yovij that I muft fufpend entirely 
our own Affairs, till 1 have imparted it. 
Poor Lady Friendly is no more! (he 
breathed her laft Yefterday, and has hardly 
left an EquaL 
She fent on Monday to defire I would 
take an Airing with her on Horfeback. 
On our Return, a Man in an adjacent 
Field difcharged a Gun, and the Noife 
frightened Lady Friendly'^ Horfe fo much, 
that he ran away with her. Her Servants 
and I followed, and when we came up, 
judge my Excefs of Grief to find her 
bleeding on the Ground, and to all Ap- 
pearance 
EMHJA AND HARRIET. 8| 
pearance dead. I immediately difpatched 
one of the Servants for her Coach, while 
the other with my Affiftance raifed her 
from the Earth. Her Head was cut in 
feveral Places, her right Arm, and one of 
her Legs very much bruifed. She opened 
her Eyes, as the Coach came up, but 
fainted again on being lifted into it, and 
continued in a State of Infenfibility. Mr. 
and Mrs. GWw/7/, her Father and Mother, 
had been unable to gather the Truth from 
tlie Servant j but when they faw her fup- 
ported, or rather carried by two, you can- 
not form an Idea adequate to their AfHic- 
tbn. The unhappy Mother wrung her 
Hands in an Agony of Grief, while the 
wretched Father flood in fpeechlefs Sorrow. 
Oh ! my dear, my Eyes and Heart are Co 
full I can hardly fee to write ! We con- 
veyed her to Bed, and immediately fent 
for two Phyficians, who on their firfl 
Arrival pronounced her irrecoverable, and 
thought Ihe would not live an Hour. Con- 
trary 
82 LETTERS betwt:en 
trary to Expeftation, her Senfes returned. 
1 was feated by her. She took my Hand, 
and tenderly prefled it tor her Lips. Her 
Mother came forward, and the dear Lady 
held out her Hand which the afflidted 
Parent wetted with her Tears. We fat up 
with her all Night; (he fainted niany 
Times, and we feared her Strength would 
be quite exhaufted. However, flie at laft 
fell afleep. When (he awaked, (he called 
for her Father and Mother, who came io- 
ffantly to her. 
My dear Parents, faid (he in a faltering 
Voice, cea(e to afHidt yourfelves for what 
is unavoidable. I am certain I cannot 
live ; but oh ! remember, you ought not 
to repine at the wife Difpenfations of Pro- 
vidence. The Suddennefs of my Death 
mult affedt you, but to a Per(bn who is 
always prepared, it cannot happen unfea- 
fbnably. For you, dear Emilia j whom I 
love as a Sifter, accept my Thanks for 
your 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 83 
your Care and Tendernefs, and oh! com- 
fort as, much as in your Power my afflidlcd 
Parents- They were unable to anfwer 
her. Ah! dear Madam, cried I, let us 
indulge the Hopes of your Recovery. 
You feem finely, and a few Hours Reft 
may perfeftly reftore you. No, anfwered 
flie faintly, I am convinced I cannot live, 
but I would — She could fay no more, but 
fwooned in my Atms. Her Mother fell 
, without Senfe on the Floor, and was with 
Difficulty recovered. The Father's Grief 
rendered him unable to aflift me, and he 
fat immoveable. At laft both revived, and 
the Phyficians intreated us to leave Lady 
Friendly^ left her Efforts to fpeak Ihould 
OGcafion a Relapfe. We left the Room, 
and I be^ed the old Lady to lay down, 
and endeavour to compofe herfclf. She 
took my Advice, and Mr. Goodwill went 
down with me. His filent Sorrow pierced 
me to the Soul, and was more eloquent 
than Words. Lady Friendly could not be 
recon- 
8+ LETTERS between 
recx>ndled to our leaving her, and (ent 
for me. My dear, fai^ fhe, I have dc- 
fired Mr. Trainwell to adminifter to me 
the Sacrament; till he comes I beg you*il 
ftay with me ; and I entreat you'll accept 
a few Trifles as Remembrances of me, 
and not think yourfelf at all obliged to 
me, fori am convinced your Merit, and 
the AffifJuities you have rendered me, de- 
ferve infinitely more. 
Oh! my dear Lady, how you wound 
me with thcfe unmerited Praifes! Why 
do you talk of leaving the World .? May 
you enjoy many Years and blefs your 
Friends! My Tears prevented my pro- 
ceeding. She embraced me with great 
Tendernefs. Her Father and Mother 
coming in that Inftant, (he begged them 
to fit down by her. They complied, and 
(he began. i 
I am / 
if 
EMIUA AND HARRIET. 85 
I am too fenfible of the Pain it gives 
you to part with me; but oh! my dear, 
ever-honoured Parents, we muft fubmit 
to the Almighty's Will ; inftead of afflidl- 
ing yourfelves, look forward to the Happi- 
nefs that awaits me. I am well afliired 
I fhall be received into s thofe heavenly 
Manfions appointed for the Good, and 
your Sorrow is ill-founded. Confider I 
am leaving a World of Cares, and who 
knows what might have happened had I 
continued longer here ! 'Tis true, I have 
hitherto had no other AfHiftion, than the 
Lofs of my dear eft Hufband, but th)at 
was fevere beyond Expreffion, yet for 
your Sakes, I endeavoured to reconcile 
myfelf to it, and Religion forbad me to 
indulge my Grief; but, believe me, I re- 
joyce we Ihall foon be re-united ! Oh ! 
what a joyful Meeting will that be! At 
this aweful Moment, how light, how trifle- 
in g do all worldly Confiderations appear ? 
E She 
1 
86 LETTERS sferwEEN 
She could fay no more, but dafping her 
Hands and lifting up her Eyts, fecmed 
to pray for the Accomplilhment of hef 
Wiflies by a final Releafe. Her affli<Sed 
Parents threw themfelves on the Bed, and 
embraced her in the tendereft Manner. 
Oh ! my Daughter, my dear, dear Daughter, 
cried the old Man, muft we lofe you? 
The Blcfling and Support of our old Age I 
'Tis too much! The Mother could not 
fpeak. The fweet expiring Saint thus re- 
fumedi 
Do not, my dear Parents,, aftlift your- 
felves. God will be your Support, and 
we fhall meet, never to part again. My 
dear Emilia^ be fo kind as to withdraw 
till I have fcen Mr. Trainwell^ for this 
Sight difcompofes me too much. You may 
afterwards come in with my poor Parent^ 
and receive my laft Breath. 
Wc 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 87 
We withdrew, and at the Door met 
Mr. 7*ramwell'j he only bowed to us, as 
he pafled. The unhappy Parents, Hand 
in Hand, fat down in the Drcfling Room, 
and Mrs. Goodwill reclining her Head on 
her Hu(band's Breaft indulged her Sorrow, 
while the good old Gentleman's Tears 
trickled down upon her- Face. This Sight 
greatly afFeded rae, aiid I exhorted them 
to bear up with Patience-, they liftened 
to me very attentively, but when I had 
finilhed, fhook their Heads, and declared 
they could not furvive her, but fdon added, 
they hoped Religion would have the fame 
EfFedl on thcra^ as on their exalted 
Daughter. 
When Mr. Trainwell came down he In- 
formed us, he never faw fuch an In« 
ftahce of Piety and Refignation, as in Lady 
Friendly^ who now defired to fee us ; upon 
entering the Room, fhe faintly called us.j 
and when we were feated near her, I am 
E z now. 
' 88 LETTERS BETWEEN 
now, I thank God, entirely prepared for 
Death, and I hope, my dear Parents, that 
Time and the divine Affiftance, will ena- 
ble you to fupport my Liofs. If I had 
lived and enjoyed many Years of Health, 
with other Bleflings, yet at laft the Scene 
' mufl: change, and our Parting would only 
have been deferred, I look forward with 
Joy to my approaching Diflblution, a 
Period, which all muft experience, when 
every Thing but a felf-approving Con- 
fcience is infignificant and of no Avail! 
^ What a Satisfaction, that I have fecured 
that pleafmg Refledion! You, my be- 
loved Parents, were not difcoiiraged by 
the Infinuations of a gay, unthinking 
World, who reprcfented your Attention 
to religious, and , moral Duties, as Pre- 
tence and afFedled Singularity. You in- 
ftilled into my Mind the Precepts of di- 
vine Truth, and ftrengthened and con- 
firmed them by your Practice. We have 
not 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. . 89 
not been diverted from the Purfuance of 
a regular, uniform Life. 
Let us thank that gracious Power, which 
has permitted me the Enjoyment of my 
Senfes, and allowed me Time to perform 
my laft Duties. Ah ! dear Mother, con- 
tinued (he, feeing the old Lady's Struggles 
to conceal her Affliction, do not diftrefs 
me! I cannot bear to fee you iineafy, 
without feeling a Regret to leave you, 
and I ought not now to fuffer any Thing 
to weaken my Defire of enjoying a more 
perfedk State. I (hall alfo meet again my 
dear Hu(band ! 
The Phyficians begged her to compo{e 
herfelf, but (he anfwered, 'Tis too late — 
'Tis almoft over 1 (hall foon be hap- 
py One dear Embrace and then 
She then held out her trembling Hand 
to me, and^ I embraced her with the ut- 
E 3 moft 
90 LETTERS between 
moft Tcndcrnefe, and Grief. Then her 
poor Father caught and ftrained her in his 
Arms ; after which Mrs. Goodwill clafped 
her in her's, and the dear Creature lifting 
up her Hands and Eyes, cryed, Adieu ! 
my loved Parents 1 am now, I thank 
God, almoft She thlt Inftant expired. 
1 cannot attempt to defcribe the poor 
old People's Tranfports of Sorrow. Mrs. 
Goodwill^ in whofe Arms (he breathed her 
laft, after gazing at her fomc Time in 
Ipeechlefs Agony, fainted. But, waving 
the Information of every Particular, I 
Ihall only add, that I flayed till Night, 
when an Uncle of the deceafed Lady 
came over to take Care of the Funeral, 
judging the unhappy Parerlts would be 
incapable of ordering any Thing, 
He had hoped to have arrived before 
her Deceafe, but the Diftance, which was 
twenty Miles, >prevented him. One of 
the 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 91 
the Phyficians who had wrote to acquaint 
him with the tragical Accident, now in- 
formed him of his Relation's Death. As 
I found. any longer Stay not neceflary, I 
took my Leave of the aiBifted Parents^- 
(who were unwilling to part from me) 
and returned Home, where I filled every 
one with Grief at the Account of. Lady 
Friendly sDtuK 
r will now mention Mr. Sydney, whom 
I have feen two or three Times fince I 
wrote laft, and he always appeared me- 
lancholy and thoughtful You may laugh 
as much as you pleafe, my dear, but his 
Timidity and modeft Behaviour have 
gained my AfFeftions more abfolutely than 
an aflured Carriage. If, as you tell me,, 
he cannot acquire fufficient Refolution to 
^ak to me, I muft be ever miferable, for 
I cannot love any otlier. 
E 4 He 
92 LETTERS between 
He called this Morning to condole with 
me on the Lofs of my truly valuable Friend 
His Stay was ftiort, and the Difcourfe turn- 
ed wholly on the melancholy Accident. 
What am I to conclude from his Be- 
haviour ? I iear I fhall never be fo happy 
as to receive his Addrefles ; or, if he c?n 
prevail on himfelf to confefs a Regard, 
that my Papa and Mamma would not like 
him for my Lover, though they efteem him 
as a Friend ; and dear as he is to me, I will 
never marry him without their Confent. 
But alas t I am uncertain whether he loves 
me. Was I aflured of that from^ his own 
Corifeffion, I fhould not defpair of my 
Parents Confirmation of our Happniefs. 
I muft now, my dear Harriet^ intreat 
you'll not be difpleafed, when I blame 
your late Behaviour to Mr. Lovewell, who 
muft have rendered you completely happy. 
You 
\ 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 95 
You take uncommon Pains to convince 
the World, you are infenfible to Merit. 
Surely you muft be very deeply concerned, 
though your Pride forbids you to own 
yourfelf fufceptiWe of the tender Paflion. 
I applaud your Mamma for infifting on. 
Sir George^ refraining his Vifits. Your 
Reafon muft be convinced of her prudent 
Care, though your Defire of attradling 
general Admiration, aiid particular Re- 
gard, influences you to be diffatisfied with 
a Command that deprives you of one 
Conqueft. How unjuft are you, m^Har^ 
riet ! You delight in giving Pain, but you 
cannot bear to receive it. 
Believe me there muft be more reaE 
Pleafure in difpenfing Happinefs to the 
truly deferving, than in encouraging thc: 
Addrefles of a thoufand Fops, whofe Vanity 
makes them willingly imagine every Wo- 
man who liftens to, is in Love with tliem.. 
E 5. . Qk!! 
94 LETTERS between 
Oh! my dear, how cheap do you render 
yourfelf by this unbounded Licenfc! Con- 
fider the many Advantages which muft 
have accrued from a Marriage with Mr. 
Lovewelly and let the Refult bQ a De- 
termination to avoid giving your Mamma 
any farther Caufe of Complaint. . My l^i- 
rits are fo extremely afFeded by the me- 
lancholy Event, and I am fo much fatigued^ 
not having flept thefe two Nights, that 
I caa hardly hold my Pen to fubfcribe 
myfelf, 
Dear Harriet, 
mod feithfully your*s, 
EMILIA. 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. gs 
LETTER IX. 
Harriet to Emilia. 
INDEED, my dcarefl: Emilia^ y,Qur Ac- 
count of Lady friendifs Death occa- 
fioned me very great Concern ; and I fin- 
cerely pity poor Ms, and Mrs. Goodwilt^ 
whofe Grief Time alone can efface. 
Now to the faucy Part of your Letter^ 
Sincerely, Child, you muft imagine me the 
belt tempered Perfon in the World, and 
I certainly am foj or I could not bear fuch 
a Torrent of Reproaches* However, I 
deferve them all, for Sir George is utterly 
unworthy my good Opinion. He is ad 
vile a Wretch as lives. 
I told you in my laft, that Laurinda 
had fomething to acquaint me with. Poor 
Creature ! no wonder Ihe coloured when 
(he 
96 LETTERS between 
fhe beheld in him the cruel Betrayer of 
her Innocence! But I will keep you no 
longer in Sufpence. 
As foon as I entered the Room, (he 
began thus. That you may not be ig- 
norant of the Unworthinefs of a Perfon 
who pretends an honourable Paflion for 
you, I will acquaint you, deareft Madam, 
with a Secret, which I never intended to 
divulge, and would have concealed par- 
ticularly from you, whofe Friendfhip and 
Efteem I am defirous of cultivating. But 
the Regard I feel for you, forbids my 
Silence in a Matter of fuch Importance. 
You will, I fear, defpife, when you know 
more of me. I dread to tell you, what 
I blufli to think of, but your Peace de* 
mands the Confidence. 
I am the only Child of a Tradefman 
in Paris, who acquired grpat Riches by 
his Bufmefs. My Mother and he were 
fa 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 97 
fo doatingly fond of me, that they in- 
dulged me in every thing. I was no 
more than Sixteen, when my Father told 
me, an Offer very advantageous for me 
had been made him, which, if agreeable 
to me, .he fliould accept. My boundlefe 
Vanity, which had been raifed and kept 
up by Flattery,' rriade me receive this 
Propofal with Difguft, when he acquainted 
me, it was a Perfon in Bufinels, who was 
fo much charmed with me. I aflured my 
Father, I fhould be nfiiferableif I engaged 
fo early in Life, and gave fuch plaufiWe 
Reafons for what in Reality was only an 
Antipathy to the Man's Station, that he 
defifted, and I heard no more of the Affair. 
Soon after, being at an Aflembly, I 
firft faw Sir George Townly. You ftart, 
Madam ! but it is really true, that he is 
the cruel caufe of all my Misfortunes. I 
gained Information of his Rank, which 
with his agreeable Perfon, and the Mag- 
nificence 
pS LETTERS between 
nificence of his Appearance, captivated my 
foolifti Heart. I was happy in his par- 
ticular Obfervation of me. He offered mc 
his Hand for the Dance, and minded no 
one elfe, during the whole Evening. 
From that Time he vifitcd me conftantly, 
and every Day feemed to bring with it 
an Incneafe of Tenderncfs* 
My Father and Mother in vain dif- 
fuadcd me from encour^ng his Addreffes; 
they then intreated I would at lead find out 
whether his Defigns were honourable, 
before I yielded to the Inclination I felt 
for him. I made a promife to interrogate 
him, but I was fome time before I could 
perform it. At laft, I aflumcd Courage. 
You have often told me, Sir George^ faid I, 
that you love me paffionately ; give me 
Leave to alk what you mean by thefe Pro- 
feflions? If you think me worthy to be- 
your Wife, I (hall receive the Honour as 
becomes me, and endeavour to defcrve it ; 
' but 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. gg 
but if, on the contrary, your Addrcfles are 
made with defign to betray me, I muft de- 
fire you will vifit me no more; for Virtue 
is infinitely dearer to me than Life, nor 
will r confent to facrifice it. 
Sir George was fo difconcerted at this un- 
expecSted^ Harartgue, that I began to fear 
my Parents Goiijeftures were too well 
founded. However, he was fa great a 
Mafter of the art of Diffimulation, that 
he prefently recovered his Confufion, and 
replyed, My Defigns, beautiful Laufind^:, 
are to make you mine by the Laws of God 
and Mauj and I only wait for an Arttwer 
to a Letter I fent to England^ to put them 
in Execution. I' acquainted my dear 
Parents with what he faid, who were as 
eafily deceived as myfelf. For more than 
a Week, he kept up the flattering Ex- 
pedtation. But why do I dwell on thefe 
Paflages } I now haften to the dreadful 
Moment of my greateft Misfortune. 
My 
loo LETTERS between 
My Father and Mother went to pay an 
annual Vifit to a Brother of the former, 
with whom they were to ftay all Night. A 
trifling Indifpofition prevented my accom- 
panying them. In the Afternoon I found 
myfelf better, but an unufual Hcavinefs 
feized me. As I thought Sir George ima- 
gined me gone to my Uncle's, I did not 
wonder at his not vifiting me. I fupped 
early, and went to Bed, and though my 
Mind was greatly agitated, I (bon fell 
afleep. Alas! I awaked not, till too late 
for the Prefervation of my Honour ! 
How, dear Madam, (hall I defcribe 
my Agony at the Sight of Sir George 
^ownly ? You may judge my Diftrefs to 
find all his Vows falfified, and my Shame 
compleated. I fcreamed for Help, but 
in vain. The Servant, who only could 
have aflfifted, had betrayed me. Sir George 
endeavoured to pacify me. He pretended 
it: 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. loi 
it was the Violence of his Paffion, that 
had induced him to take this Advantage. 
Ceafe, anfwered I, to mention Love, which 
can never be the Motive of fuch bafe 
Adtions. A re^l Paflion feeks the Hap- 
pinefs of its Objeft, but you have entirely 
. deftroyed mine. My Sighs and Tears pre- 
vented any farther Utterance, and he ufed 
fo many endearing Expreffions, that my 
Rage fubfided. I forgave him, and* be- 
came at laft by his Sedudions, as guilty 
as I was miferable. Do I live to repeat 
my Weaknefs ? Before this fatal Conceflion, 
' the Integrity of my Heart would have 
fomewhat confbled me, but I was inca- 
pable of Refleftion. The irreparable In- 
jury he had done me, made me confider 
myfelf an abandoned Creature,' and I yield- 
ed as one whofe Mifery could not be in- 
creafed. Oh ! Madam, if the Purity of 
your Soul can fufFer you to condefcend 
for one Moment, to paint to yourfelf the 
Horror of my Situation, howmuft it fhock 
your 
loa LETTERS between 
your gentle Difpofition ! I was at once 
fallen from that Virtue, which, till I knew 
Sir GeorgCy had been ever the ruling Prin- 
ciple of my Adtions. With what Face 
could I look up to my dear injured Parents, 
whofe Confidence I had abufed ? How could 
I addrefs the Divine Author of my Being, 
after the dreadful Forgetfulnefe of what 
I owed to him and myfelf ? 
Sir George left me before Day, and I 
endeavoured to compofe myfelf,. but my 
Looks had fomething of Wildnefs in them. 
On my Parents Return, they prefled me 
to tell what ailed me, as they imagined 
my Uneafmefe proceeded from violentPains. 
I fupported their Miftake. Alas ! I foon 
found myfejf more wretched than I at firft 
apprehended! Too foon alfo was I con- 
vinced Sir George intended not to do me 
Jtuftice, for he in a fliort Time entirely 
refrained his Vifits. My Parents alked 
me the Reafon. I told them he had re- 
ceived 
EMIUA AND HARRIET. 105 
sceived Letters from England^ which forbad 
his Marriage with me, and that we had 
parted by Confent. They blamed hirn for 
not confulting his Friends, before he en- 
deavoured to engage my Affedions, and 
advifed me to forget him. 
Under the Made of Indifpofition I con- 
cealed the Agonies of my Heart, but was 
all the Time devifing. Means to make my 
Efcape. I was informed by Accident, that 
Sir George had entered himfelf a Paflenger 
in a Ship, which was ready to fail for 
England. Rage and Grief took Poffeflion 
of my Soul, and I rcfolved to accompany 
him in Difguife, whatever became of me 
afterwards. Accordingly, that Night I dole 
from my Father's Houfe in a Boy's Dreft, 
and in the Morning went to the Shipj and 
begged to be taken in. The Captain at 
firft refufed, telling me the Ship was full> 
but on the Sight of fome Gold, which I 
offered him, acquiefced to my Defire, and 
the 
I04 LETTERS between 
the next Morning we bid adieu to the 
Coaft of France. I kept myfelf conceal- 
ed from Sir George^ till we were near the 
Landing Place at Dover ; then taking him 
afide, I defired him to view me earneftly, 
and know me for an Acquaintance. He 
gazed on me with Surprize, aikl mingled 
Difguft. Well, Madam, faid he, what do 
youexpedl from me? Why did you leave 
your Friends and Country in this Difguife ? 
Cruel Man ! cryed I paflionately, can you | 
demand the Reafon ? Had not you deftroy- 
ed my Honour and Peace of Mind, I had 
ftill been in France^ and enjoyed the Love 
of my Parents. I have left every Friend 
for you ! What will become of me } Ah! 
for Heaven's Sake, if you have any Hu- 
manity, take Care of me, till the expefted 
dreadful Moment is over! I will after- 
wards endeavour not to be troublelome to 
you. He feemed fomewhat concerned, and 
raifmg me (for I had fallen at his Feet) 
with an Appearance of Tenderniefs, pro- 
mifed 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 105 
mifed to grant my Requeft. I had al-^ 
ready made a Proficiency in the Englijh 
Tongue. 'When we landed at D'n;^r he. 
oWiged me to put on Cloaths fuitable to 
my Sex, which he purchafed for me, and 
behaved very kindly to me during our* 
Journey to London, I ventured to prefe 
him with fome Earneftnefs to perform his 
tromife of marrying me, but he forbad ' 
my mentioning it, telling me if I touched 
any farther on that Subjeft, he would 
abandon me for ever, and leave me help- 
lefs in a ftrange Country, I dared to fay 
no more, nor indeed could expe<5t from 
a Man of fo bafe a Principle to receive 
a Retribution of that Sort. 
He placed me in an obfcure Part of 
the Town, paid for my Board, butfeldom 
vifited me. There I was delivered of a 
Boy, who fortunately died foon after it 
was born. How kind was Providence to 
fnatch the dear Infant from a Worl4 of 
Cares, 
io6- LETTERS between 
Cares, to a State of eternal Felicity ! Sir 
G(?crf^ appeared very indifferent about the 
Child, and I faw him but twice during 
my Confinement. 
His cruel Behaviour greatly weakened my 
Affedion, but what an additional Weight 
to my Misfortunes, was his Barbarity af- 
terwards ? He came to fee me, aflumed 
an Appearance of that bewitching Ten- 
dernefs, which had feduced me, and when 
he perceived that I glowed with Pleafurc 
at his Expreffions of Love, which I now 
hoped -was converted into an honourable 
Regard, he mentioned his diabolical In* 
tention. Oh ! Madam, how (hall I repeat 
it ? His Propofals were, either that I ftiould 
live with him as a Miftrefs, or receive 
him and other Company, whom he would 
recommend me to! Cruel Deceit! My 
Amazement and Rage for fome Time pre- 
vented my Anfwer, but when I recover- 
ed the Power of Utterance, Iupbraide<|, 
him 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 107 
Wm in the bittereft Terms, and protefted 
I would ftarve rather than fubmit to hia 
wicked Defigns. The Villain with a Sneer 
defired me to find out fome virtuous Means 
for my Support, adding he would pay 
no longer for my Board. He ftaid not 
for my Reply, but left me with the moft 
cool Indifference. My Spirits, which had 
been greatly agitated, now entirely for- 
fook.me^ and I dropt down in a Swoon. 
How long I remained in this Condition^ 
I know not ; when I recovered, which was 
by the Aflittance of the old Woman with 
whom I lodged, ftie told me, fhe hoped 
1 had fettled foftie Method for my future 
Subfiftence ; adding, that People muft pay 
For what they ufed, or they could not 
texpeiSt Lodgings. 
1 was fo very weak, I could hardly an- 
fwer, that I would trouble her but a ftiort 
Time^ till I could get a Place, fgr I was 
de- 
i 
io8 LETTERS betweeisi 
determined to go to Service. She faid, 
if that was my Intention, (he could re- 
commend me to a Lady of Fortune ; and 
accordingly at my Defire fhe did fo, and 
I'was gracioufly received in a few Days. 
Mrs. Danvers (for that was her Name) 
was ftill young and handfome ; fhe had 
two Daughters and three Nieces, who were 
extremely beautiful. They tried to fur- 
pafs each other in Marks of Fondnefs to 
me, and for fome Days I liked my Si- 
tuation very much. I received many Pre- 
fents from them, artfi they aflured me, if 
I continued with them I need not doubt 
making my Fortune. I blcfled Heaven 
for this happy Change : but alas ! in a 
little Time, I found I was not fituated in 
a defirable Place, for thefe fpecious Ladies 
were in Reality the vileft of their Sex. 
Refolving to make my Efcape from this 
dreadful Houfe, I packed up what Things 
EMIUA AKD HARRIET. 109 
had been mine before I went there, (leaving 
the Ladies Bribes behind me) and one 
Night Hole down Stairs, and without Noife 
efcaped from that dangerous Place. I walk- 
ed very faft, for Fear lent me Strength, « 
and a* (bon as it was Light, I took a 
Lodging, and defired the Landlady to ac- 
commodate me with Work. She com-^ 
pHed, and I plcafcd fo much, that I had 
more than I could have done, had I not 
broke in iipon thofe Hours, generally de^ 
dicated toRepofe. 
Hived in this Manner for Six: Months j 
and as I never carried homfie my Work, 
1 ifeldom ftirred abroad* An old Lady, 
who lodged in the fame Houfc, took no-^ 
tice of my Dfligence, and hearing me fay 
» I fhould like to go to Service, recom- 
mended me to you, as one, whofe Mis- 
fortunes obliged her to have Recourfe to 
f*t!S Way of Life. I (hould have been 
* . F happy 
i 
no LETTERS etweem 
happy with you had not the unexpeded 
Sight of Sir George^ determined me to quit 
a Town and Country he inhabits. I have 
not yet fully conquered my Affection for 
him, but I will make it my ftrift En- 
deavour to expel his unworthy Image from 
my Breafti Would you afltft me in my 
Defign, I would return to France^ and pafs 
the reft of my Life in a Nunnery, for 
I am irefolved never to live again with 
my unhappy Parents whom I have dif- 
graced. 
Can you, Madam, pity a Wretch, whofc 
Crimes juftly render her deteftable to her- 
felf? Can Virtue deign to footh the Afflic- 
tion, which Vice has introduced to thi* 
Bofom, once the Seat of Peace and In- 
nocence? Oh! imitate the Divine Mercy! — 
Her Sobs prevented her adding more, and 
I endeavoured to compofe her Spirits. My 
dear Laurinda^ faid I^ tenderly embf|ki|p 
■% ■ 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. m 
her, a Mind like your'^ muft fuffer on 
the Confideration of a criminal Adlion. 
You find I do not attempt to palliate it ; 
but even the Deity is appeafed by Pe- 
nitence, and furely Nature ought not to 
be lefs forgiving! May that Penitence con- 
tinue to fecure you from any future De- 
viations! 
I was (b moved with her Misfortune 
and Return to Virtue, and fo much obliged 
to her for the Cautions (he had given me, 
that I determined to affift her to the ut- 
luoft of my Power. I made her a Prefent, 
which (hereceived with the utmoft Thank- 
fulnefe ; and my Manuna, on hearing her 
Story, added confidcrably to it. She wept 
for Joy at our Kindnefs, as (lie termed 
it, though certainly we did no more than 
Jufticc demanded for a Perfon fo deferv- 
ing. 
P'z Her. 
ri.2 t£TTERS betweek 
H6r Health^ being fbon perfe£tly rt^ 
eftabliftiedj we enquired for a Ship, and 
entered her aPafle»ger. ' She left us about 
a Weak ago. Our parting was very ten- 
der, for wcr have a fincere-R^ard for ^ch 
other. She promifed to write as fbon aa 
fhe is fettled 
Sir George is not yet returned. I in* 
tend never to fee him again. I always 
fck fo perfe£l an Indiflference for him, 
that his Behaviour gives me no Manner 
of Concern on my own Account; and 
I will own to you Mr. Laveweil ever 
had my highefl Efteem, though I did 
not give raiyfelf Time to exan^pe my 
Sentiments. 
I know you will upbraid me after this 
Confeffion ? but d6n*t,. there's a good Girl^ 
for I am a little uneafy. Not that I love 
him. 
EMILIA AND fHARRIET. 1 13 
him. — No ! my dear, and he has not be- 
haved well 
This is a long Letter, and 1 will lengthen 
it no more than to afiure you, that I am, 
my dear Emilia^ 
Your a^eftioaatc lind obliged 
HARRIET. 
F3 
114 LETTERS between 
L E T T E R X. 
Emilia to Harriet. 
YOUR Letter, my beloved Friend, 
aftoniflied and (hocked me. My Sur- 
prize was greatly inferior to my Concern, 
for I always had ^ bad Opinion of Sir 
George^ though, I now find, a better than 
he deferved. Poor Laurinda ! How I pit^ 
her ? What muft ihe have fufFered ? I re- 
joice at her Perfeverance in refifting the 
Attacks of Vice. 
Happy is (he, who early fees and reforms 
the Errors of her Condudt. I rejoice, that 
the All-gracious Being has enabled her to 
confider properly on the pad. May (he 
fully atone for it, by a future Regularity 
of Behaviour. Her ingenuous Confeffion 
proves the Sincerity of her Repentance, 
■'hat Repentmjce and Sincerity muft ren- 
"'J 
der 
EMIUA AND HARRIET. 1 15 
der her dear to the truly generous and 
benevolent Mind.' They arf^ the only Pre- 
tenders to Virtue, who are inflexible to 
penitent Offenders. Real Goodnefs ia never 
fevere, but delights to perceive a Return 
to Virtue; and indeed, how can we rea- 
fonably expedt Forgivenefs of our own 
Faults, if we refufe it to others ? Let us 
refleft on our frequent Deviations, which 
while they convince us of our Fallibility, 
will prove beneficial to us, both with re- 
gard to our own, and others Condudt. 
Would the wretched Senfualift indurgjs 
fome Moments of Refleftion, furely it 
would be impoflible he (hould purfue a 
Courfe of Life, fatal to himfelf, and which 
involves in his own, the Ruin of many 
unhappy Creatures! Can any Man be fo 
wholly loft to Goodnefs, as to look back 
without Horror and Contrition on the 
dreadful Confequences of a Moment*s Plea- 
fure ? Can he reconcile to himfelf the Se- 
F 4 ^ dudtion 
i 
ii6 LETTERS between 
dudlion,of an innocent Creature, whom 
he has introduced to all the Miferies of 
Guilt, perhaps to Poverty and Contempt ; 
and, what is far more (hocking, of whofe 
eternal Condemnation he is perhaps .jj|c 
firft Occafion ? Can he bear to reflect that 
he has deftroyed ber Happinefs, who fuffcr" 
ed from too good an Opinion of bis Ho- 
nour and Integrity ? To think, that a 
whole Family's Peace, is entirely fecrificcd 
to a criminal Indulgence? The Pleafure 
which is purchafed at the Expence of Vir- 
tue, and Duty, is a poor Equivalent for 
the Lofe of Serenity, which flows fro»i a 
Cpnqioufnefs of acting right ! 
You needed not;, my'dear, be fearful of 
my upbraiding your Behaviour to Mr. 
LoveweJIy as you pwn the Recollcdlion 
gives you fome Concern. I w/7/ fpare you^ 
but muft cjiffent from your Opinion, that 
you fip'vi^r loved hnn. You cannot per- 
fi.. ^ you held him in the higheft 
., *^ Efteem, 
EMILIA A5rD HARRilET. 117 
Efteem^ wkhoiA fcciing fom Degree of 
Love. I do not tell you, this Afffe£lfeift 
had acquired much Strength, for you de- 
tomined not to yield to the Povrar of 
LDve, and would not attend to the Emo- 
tbos of your Be»it . 
1 beg you win perifift in your RrfoJu- 
tuHiof never fceingSirG^(9ffi? again. Sttcfe 
« Wretch oug^t to be tmniflicd fiom So- 
tSety. 
Oh! my dear, I have femethirig to ac- 
quaint you with, which will greatly fur- 
prize you. 1 wrote the firft part of this 
Letter ifome Days ago, and deferred finifh- 
ing k, as I had fome Work in Hafte. I 
know not what wiB be the Event, but 
I have an iiwexpcfted Story to impart. 
My Heart ibmatimes flutters at the Re- 
collcdlibn of the pleafing Eclairciflement, 
then fliudders with Apprehenfion&of a Lola 
F 5 ^ I may 
ii8 LETTERS between 
I may foon experience. But I forget you 
are impatient. 
On Monday I was pleafingly fiirprized 
with the Sight of Mr. Sydney^ who had al- 
ways declined paying us a Vtfit. My Father 
and Mother were at Mr. TrainwelPs. A 
violent Head-ach had prevented ray ac- 
companying them. His Prcfence foon diC- 
pelled it -, and I. was in hopes he would 
now take the Opportunity of fpeaking to 
me ; yet you will laugh when I tell you, I 
as much dreaded, as I wiflied aa Ex- 
planation.. 
I called at Mr. TrainwelTs, Madam, faid 
he with the moft refpedlful Air, where 
I was informed of g^ourlqdiipofition, and 
took the Liberty f f intruding on you^ 
to enquire after ^ur Health ; but this 
was not my only Mptive — Here he Hog- 
pcd. To give him Time fey Recollection, 
and 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 119 
and to avoid (hewing my own Confufion^ 
I thanked him for his kind Vifit, and 
aflured him his Company could be no 
Intrufion, on whatever Account he came» 
Ah ! Madam^ anfwered he^ you are ig- 
norant of my audacious hopes. I have 
prefiimed — — He hefitated again, but at 
laft proceeded, pardon, dear Madam, the 
Effcdts of a moft fmcere Paffion, which 
I intended never to difclofe ; but the Re- 
folution I have taken of leaving England^ 
makes me unwilling to carry the Secret 
with me. 
I have long loved yoUj with the moft 
pure difinterefted AfFedion ; but the known 
Difparity of our Fortunes, occafioned me 
to form a Refolution of avoiding your 
Prefence. 
How dear has it coft me to preferve 
it fo long! In my prefcnt Circumftances,, 
I wifli not to call .you mine j byt may I 
# noc 
{ 
120 LETTERS between 
not hope for your Approbation, if I caa 
gain a Fortune adequate to yours ? I felt 
fuch a pleafmg, yet embarrafling Emo- 
tion, I was fomc time before I could 
make this Anfwer, Your Fear of my 
Difpleafure, Sir, is ill-founded. I have no 
Reafott to be offended with fo generous 
a Re^rd as you profefs. On the con- 
trary, I will confefs, that if a Union with 
yoi| is agreeable to my Papa and Mamma, 
you will meet with no Oppofition on my 
Part. You find, Mr. Sydney^ I don't at- 
tempt to difguife my Sentiments. Let - 
Prudes blufla to own a well-placed Af- 
fe6tion, and Coquets delight to trifle with 
^ worthy Heart : no fuch Examples ftiali 
influence me. Your known Merit fanc- 
tifies my Choice, and I think myfelf hap- 
py in being diftinguiflied by a Perfon of 
your Chara<Ster. 
Ah! Madam, replied he, v^at a dge 
lightfulConfeffipn is this ! — But alaisl^BW 
w dafcs 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 121 
s 
dares a Wretch, whofe fole Dependence 
is on another's Bounty, prefume to ex- 
pedt fuch a Blefling as your Love ? I go. 
Madam, to-niorrow for London^ and from 
thence to 'fome Port, where I will em- 
bark for the Weft'Indics in the firft Ship. 
My Brother is advantageoufly fettled there. 
By his^ Means, I may ^xped in z (hart 
Time to acquire a Fortune, which may 
render my Offer agrecaibie to your Pa- 
rents. Suffer me to hope you wiH not 
forget, that the future Happinefs of my 
Life depends on your being mine, 
AfTure yourfelf, anfweredl, thatiwtfiTng 
fhall efface from my Heart, the Regard 
'I have for you ; and if I am not yaurs, i 
nevel: will be another's. How you re- 
vive mc ! refumed he ; but I muft now 
leave you. — Oh ! what will; beconie of nae^ 
if I never fee you more } Perhaps I may 
not meet with the expefted Succefs, and 
then you will never fee me again. You 
* (hall 
122 LETTERS BETWEEN 
(hall hear of rAy Mifery, but I cannot 
return unlefs I am fortunate. 
Why, Mr. Sydney^ faid I, do you caft 
a Gloom over fo pleafing a Profped? 
Think not I will fufFer you to fpend the 
Remainder of your Days, far from your 
native Country. My Fortune is fufficient 
for bothi and I doubt not my Parents 
Confent, when they are acquainted with 
our mutual AfFe6tion. Can they, ought 
they, to approve your marrying a Beggar ? 
anfwered he. No ! my dear Emilia^ I will 
not even make fuch a Propofal. Only 
preferve me in your Remembrance, and 
let us hope for better Times. Acquaint 
your Papa and Mamma with our Love, 
who will permit you to wait the Event 
of my Voyage. Farewell! Our Hearts were 
too much affedted to add more. He de- 
parted, leaving me almoft drowned in 
Tears. I fat like one ftupified, when mj 
Father and Mother entered the Room. 1 
jhea 
EMIUA AND HARRIET. 123 
then haftily attempted to wipe away the 
Appearances of Sorrow, but their pene- 
trating Eyes perceived my Uneafinefs, and 
with the utmoft Tendernefs, they defrred 
to know if I was worfe than when they 
left me. To eafe their Fears, I acquaint- 
ed them with every Particular, and per- 
ceived with Pleafure they were aflfedted 
as I wilhed. When I had ended. Be com- 
fortcd, my Child, faid my kind Father -, 
fmce you really love Mr. Sydney^ whofe 
Merit I am convinced of, his Want of 
Fortune (hall be no Objedion. I abhor 
any mercenary Views. I confult only your 
Happinefs, and think you the befV Judge 
what will moft contribute ta it. Tb- 
morrow Morning early I will wait on old 
Mr. Sydney^ when I can talk with him, 
and fee the young Gentleman, whofe Voy- 
age I (hall certainly prevent. 
What a Tranfition, my dear, from rack- 
ing Grief to exce(rive Joy! I couU^'hot 
fug^oft 
124 LETTERS between 
fupport it, but funk down in a Swoon, 
from which however I foon recovered, 
when my Mother infifted on my :going to 
Bed. 
The next Morning my Fafther waited 
on old Mr. Sydney^ who told him on.afk- 
I for his Nephew, and mentioning the 
^'-'"ount on which he went, that, Mr. 
i*/»gr was that Morning gone poft to 
Ijondon^ and that on the Morrow he in* 
tended fettiQg Giil in a Ship then ilatioa* 
cdat*** 
<I am muf^ concerned; anfwercd my 
Father,, as ) find a Letter cannot reach 
him befor^ he leaves England \ but I beg^ 
Sk^^tJ^*^>'$^^"^^ y^^ hear from \uvsk 
yovi^AvilL^quiint me, for I will write to 
hxniym^ erftreat his Return. 
/'I waited impatiently the Refult of this 
Vifitj^ and could not help burfting into 
Tearsj^ 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 1 25 
Tears, when I found Mr. Sydney was gone; 
My Father foon calmed my Uneafinefg, 
by an Afliirance of writing when he knew 
where my Lover was arrived. 
This is my Situation. I know not what 
will become of the dear Objeft of my 
: tendered Regard. But I hope the Deity 
will preferve, . and bring him back to his 
native Country. 
I muft now inform you that Lady 
Frimdly has ieft me her Watch, feveral 
Jewels, and many valuable Books. I am 
in Mourning for her, to fhew my real 
Regard, as well as a Senfe of the Fa- 
vours fee has conferred on me. I often 
vifit Mr. and Mrs. GoodwiJi^^ and by mix- 
ing my Tears with theirs, ' render my- 
felf very dear to thenL They will Con- 
tinue to be our Neighbours, as the\de- 
ceafed Lady left them the Houfe, Furni- 
ture, 
'^k.^ 
iz6 LETTERS between 
ture, &e. Amongft othei; Papers, I foiind 
an Ode to Charity, wrote by her fome 
time fince, a Copy of which I have leave 
to inclofe. 
I muft renew that SubjedV, which al- 
xnoft wholly engrofles my Thoughts. But 
it is only to entreat your Prayers for the 
Happincfs of 
Your faithfully affedtionate 
EMILIA. 
Inclofed in the foregoing. 
An ODE to CHARITY. 
Hail ! Heav^'n-defcended Charity ! 
Thou Source of conftant Joy ? 
Our higheft Pleafure flows from thee ; 
T'impart is to enjoy ] 
Can 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 127 
Ilan founding Titles, glitt'ring State, 
Can all the Boaft of Art, 
Contribute aljught to fwceten Fate, 
Without a feeling Heart ? 
The ftately Caftle's ample Round, 
May catch the wond'ring Sight j . 
The giddy Mind is pleas'd with Sound, 
But taftes no p.ure Delight. 
^or Pleafure's Lure, nor idle Noife, 
Can fatisfy the Mind ; 
The Soul afpires to nobler Joys, 
. To Tranfports more refin'd I 
joldis itfelf a fhining Toyj 
But rightly undcrftood, 
'onveys the moft exalted Joy, 
The Pow'r of doing Good. 
The Cheek that emulates the Rofe, 
Muft wither and decay ; 
Vhilft Charity a Wreath beftows 
That ne'er can fade away. 
The 
ia8 LETTERS between 
The meek-eyed Seraph (buns the Sound 
Of popular Acclaim ; 
The tainted Gale but wafts around 
An empty, joykfe Panic! 
To fome the Dread of Cenfure lends 
A Gleam of borrowed Ray j 
The Hand to Charity extends. 
The Heart difowna her Sway. 
Specious Pretence ! delufive Source ! 
How void of true Delight! 
How void of Virtue's genuine Force, 
And Rea(bn*s facred Light! 
Tho* ev*n Ingratitude (hould dwell. 
In fome ungen'rous Mind ; 
Shall Charity no more impel. 
To Adkions juft and kind ? 
She, like the Sun ferenely bright. 
Maintains a fteady Courfe; 
Breaks thro the Clouds that veil her Light, 
And beams with added Force. 
Tho' 
EMttJA AND HARRIET. 129 
Tho' Man forgets, yet God regards. 
The Sympathy benign ; 
And with eternal Blifs rewards 
The laudable Defign. 
Seek not, ye Vain, on lading Bafe 
To build inglorious Fame; ; 
Say, can ye wifli, Oh ! trifling Race ! 
T' immortalize your Shame ? 
But ye, who would be truly great, 
From Varro^^ gen'rous MincfA 
Learn to defpife the Forms of State, 
Like him, to blefs Mankind. 
From Virtue's {adly-drooping Eye 
To wipe the ftealing Tear ; 
To footh the burfting Heart-drawn Sigh, 
Is Happinefs fincere! 
Ye, who with Pow'r lefs amply bleft, 
Th' enlarged Sphere to fill j 
Know, Charity is ftill pofleft, 
Tho' centred in the Will 
Fortune's 
130 LETTERS BETWEEN 
'V'ortune's uncertain Gifts may fail. 
Yet blame not Heav'n's Decree ; 
To melt at Sorrow's plaintive Tale, 
Is real Charity. 
EMIUA AND HARRIET. 131 
...... .(v 
Harriet to Emilia. 
YO U have my earneft Prayers, my 
dear, for your happy Union with 
Mr. Sydneyy and I rejoice at your, agree- 
able Profpedt; for as your Parents ap- 
prove the Man, you have no Occafion 
for Difquietude. Prithee, Child, do 'not 
vex without Reafon, while your Harriet^ 
unpitied, lofes all her Lovers. 
I fuppofe I am at laft doomed to lead 
Apes, but I cannot be uneafy. Men are 
but Monkies, and they will not be kd. 
Am I not of a moft happy Difpofition ? 
I can find fbme alleviating Circumflance 
in the moft unpropitious Situation, whilft 
you, with every favourable Appearance, 
pine for a (hort Abfericc. Why, Child, 
'tis fuch as you who make the Men think 
they 
{ 
132 LETTERS between 
t%ey are Beings of Conrequence, and after- 
wards you will be furprized at their af- 
fuming an Authority. For Shame, keep 
up the Dignity of the female Chara6ter.--i 
Now for Fafts. 
Sir George called Yefterday in the After- 
noon. .My Mother received him, and on 
his enquiring for me, told him I was not 
at Leiture, and had defired her ti) acquaint 
him, his Vifits were not agreeable. 
He changed Colour, and demanded the 
Reafon of this extraordinary Proceeding* 
Without entering into Particulars, replied 
my dear Mamma, I muft teH you Sfr George^ 
I never approved your vifitingmy Daugh- 
ter*; and an Ai&ir we were lately acquatnt- 
cd with, makes? us think your Company a 
Diferedit. Think of Laurmda^ Sir^ and 
wonder not at ouf Behaviour. He ftbod 
immoveable fome Time^ but at laft retired 
Without uttering a Word.' 
. I nnift 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 133 
I muft own to you, that I felt the 
highcft Satisfadtion arife from the Rc- 
fledtion of having performed my ^ Duty. 
Now you will fay, Why was you £b long 
blind to it? To this I anfwer, I was un- 
willing to fee any Faults in a Perfon, 
Avhofe Rank and Fortune made me proud 
of his Addrefles, though I defpifed the- 
Man. I muft have Time to be perfedt. 
Leave me to the Workings of my own 
Mind. One Step to Amendment is a 
Confeffion of our Errors. Whether I 
(hall advance after my ingenuous Ac- 
knowledgement, I cannot pretend to. Be 
certain, 
1 thank you for fparing me on LovewelFs 
Account ; but to tell me, I was or am in 
Love with him, is an infupportable Af- 
fertion. Becauie you are filly, you would 
perfuade me into the fame Folly ; but I 
^m and have been fuperior to fuch Weak- 
neis. 
G My 
K 
i 
134 letters; Between 
My Concern for his Lofs, (for I will 
confefs I think it fo) only proceeds, I 
believe, from mortified Vanity. To have 
a Lover flip his Chain, and run wild, till 
lie is caught by more powerful Attradlions 
'tis provoking, Emilia! This is my 
Caufe for Vexation. I defy Cupidy and 
all his Artillery. 
I Yefterday received a Letter from my 
dear Laurinduy which I inclofe a Copy of. 
I have anfwercd it, wiflied her Health 
and Happincfe in her prefent Situation, 
^nd added, I doubted not but flie was for- 
given by the Almighty, as her Repentance 
was really followed by Amendment of 
Life. 
My Mammia is not To complainant as you 
are; ftie frequently upbraids me for my 
Condud to Mr. Lovewelly though to do 
her Juftice, it is, I believe, only when I tell 
her I am quite indifferent about him 
(which 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. ^ 135 
(which by the bye, is not confiftent with 
Truth.) I thank you for the Ode, which I 
am much pleafed with. Lady Friendfy had 
certainly an excellent Heart. , ^^ 
Mifs Flareit was here this Morning, 
and has defired me to dine with her to- , 
morrow. I told her of Sir George's Vil- 
Jainy, which fhe feemed not to believe, 
iaying I was certainly deceived by the Girl, 
who only wanted Money to enter into 
a Way of Life more fuitaWe to h^ DiC- 
.pofition. She then launched out in Sir 
George's Praife, told me I was very in- 
fenfible, and (he wondered at my Be- 
haviour to him. I anfwered very gri^ely, 
that I was furprized at her Defenc^ of Sir 
George \ that I was certain I had not beai 
impofcd upon by Lawinda^ whom he h^ 
treated with fo much Inhumanity, I Se- 
tefled him. I added, that he had never 
arfy Share of my Efteem, though his Ad- 
dreCes pleafed my Vanity j but that I was 
G 2 now 
.^ 136 LETTERS BETWEEN 
now as much convinced of my own Folly, 
as his Bafenefs. 
The poor Girl was frightened, and 
begged my Pardon. I believe (he thought 
I liked him, which made her fay fb much. 
How greatly was (he miftaken ! I always 
had too juft an Opinion of Mr. Lovewell, 
not to diftinguilh his Superiority. I know 
I condemn myfelf, but he was yj jealous, 
^ I could not help delighting to teaze him 
'Twas unjuftifiable, you'll fay. I don'i 
defend my Behaviour, therefore (pare youi 
Comments. 
I hope foon to be informed of Mr 
Sydney s Return. Be aflTured you have noi 
a Friend more unfeignedly your*s than 
HARRIET 
EMIUA AND HARRIET. 137 
LETT E R XII. 
Inclofed in the foregoing. 
Dear Madam, 
YOUR Goodnefs emboldens me to 
take the Liberty of actjuainting you 
with my Affairs, and I am certain you will 
feel the tendereft Compaflion for my Suf- 
ferings. 
I landed after a pleaiant Voyage at 
Calaisy from whence I hired a Poft Chaife- 
to Parisy and went dircdtly to an .old 
Gentleman, who had always profeffed a 
great. Regard for mt. 
He was amazed to fee me, and faid, 
he doubted but I had been feduced by 
Sir Georgt Townly, What Milchiefs, Child^ 
continued he,, has your Behaviour caufed! 
G 3 Your 
I 
138 LETTERS BETWEEN 
Your poor Mother, unable to hear any 
News of you, died a few Months after 
your;^Departure, and your unhappy Father, 
has been confined to his Bed fmce the 
Time of her Deceafe. 
Alas? Sir, cryed I, burflinginto Tears, 
how dreadful is this InforniatioH ! For Hea- 
ven's Sake, let me fee my dear Father, 
and receive his Forgivenefe. Perhaps 1ic 
now breathes his laft, and accufes me oi 
fhortening his Life. Ah ! if he was Ccn- 
fible of my Sufferings, and afTured of 
my Return to Virtue, he certainly would 
pity aiid forgive me. 
s The old Gentleman kindly undertook 
to prepare my Father for an Interview, 
and fbon returning, told me, the dear 
Parent longed to embrace me before he 
died. On my entering the Room, he 
flarted up in his Bed, and catching me 
in his Arms, Ah! my dear Child^ faid 
he, 
EME.IA AND HARRIET. 139 
s 
he, art thou come to clofe my iEyes? 
But why didft thou not acquaint me with 
thy Misfortunes? Could'fl thou imagine 
me fuch a Barbarian as not to receive 
thee after an unfeigned Repentance ? P^lzsl 
continued he, had you not gone, your 
Mother might ftill have been alive ! But 
why do I add to your Afflidion ! 
What was my Diftrefs at this (hocking 
Scene? I cannot defcribe it particularly. 
When I acquainted him with my Mis- 
fortunes, my poor Father wept fo heartily 
I was obliged to flop feveral Times. I 
was in Hopes he would have contmued 
. to amend as he did the firft Day, but 
alas ! the Surprize was too powerful for 
his weak Frame to (upport, and he expired 
in my Arms, the fourth ^ Day after my 
Arrival. As (bon as his Funeral was over 
I entered into a Nunnery, where I intend 
to devote the Remainder of my Life to 
God. 
G4 Oh! 
4^p . LETTERS BETWEEN 
Oh ! Madam, what dreadful EffecSts has 
my Conduct produced ? The Death of both 
my Parents. Shockmg Thought! What 
will become of me? I hope. God will ac- 
cept my fincere Repentance, and look on 
me with an Eye of Mercy. 
I can add no more, than to entreat you 
and your good Mama will accept my fin- 
cere Acknowledgements. I moft earneftly 
swifli it was in my Power to make a more 
fuitable Return for the Favours both have 
conferred on 
The truly penitent and grateful 
LAURINDA. 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 141 
LETTER XIIL 
Emilia to Harriet:. 
I Have fb perfect an Aflurance of my 
dcareft Harriet's Regard for me, that 
I am fure fhe will rejoice at the Contents- 
of this Letter. My lafl: acquainted you 
with my AflBiAion for Mr. Sydney's De- 
parture i this will contain the pleafing Ac- 
count of his Return, and that at a Day is 
fixed for our Nuptials. I can hardly be- 
lieve the delightful Change to be real. From 
the Depth of Defpair, I am now raifed to 
the Height of human Felicity. How 
thankful am : I to the divine Author of 
ray ftappiniefs I 
On my Return from Mifs ^rainwelTs, 
the Evening I difpatched my Letter to. 
you, my Father met me at Ihe Door 
with aimiling Countenance, Come, my 
G 5 ' dear 
142 LETTERS between 
dear Child, faid he, I have fomething to 
impart which will give you Pleafure ; old 
Mr. Sydney has fent this Letter, and a 
Meffage informing me, that his Nephew 
is on his Return ; but I will not anticipate 
the Satisfadtion you will receive from the 
young Gentleman's Account. With pleat 
ing Hafte I broke open the Letter, which 
contained thefe Words. 
** Deareft Madam, 
" If any Thing can reconcile me to the 
** Death of an only Brother, it is- the 
** pleafmg Hope I now entert^n of making 
** you mine for ^ver. This delightful Pro- 
" ipeft enables me to fiipport the Lofs of 
" one, from whom, though he was per- 
/* ibnally a Stranger to me, I have always 
" received the higheft Teftimonies of Af- 
" fedtion in his Letters. 
" Judge then, dear Madam, what I felt, 
^\ when arriving at the Port, I found a 
" Letter 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 143 
*^ Letter to acquaint me that my Brother 
** was dead, and had left me above thirty 
" thoufand Pounds in Money and Eflfeds, 
** which were embarked in a Ship, the 
" Captain of which had been anjntimate 
" Friend of my Brotlier. 
** I cannot deferibe the different Emoti- 
" ons that aflailed me ! I was deprived of 
" a dear Relation, whom I hoped in a few 
** Weeks to have embraced ; but on the 
*^ other Hand, I found myfelf in a Si- 
" tuation to hope for the Pbfleflion of my 
** Emilia^ without being fiifpeded of any 
** lucrative Views. Oh ! the extatic 
** Thou^t ! This alone makes me ceafe to 
** lament the Death of an only Brother.. 
^* Believe me, dearefl Madiam, it was not 
^ your Beauty, but the Swcetnefs of your 
** Difpofition, and the amiable Qualities 
« of your Mind, that captivated my Heart. 
" Founded 
144 LETTERS between 
^* Founded on this Bafis, Love will ever 
** remain unfliaken. 1 (hall (lay no 
*^ longer in Town, than to fettle my Af- 
" fairs, for I wait with Impatience to alTure 
"you in Perfon how much I am, dear 
" Madam, 
" Your faithfully devoted 
'' HENRY SYDNEY." 
My Joy was too great for ExpreflTion. 
My dear Parents participated in it, and we 
all returned Thanks to Providence for this 
happy Change of Affairs. His great Ac- 
quifition gave me no other Pleafure, than 
as it prevented my Friends being blamed 
for confenting to our Union, and as I 
knew he felt a high Satisfaction in proving^ 
his difinterefted R^ard. 
I cxpefted him in a few Days ; biit on 
the Evening of the Day after I received 
his 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 145 
his Letter, I faw, him enter the Court- 
Yard. What a pleafmg Surprize! He 
entered the Room, paid his Compliments 
to my Parents, then embraced me, while 
our Tranfports at this Meeting were too 
great for Utterance. 
When our firft Emotions were over, 
my Father mentioned the Lofs of his Bro- 
ther, at the fame Time, that he con- 
gratulated hirn on his Acceffion of For- 
tune. I ought. Sir, faid Mr: Sydney^ to 
have acquainted you before I went, with 
my Reafons for quitting this Country, but 
I was willing to render my Circumftances 
more fuitable to your Fortune, before I 
foUicited your Confent to my Happinefs. 
I ftiould not have fpoke to this Lady, had 
I not feared to lofe her in my Abfence, 
if I did not fecure a Place in her Affe<5tions. 
When I rcftedl that by the Death of my 
neareft Relation, I gain fo ineftimable a 
Prize, I muft confefs my Joy furpafles 
" my 
1 
146 LETTERS BETWEEN 
my Concern ; but I hope this is cxcufable, 
as I never had an Opportunity of a per- 
(bnal Knowledge of him. 
Moft certainly, Sir, anfwered my Father. 
Believe me when I aflure you, there needed 
not a Fortune to render you agreeable to 
me for a Son. Your Merit is fufficient 
Recommendation. 
My Uncle has informed me. Sir, replied 
the amiable Youth, of my Obligations to^ 
you ; but though your Goodnefs made 
you overlook my Deficiency of Fortune^, 
the fincere Regard I felt for your Daugh- 
ter, would not have permitted me to ac- 
cept the kind Propofal; but now every 
Obftacle is removed^ and. I hope fbon to 
obtain my Emilia's Confent to render ouc 
Happinefe perfedt. 
We pafled feveral Hours in pleafing 
Converfation, and were all more ftrongly 
impreffed 
EMILIA AND HARRIET, 147 
imprefled in his Favour-. I told him, 
when he entreated my Approbation of an 
early Day, that I ought to decline accept- 
ing his Addreflcs, fince ten thoufand 
Pounds bore a fmall Proportion to thirty, 
and he was now in a Situation to afpire to 
a Perfon of much larger Fortunes. With 
a Glow of painful Senfibility at my men- 
tion of fuch a Change, he begged I would 
entertain a morejuft Opinion of myfclf 
and him, and aflured me his Love was 
too firmly engaged, to be capable of 
Alteration. 
I was uneafy to fee him afFeded, and 
alked his Pardon, telling him, I had no 
Sufpicion of his Love, which was equally 
returned on my Side. 
He foon after took Leave, and my 
Father and Mother are fo pleafed with 
him, they can talk of nothing elfe. How 
happy 
148 LETTERS BETWEEN 
happy am I that my Choice is approved 
by thofe whom it is my Duty to obey! 
Certainly no one ever had a more plea- 
fing Profped. 
The next Morning Mr. Sydney and his 
Uncle breakfaftcd with us. The latter 
told us, he came to defire us to fix hiisr. 
Nephew's Happinefs, and to acquaint us. 
with his own faulty Condudl. I have 
ufed him very ill, continued he ; but he 
has forgiven me, and infiftcd on my 
not faying more on that Subjedl. My 
Gratitude however breaks through this 
Injundtion, and to perform its Dictates, 
I will inform you of all his Gfoodnefs. 
You muft. know that (bme Years; 
ago, my Houfekeeper leaving me, a Per- 
fon was recommended to me for that 
Office. From her fir ft Appearance I 
regarded her with more than the Eyea 
of 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 149 
of Friendftiip, and as (he is a moll amiable 
Woman, my AfFeAion encreafed daily, 
till at length I difclofed it to her, and* 
had the Satisfadtion of finding fhe re- 
turned it. In fhort I married her, but 
my Pride prevented my imparting this 
Engagement to any one; my Circum- 
ftances^were fo indifferent, I knew. I fliould 
be condemned. My Nephew's Kindnels 
has rendered us eafy for Life. By the 
Sale of the EfFedts which came over, he 
found himfelf worth 40,000 Pounds, a 
fourth of which he infifled on my ac- 
cepting, and is certain, he fays, this young 
Lady would confirm the Gift. 
Ah! Sir, returned I, Mr. *Sy^«^ys. Beha- 
viour charms me. I participate in your 
Happinefs with fo defer ving a Woman, 
whom I beg to have the Pleafure of feeing. 
I always efteemed her as Mrs. RawUnSj 
and Ihall love her infinitely in the Cha- 
rafter 
i 
150 LETTERS BETWEEN 
radler of Mrs. Sydney. How obliging is 
this AiTurance, Madam, faid the Uncle ; 
but permit me now to entreat you will 
confer the higheft Obligation on my 
Nephew by giving him your Hand. 
Let me beg you will agree to an early 
Day. 
My lover and Parents joining in this 
Requeft, I with an hefitating Voice, pro- 
mifed to acquiefce in their Determina- 
tion. Accordingly the Thurfday in next 
Week^ is fixed for our Marriage. Mr. 
Sydney'^ Joy proved the Sincerity of his 
Love. My Father defired he might fend 
his Coach for Mrs. Sydney. Her Hut 
band went in it for her. She is an ac- 
compliflied Woman, and infpired us with 
a ftill higher Regard for her, than we 
had before conceived, by her fenfible Ob- 
fervations and engaging Behaviour. She 
juftifies her Hufband's Choice. 
That 
EMttJA AND HARRIET. 151 
That Gentleman, now relieved from 
Diflrefs, and convinced of his Error in 
encouraging an illaudable Pride, appears 
cd a fenfible agreeable Man. Before he 
went away, I am certain, faid he, addrefs- 
ing himfelf to me, from the Regard you 
honour my Nephew with, . that you will 
highly value this Portrait of his Mother. 
His own, he will himfelf prefent you with, 
which is an exadt Likenefs, 
Mr. Sydney drew it from his Pocket, 
and I received -it with the.utmoft Pleafure. 
I returned both the Gentlemen Thanks. 
Indeed the elder Gentleman's Prefent was 
alfo extremely agreeable to me. As I 
have promifed you the Original, faid I 
to young Mr. Sydney^ a Copy will hard- 
ly be defired, or I would beg your Ac- 
ceptance of my Pidlure. Every thing, an- 
fwered he, which bears your Refemblance, 
I fhall always mod hrghly value. 
We 
152 LETTERS between 
We pafled the Day in a very agreeable 
Manner. The Morning after, Mifs Tram- 
well came to congratulate me on my ap- 
proaching Felicity. 
My Lover is conftaqtly here ; and every 
repeated Aflu ranee of his AfFedtion, gives 
me additional Satisfaction. Yet I know 
liot how it is, my Spirits fink at the 
Thoughts of the aweful Change. I am 
rifled left my flattering Profpedtsfhould 
.^lifh i fearful my Want of Merit (hould 
leflen his AfFedion. Oh! my Harriet^ (hall 
I always retain the Power of contributing 
to his Happinefs? Every Adion of my 
Life (hall prove my Defire of obliging 
him. With a mutual Difpofition to plcafe, 
furely we cannot be othcrwife than hap- 
py. By a conftant Obfervation of his^ 
Merit, I (hall improve my own Mind ; 
and thus by aiming at Perfection, (hall ren- 
der myfelf more de(erving his Efteem and 
Love. 
Wc 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 153 
We are to live in this Houfe with my 
Father and Mother, which adds confider- 
ably to my Happinefs. Nothing is want- 
ing to complete it, but your Prefence, and 
a Profpeft of your foon following my Ex- 
ample. 
You made me fmile, my dear, when 
you defired me not to be uneafy about 
Trifles, while you lofe all your Lover^ 
You have had but one Lofs, my dear, 
JMr. Lovewell The Difmiffion of the oth 
was an Aft of Juflice to yourfelf and them. 
I heartily wifh Mr. Lovewell would renew 
his Addreflcs. I am certain you would 
accept him. 
With an Heart warmly follioitous for 
your Happinefs, I truly fubfcribe myfelf 
Your afFeftionate Friend, ^ 
EMILIA. 
I 
W A 
154 LETTERS BETWEEN 
LETTER XIV. 
Harriet to Emilia. 
I Should fboner have anfwered your mod 
welcome Letter, \( I had not been moft 
fhockingly prevented. Oh ! my Emilia^ 
what have I fuffered fince I wrote laft ? 
You have often cautioned me againft too 
sat an Intimacy with Mifs Flareit ; but 
loded by my own Folly, I imagined 
her incapable of the Bafenefs I was near 
falling a Sacrifice to. 
You may remember. I promifed to pafs 
the Day with her. I went, accordingly. 
We were very merry, and I had no Caufe 
for Sufpicion, till about four o'Clock, the 
Door opened, and Sir George Townly en- 
tered the Room. An unufual Terror feized 
me, and I could not help giving Mifs 
Flareit 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 155 
Flareit a fignificant Look, which fhe feem- 
ed not to obfervc. Sir George approach- . 
ing me ; I wiftied, Madam, faid he, for 
an Opportunity of juftifying myfelf to 
you, which Mifs FUmt has kindly pro- 
cured me. May I beg, continued he turn- 
ing to her, you will permit me to fpeak 
to this Lady in private. Ah! for Hea- 
ven's Sake,^ cryed I, leave me not with, 
this vile Man ! The deteftable Wretch 
regarded me not, but while he held me, 
left the Room. I will not attempt a De- 
Icription of the ftiocking Scene. Let it 
fuffice that all my Tears, Shrieks and In- 
treaties, were inefFedtual to procure my 
Releafe from him, and I was near 'be- 
coming the wretched Vidim of his Bafe- 
nefs ; when a Noife on the Stairs, occa- 
fioned his leaving me to fallen the Door; , 
but before he could fecure it, a Perfon 
liaftily entered the Room, whofe Voice 
convinced me it was Mr. Lovewell Ah ! 
Villain, 
I 
156 LETTERS BETWEEN 
Villain, cryed he, is it your Crime I am 
the happy Inftrument of preventing ? Art 
thou not aftiamed to diftionour the Name 
thou bearefti The Wretch began to mut- 
ter, but Mr. Lovewell drawing his Sword, 
bad him to be gone, left he ftiould be t«nipt- 
ed to chaftife him. He made no An- 
fwer, but ran down Stairs. The com- 
paflionate Mr. Lw^re;^// approaching, and 
looking earneftly at me ; Oh ! Heavens, 
cryed he, is it you. Madam, I have had 
.the Happinefs to refcue? My Weakngfs 
prevented my anfwcring. He faw my 
Condition, ran and called a Coach, into 
which he conveyed me, and tenderly fup- 
ported me all the Way home. 
My dear Mother was greatly (hocked 
at my diftreffed Appearance, and furpri* 
zed at Mr. LovewelFs accompanying me ; 
but he foon c^med her Fears, and con* 
eluded with informing us, that my Cries 
had. 
i 
EMILIA AND HARRIET, 157 
had alarmed him^ as he by Accident pafl^ 
ed by. He then took his Leave, pro- 
mifing to call in the Morning, when he 
hoped to find me perfedtly recovered from 
my Fright. 
I fainted on being carried up Stairs, 
but foon recovered, and had a tolerable 
Night. When I awaked, I found my- 
felf in a violent Fever, occafioned by the 
Hurry of Spirits I had undergone. It 
was three Weeks before my Health was 
perfedtly re-eftabli(hed. Mr. LoveweU cal- 
fed ercrylhy to enquire after me, and 
when I got down, came to pay me a 
Vifit. I received him with the higheft 
Marks of Gratitude and Efteem, and pour- 
ed forth the Overflowings of a thank- 
ful Heart. He interrupted me^ You con- 
«found me, dear Madam, with this Profu- 
fion of Gratitude. Could I have done 
otherwife for a Perfon ih Diflrefs ? 
H May 
J 
158 LETTERS BETWEEN 
May I not prefumc to addrefs you on 
a more pleafmg Subjcdt? Permit a Re- 
newal of my Addrefles, and fufFer mcto 
hope a kind Gonceflion. 
I was filent fome time in pkafing Sur- 
prize ; but at laft, You have been fo un- 
worthily treated Mr. Lovewell^ faid I, that 
I may juftly fufpedt your Veracity in this 
Declaration. 
You have always been dear to me, re- 
plied he ; and the Contempt with which 
you received me, did not weaken my Af- 
fedion, though it prevented a Continuance 
of that Addrefs, which I efteemed Per- 
fccution. I knew not how to fupport an 
Abfence from you-, but the Conlideration, 
that you neglefted me, and preferred Sir 
George Townly^ made me unwilling to add 
to his Triumph. When I heard you had 
dilcarded him, I could fcarcely forbear 
flying 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 159 
flying to congratulate your Determina- 
tion, but was withheld by the Remem- 
brance of the Contempt you had fhewn 
rae, which I imagined proceeded from 
Diflike. But I now hope you have a 
more favourable Opinion of me, and that 
you may be prevailed upon to confent to 
my Happinefs. 
Indeed Mr. Lovewell^ anfwered I, the 
Continuance of your AfFedion gives me 
the utmofl: Pleafure ^ I always regarded 
you with the higheft Efteem, though my 
Folly made me delight to teaze you. But 
this Behaviour was unjuftifiable. For the 
future, be afllired my Study fhall be to 
render you happy. I promife to ufc my 
Endeavours to form my Conduft, fo as 
to make myfelf more worthy your Re- 
gard. Believe me. Sir, I rejoice that your 
AfFedion is not alienated, and from this 
Moment, I difclaim my foolilh Defire of 
H 2 general 
i6o LETTERS between 
general Admiration. By rejoicing qply 
in your Heart, I fliaU be bktft beyond 
the Enjoyment of my late ideal Scheniea! 
Be aflured nothing can have Power to aker 
my prcfent Sentiments, 
My deareft Harriet^ cryed he paflioa* 
ately, you as much furpafs the Genera- 
lity of your Sex, by this ingenuous De- 
claration, as by your other amiable Qua- 
lities. May 1 hope you will at laft be 
mine? Indeed you may, returned I; but 
give me leave to acquaint my Mamma with 
our Intentions. 
She was delighted with the Account. 
Now, faid fhe, I am happy. In marry- 
ing Mr. Lovewell^ you fecure a worthy 
Hufband, and will have no more to fear 
from the Infults of dcfigning Men. We 
then entered the Parlour, and after a Con- 
verfetion which I Ihall omit, the Day was 
fixed 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. i6i 
fixed for tying the indiflbluble Knot, and 
is no other than next Wednefday. I 
hope I (hall not behave like a Fool. I 
muft ingenuoufly confefs, my dear, I feel 
more real Pleafure in the Power of im- 
parting Satisfaction to Mr. Lovewellj thaa 
I ever knew in rendering him uncafy. I 
believe you were right in your Conjefture — 
I certainly loved him* Well, I am iK>t 
aftiamed of owning it" You're a goodi 
Girl, and fet an excellent Example. 
Tte next Morning Mr. LaveweJl fur- 
prized us with an Account that Sir George 
was married to a Woman of the Town,^ 
who had hired Bravos to frighten him 
into an Engagement with one he defpifed.. 
He was acquainted with the Deception, when 
it was too late to be remedied ; his Fear is 
ftill fo predominant, Mr. LoveweU added,, 
that he lubmits - implicitly to the Will^ 
of the new-made Lady I'ownlyj who ex- 
H.3 erts> 
i62 LETTERS between 
crts her Power ta the higheft Degree of 
Tyranny. 
I fineerejy rejoiced in my Efcapc from 
this cowardly Villain, and acquainted Mr. 
Lovewell with Laurinda's Story ; at the Re- 
cital of which, he protefted tjie Wretch's 
Puniftiment was juft, after the ComrQiifioa 
of fuch enormous Crimes; 
I wrote an Account of his Marriage 
to Laurinda. I muft now beg ^your Par- 
don for deferring my Congratulations^ but 
my Hurry of Spirits on recollefting the 
Circumftances of my Danger^ will I hope 
plead my Excufe. 
Believe me, I (hare in your Felicity, 
and wi(h you and the worthy Mr. ^dney 
a long, long Continuance of it. My Mam- 
ma joins with me in afFedtionate Wifhes. 
How I ftiould rejoice to make my per- 
fonal 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 163 
fonal Compliments ! May fome happy Op- 
portunity prefent itfelf ! 
This Morning I told Mr. Lovewelly h$ 
muft not expedt much Solidity from me^ 
for that L was difpofed to be a merry, . 
mad Creature^ To which he generoufly 
anfwered, that his greateil Delight would 
be to fee me chearful and cafy. I am 
amazed, I could vex the dear Man as 
I have done; he is certainly too good 
for me, but I will endeavour to deferve 
his Love. 
My Mamma is much pleafed with me,^ 
and fays, I now prove myfelf a Perfon 
of Underftanding. I believe (he is in the 
right, I find myfelf much improved. You 
muft praife me too, my dear ; tho' I do not 
want Encouragement, I wifli to fecure my 
Friends Approbation. I charge you,, blot 
my Folly from your Remembrance. 
H 4. I am 
1^4 LETTERS between 
I am fummoned down Stairs to 
LoveweU% md as my Mamma is going 
upon Bufinefs, I muft lay aiide my ] 
I will icribUe before I refign it^ that I 
my dear, 
Your*8 unalterably, 
HARRI? 
^ 
EMTLTA' A >TO HARRIET. 165 
LETTER XV. 
Emilia to Harriet. 
I Joyfully embrace the very fir ft Op-*- 
portunity of corigratulaung my deareft 
Fdend on her late Efcape^ . and her happy . 
Nuptials. Oh ! how my Heart bled for 
your Sufferings ! and how I execrated the 
vile Wretches! 
You know I always difliked Mils Flarcity , 
and have wondered at your Partiality in^ 
her Favour. I am thankful to the Deity^ . 
that you are convinced of her Depravity : 
of Heart, without any other Suffering, than . 
Apprehenfion and Terror 
My Admiration of .Mr. LovewelFsBc- 
haviour, and your ingenuous Confefl'ion > 
of your, miflaken Condudt^ I cannot fuf- 
H 5; ficiently , 
i66 LETTERS between 
ficiently exprefe; you both dcferve the 
higheft Encx)miuBiS; and have our united^ 
moft earnQft Wiflies for your Happir 
nefs. 
Mr. Sydney his Lady, and my Lover, 
breakfafted with us on the appointed 
Morning; we then repaired to Churchy 
.where I behaved, much better than I ex- 
pefted. My dear Hulband teftified by 
his Looks, the Sentiments of his Heart ; 
and when we had received the Nuptial 
Benecjiftion, etx^hx^ccd me in the., nwft 
tender Mapnen My Patents, and M5. 
Sydney's Uncle and Aunt, came forward 
and wifhed us Joy. We then returned 
home. Mr. Traitmell and his Sifter were 
invited to Dinner, but begged to defg: 
their Vifit till the next Day. 
On our Entrance into the Parlour^ 
My deareft Life, faid Mr. Sydney^ how ray 
Heart 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 167 
Heart ^ overflows with Traniport at this 
happy Event! I hope you do not feel 
much iefs Joy on- the Oecafion ! AiTure. 
yourfclf, Sir, cryed I, my Sentiments are^ 
equally tender, and our Happinefs is reci- 
procal. How bleft will be my Life m en- 
deavouring, to render .your's happy!. 
We paft the Day in a Manner fuitable 
to the Oecafion. The next Morning, I 
fent to intreat the Favour of Mr. and 
Mrs. GoodwilPs Company, who complied 
with myDefire.. 
They fincerely congratulated us; but' 
the Remembrance of their dear deceafcd 
Daughter, and the RecoUedtion of hec 
Marriage with Sir fFtUiam Friendfyi filled 
their Eyes with Tears. They begged I 
would be with them as muck> as poflible, 
affuring me my Company- was more agree* 
able to them, than that of. any other Per^ 
fon,.. 
i68 LETTERS between 
fbn, as I had given (uch convincing Prool 
of my Regard for their blefled Daughtc 
and had adminiftcred, Comfort to them i 
their Afl3i£tioD^ 
I with Pleafurc promifed to acc:eptth< 
obliging Invitation, and then turned tl 
Pifcourfe, as this Subject had fenfibly 2 
fedted them. Mr. and Mifs Traimvell can 
in the Afternoon, which we pafled che? 
fully ; and I had the Satisfaction to obfer 
Mr. and Mrs. Goodwill were lefs mela 
qholy than in the Morning. 
You tell me you wifti to fee me. A 
»y Friend, to have you. near me woi 
crown my Felicity ; and I muft acqua 
you, bere is an extreme good Hon 
with a fine Garden, a great deal of Lar 
wd other Cbnveniencies, within Half 
Mile of us, to be difpofed of; the G( 
tjeaxaji to whom it belonged, k. dead, a 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 169 
his Widow, a. very gay Lady, intends as 
foon as the Houfe is fold, to fettle at 
Bath. My dear, confult your Mamma and 
Mr. Lovewell^^ who will, I hope, have no^^ 
Objedtion ; let me indulge the fweet Hope 
of having you for a Neighbour. I have 
a thoufand Things to fay to yon, and. 
fliall wait your Anfwer with Irnpa- 
tiencc. 
You cannot be truly fenfible of Mr. 
Sydney's Merit without being an Eye Wit- 
nefs of it. I have the Satisfadlion to find 
his Love increafes, with my Endeavours - 
to dcferve it. What a delightful Situation 
is Our's! To be united, to two Men,,. 
whofe Equals the whole World can fcarcely 
produce, and to be convinced every 
Aftion of our's contributes to their Hap- 
ginefs, and ftrengthens. their AfFeftions! 
Oh! 
I 
17a LETTERS. BET WEEN 
Oh! how different fit>m thdfe fordid 
Matches, where nothing is required, but 
a large Eftate, or a Title, to make a 
Woman throw herfelf away on a Wretchf 
whofe exalted Station only ferves to render, 
him more confpicuoufly.defpicable! Is it 
polTible for Happinefs to fubfift, , where 
Lpve.the.eflential Bafjs is wanting? where 
the Hulband and Wife feek in different 
Companies that Satisfadtion they cannot 
eqjpy in a mutual Interchange of Senti- 
ment, which the Confiderate and. Worthy 
efteem the moft delightful Converfe I 
Mrs. Lucas (the Lady whofe Houfe I have 
recommended), is an Example of the In- 
fufficiency of, mercenary Views to fequre 
Happinefs, . 
She married Mr. Lucas (who was then 
fixty-five, and fhe only feventeen) on ac- 
count of his very large Eftate. As fhe 
bad an inconfiderable Fortune, (lie fa- 
crificed 
EMIUA AND HARRIET. 171 
crificed her Youth, and Beauty^ foi the 
Charms of Spkndour. Mr. Lucas's Ilt- 
Mture and* Mdrofenefs> rendered- him 
abhorred by his Acquaintance : how- 
ever, fhe (b anfully managed him, that 
be behaved very well to her, and at his 
Deceafe left her above fifty thoufand 
Pounds. 
She does not affedb to be concerned, 
which indeed would be only Grimace; 
but on the contrary, behaves with in- 
decent Mirth-, andhasjuftly incurred the 
Genfures of the Neighbmirhood. Poor 
Woman ! (he is really very pretty, and 
her extreme Youth (for fhe is how no 
more than nineteen) and great Gaiety, be- 
tray her into a thbufand Follies, which I 
hope fhe will condemn and avoid, when 
^er Judgment Arengih^s. 
X7t LETTERS BETWEEN 
We all fccm to be one Family, for 
Hiy Uncle and Aunt are generally at 
our Houfe, or we ^t their*s ; and Mr. 
and Mrs. Goodwill are frequently with us^ , 
and appear feme what to hjave regained:, 
their natural Chearfulnefs. 
Let me not be difappointed in ther 
pjeafing Expectation of enjoying your 
Society. You will find^ my. dear, the 
Country has Charms, you will bring with 
you Happinefs; and I think you will not 
wifli to fee London^ except for a Month or 
two in the Winter, and then perhaps we 
may accompany you to Town, where the 
Intercourfc between the two Families will 
be, amidfl: a bufy Worlds our higheft: 
Enjoyment* 
Come then, my beloved Friend, and 
increafe your own, by communicating.. 
Hippinefs. I hope your Anfwer to this 
wiJl 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 173 
will conclude our literary Correfpondence, 
and that it will contain m Aflurance of 
your Acquiefcence with the Wiflies of 
Your happy and truly aflfedlionate 
EMILIA SYDNEY. 
174 LETTERS between 
LETTER XVI; 
Harriet to Emilia. 
WELL, my dear, the aweful Ce- 
remony is over, and your Har- 
riet IS (hackled for Life ; but don*t ima- 
gine I begin to repent, for I receive fo 
many Proofs of Mr. LovewelPs Aflfedion, . 
that I never was fo happy. 
Khali not fend you the Particulars, but 
only acquaint you, my Satisfadtion was in- 
expreffible to perceive the Joy our Union 
gave my Hulband and Mother. 
I repeated to thefe dear Perfons the 
Errors I had been guilty of, and found 
Pleafure in the Confeffion, as I determined 
never to relapfe. Mr. Lovewell viewed 
me with fo much Tendernefe, while I 
was 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 175 
was upbraiding myfclf, that the Tears 
dole from his Eyes, and embracing me, 
lie declared, that a Woman who thus 
difclaimed thofe little Follies, which the 
Cuflom of the World feemed to autho- 
rize, gave the higheft Proof of her good 
Senfe, suid well djfppfed Mind. I aflured 
hini I wou^i endeavour to regulate my 
Behaviour, in fuch ^ Manner, as to ren- 
der ir. always agreeable to him. Indeed 
ray dear we are the happieft of Women. 
I did not deferve fuch a Man as Mr. 
Lovewellfi though your Merit entitled you 
to a Sydn^. HQ>yever I won't depreciate 
myfelf. A Confeffion of and Refolution 
to correct one's Errors, is fome Degree 
of Merit, and I have entirely fubdued my 
Inclination for Folly. My Heart is ftiU 
gay, but it is free from Levity. 
I received on Tueiday a Letter from 
Laurinda^ which proves the Strength and 
good Effects of her Refolutbn. Mt^Love- 
176 LETTERS BETWEBK 
well highly applauds, and dteems her. I 
will tranfcribc her Letter for your Perufak 
" Deareft Madam, 
^ I cannot fufficicntly cxprcfi my Gra- 
** titude for your unmerited Favours. The 
** Account in your laft would, Ibme time 
^ ago, have occafioned me a great deal 
^* of Uneafmefej but by the Alfiftancc 
" of the Deity, I have now entirely am- 
" quered that violent Paflion, which was 
<* the Foundation of all my Guik. I 
** look back with Horror and Ama2e-~ 
** ment, on the Time when I thought 
** Sir George J'ownly the moft amiable of 
** his Sex. Blinded by my Vanity at firft, 
" and afterwards yielding to. a more pow- 
"erful Faffion, Idid not perceive thofe 
** Defedls which were obvious to others. 
" What infeparable Companions are Cow- 
** ardice and Villainy ! Sir George is juft- 
** ly treated with the Contempt of Man- 
" kind, I cjannot help pitying the poor 
[{ Wretch,, 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 177 
"Wretch, though he does, not deferve it, 
** at lead from me, whom he has fo bar^ 
** baroufly wronged. 
'^^ 1 am thankful to that iPower, who 
*' has enabled me to fubdue thofe Emo- 
** tions, which for fbme time, rendered me 
*' incapable of performing my Duty. I 
*'^ow find myfelf compofed and ferenc. 
** I have, I hope, made tny Peace with 
** Heaven, and my whole future Life (hall 
** be devoted to the worfhip of the Di- 
^' vine Being, whom I have Co greatly 
^' offended. 
" You can\ imagine, deareft Madam^ 
*' the Difference I perceive in myfelf. 
^' When I was with you, the Remem- 
** brance of my unexpiated Guilt, and 
** too great Love for the Author of it^ 
^' made me continually wretched. I now 
s* entirely forgive Sir George^ who I 
*^ hope will feel unfeigned Repentance, 
" «nd 
178 LETTERS BETWEEN 
** and am in Peace Avith the whole World. 
" What a defirable Situation ! Pray for 
** me, that I may continue fteady in my 
"Duty. 
'^^ Give me leave, deareft Madam, to 
" wifh you and Mr. Lovewell all ima- 
** ginable Happinefs. I am convinced 
** of his Merit, and that 4t is -in your 
*' Power fully to reward it. To he af- 
^ fured of your Felicity, and that you 
^ ftill love me with the fame AfFedion, 
" will cflfbrd the utmoft Satisfaction to., 
" Deareft Madam, 
"** Your faithful and much obliged 
**LAURINDA." 
1 am certain I fhall give you Plea- 
fure, when I acquaint you Mr. Lovewell 
has purchafed the Houfe, l^urniture-, &c. 
of 
/ 
EMILIA AND HARRIET. 179 
of Mrs. Lucas. She leaves the Country 
this Day, and we 'intend fetting out on 
Wednesday, having been informed by the 
Perfon we fent down to buy the Houfe, 
that every thing is in Order for us. My 
deareft Friend! I anticipate the Pleafure 
I (hall enjoy in your Company. 
sMy Mother is to live with us, and we 
arc to be in Town two or three Months 
in the Winter. We have difpofed of the 
Houfe Mr. Lovewell refided in before we 
married, and «re to be in my Manama's 
while we are in London. Ypu are very 
Jcind to promife coming up. With fuch 
a Society Town and Country muft be 
delightfuf. 
Expeft to fee a prodigious Alteration 
m me. I ^m grown quite grave, but, to 
confefs the Truth, I never was io happy 
as now. 
Adieu! 
i8o LE.TTERS between, &c. 
■ s . 
Adieu! my valuable Friend? You will 
fcarcely have Time to read this Letter, 
before I fliall in Perfon con^nce you, 
that Abfence has not the leaft abated the 
AfFedtion of 
Your fincere and ever faithful 
HARRIET LOVEWELL. 
s.* 
t H E E N D. s 
