The voyages, dangerous adventures, and imminent escapes, of Capt. Richard Falconer ... Intermixed with the voyages and adventures of Thomas Randal .."
FALCONER (Capt. R) Voyages, Adventures 
and Escapes ; containing the Laws, Customs, 
and Manners of the Indians in America ; with 
the Voyages of Thomas Randal, his being 
taken by the Indians of Virginia, &c., front.. 
sm. 8vo, orig. calf gilt, Isond., 1769 40 
17 AMERICA : — Falconer (Captain Richard) 
The Voyages, dangerous Adventures, and 
imminent ESCAPES of, containing the Laws, 
Customs, and Manners of the Indians in America, 
his Shipwrecks, his narrow Escape from the 
Island of Dominico, etc., intermixed with the 
Voyages and Adventures of Thomas Randal of 
Cork ; his beimj taken by the Indians of Virginia, 
etc., first edition, the two parts complete (pp. 
136 and ISO), with frontispiece, 8vo. old mlf y £1. 10-9 
VOYAGES
DANGEROUS 
ADVENTURES, 
AND IMMINENT 
ESCAPES, 
O F 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 
CONTAINING 
The Laws, Cuftoms, and Manners of the In- 
dians in America ; his Shipwrecks ; his mar- 
rying an Indian Wife ; his remarkable Efcape 
from" the Illand of Domimco> &c. 
Intermixed with 
The Voyages and Adventures of THO M AS 
RANDAL, of Cork, Pilot; with his Shipwreck 
in the Baltick, being the only Man that efcaped ; 
his being taken by the Indians of Virginia, &C. 
and an Account of his Death. 
Bold were the Men who on the Ocean firft 
Sprlkd their new Sails, when Shipwreck was the worjl. 
More Danger now frtm Man alone we find, 
Than from the Rocks, the Billows, or the Wind. 
Waller. 
The Sixth Edition, Corre&eJ. 
To which is added, A Great Deliverance at SEA, 
by W r . John/on* D. D. Chaplain to his Majefty. 
LONDON: 
Printed for G. Keith in Gracechurch-ftreet, and 
F. Blyth, No. 87. CornkilU 1769% 
THE 
PREFACE 
To the Fourth Edition. 
I S in Compliance with Sir JR^r 
3j >T K VEftrangfs Maxim, « That a 
k^S^jalf " Man had as good go to Court 
" without a Cravat, as appear in Print 
without a Preface that I give the gentle 
Reader any Interruption of this Kind for 
to be plain with him, the Book itfelf, as. 
full of Misfortunes as it is, is but a Preface 
to the Misfortunes I have met with fince 
its firft Publication, which I mud freely 
confefs are wholly owing to the Bent of 
my own head-ftrong Inclination, in not 
taking my Father's Advice at my firft fet- 
ting out into the World, 
This 
m PREFACE. 
This fwrth Appearance indeed, is, I 
canft help owning,, a Fleaikre to me, tho' 
it is much more owing to the Candour of 
the Public, than the Merit of the Perfor- 
mance. 
The Age of Gallantry I obferve, feems 
to roll round again, for certainly Plays* 
Novels and Romances, were never more 
in Vogue that at this Juncture. And as 
to thofe who have a more refined Tafte 
for Mafquerades, Operas, and Grotefque 
Entertainments, this good Town is fully 
convinced, that Dr. Faujius from Germany 
now vies with our Countryman Mrs. 
Robinfon at the Haymarket j that Mr. Le- 
veridge, as a Devil, has more Admirers 
than Signiora Cuzzoni * and that Heydegger 
has a much greater Number of Pollers, 
than the laudable Society eftablifhed for 
Reformation of Manners. Thefe latter 
Gentlemen are, if Dr. South may be cre- 
dited, arrant Hypocrites ; for that learned 
Divine honeftly tells us, That inftead of 
making Godlinefs a Gain, they make a 
Gain of Godlinefs : So much for Polite- 
nefs. 
The PREFACE. 
nefs. But at the fame Time it muft be con- 
fefled, that it is very rueful to behold the 
Quill-drivers of the prefent Age, fo egre- 
gioufly triumphant over thofe of the laft.; 
for now Shake/pear and Ben Johnfon y muft 
give way to Robinfon Crufoe^ and Colonel 
Jack \ as well as Dry den and Otway to 
Moll Flanders^ and Sally Salijbtciy : And I 
myfelf am terribly afraid, that the Voyages 
and Adventures of Captain Richard Falco- 
ner muft in a fhort Period of Time, ftrike 
to Sir John Mandevilleh lying Travels, and * 
Mademoifelle B tie aits unheard of Intri- 
gues. Tho' I have ftill fome Confolation 
in my Hopes, that this fourth Edition, 
wherein many Errors of the Prefs that cf- 
caped in the former, are corre&ed, will 
come to a fifth, and fo on. 
To conclude, if Mr. Dennis ^ or any 
other Critick of Renown, fhall think fit 
to fall foul on me, to fuch I fhall only re- 
ply, in the Words of the fame Gentleman 
with whom I began this Preface : " Thofe 
" that don't like my Book may let it 
alone, and there's no Harm done. 99 
V A L JE, 
i « jf£ «; K » y 5 « « » > 
1 ?o<xxxxxxxxxxxxx>^ c 
3 &xx>:xxxxxxxxxxxx^ £ 
THE 
VOYAGES 
AND 
ADVENTURES 
O F 
Captain Richard Falconer. 
^^Jz^zffi W A 3 korn at Brui0H i a Market 
fe^ ^5 Town in SomerfetfI?in\ of Parents to- 
%H I lerably well to pais in the World ; 
my Mother died when I was very 
^x^^^x*^ young: my Father, Richer J Fal- 
coner, had been a great Traveller in his Youth, 
and frequently repeating his Adventures abroad, 
made me have a great Defire to follow his 
Steps : I often begged he would let me go 
B \ 0 
2 The Adventures of 
to Sea with fome Captain of his Acquaintance ; but 
he would reply, Dick, ftay where you are, you 
know not the Hazards and Dangers that attend a ma- 
ritime Life : You fhall have a good Trade in your 
Belly, and that will keep you from a Defire of ram- 
bling ; therefore tell me what Calling you like bell, 
that I may immediately put you out in Order to your 
living hereafter: You know, continued he, that my 
Fortune is but fmall, and I living to the Extent of 
it, it will not be pofiible for me to leave you where- 
withal to fupport you without fome Employment, 
Therefore, (replied I,) as you have a Daughter, you 
may leave your Subftance to her, fhe muft be pro- 
vided for; as for our Sex, we can beft take Care 
for ourfelves ; and if you plcafe but to fit me out 
to Sea, even in what Station you think conveni- 
ent, it fhall be all I will defire. Son, (faid my 
Father) think no more of going to Sea, for Til not 
have it fo ; I know it is only a Defire of Youth 
prone to change : If I Ihould give you Leave, I am 
aflured one Week's Voyage would make you wifh to 
be at Home again. I ufed all the Arguments my 
young Senfe prompted me with, but all to no Pur- 
pofe, my Father was not to be moved ; and thus I 
lived two Years longer with him in Expectation of 
his Mind altering. At lall an Accident happened 
that furthered my Defires, and tho* it was the Ruin 
of our Family,. I muft confefs, I was not much 
concerned. 
My Father was Supervifor of a Tax laid upon the 
Burning of Pipes, and he having gathered a Sum of 
Money, 
Cape Richard Falconer, 3 
Motiey, amounting to 3800/. in Order to pay in to 
the Government for the King's Ufe, was, by an 
under Excife-man robbed of die whole Sam, who 
made his Efcape. My Father ufed all poffible 
Means to apprehend him without Noife, but all his 
Endeavours were fruitlefs : So finding his Affairs 
in a defperate Condition, refolved to retire to fome 
Part of the World where he might be fafe from the 
griping Hands of the Law. One Morning, juft be- 
fore his voluntary Exile, he called me to him : Dick, 
(laid he) you have been often defirous of going to 
Sea, and I have always ufed Arguments to diffuade 
you from it ; but now, fince what has happened, 
it being impoflible for me to continue upon the Place 
of my Birth, the Patrimony of my Anceflors, I muft 
even recommend that Way of Life to you which f 
fhould never have chofe, but that the Exigency of 
my Affairs will not permit me to provide any other 
Way for you. Here (continued he) take this 100/. 
which I can ill fpare out of my little Fortune, but 
fince it is all I can do for you, take it, and may 
Heaven profper thy Undertakings; may theBlefling. 
of a Father always live with you, whofe Prayers 
fhall ever be fent to our Almighty Creator for thy 
Welfare. Here (added he) is a Letter of Recom- 
mendation for you to Captain Pultney of BriJiol f 
whofe Friendlhip I am fure. will be of Service to you. 
With that, he embraced me with Tears in his Eyes, 
gave me his Blefiing, kifled me, and took his Leave 
for ever, for never have my Eyes beheld him fince* 
B 2 This 
4 The Adventures of 
This Parting, I think, was the greateft Grief my 
Thoughts had ever known till then; (for nothing 
could be fonder, or fhew more paternal AfFedion, 
than my dear Father at his Iaft Farewell) but the Joy 
of my being at Liberty to follow my own Defires, 
foon drowned my Sorrow for parting with fo good a 
Parent. 
I had now nothing more to do, but to provide my 
little Equ ipage in order to go to Briflol, to my Father's 
Friend ; 1 packed up my Things in a Portmanteau, 
and gave them to an old Servant of my Father's, 
who would fee me as far as Brijiol for his Sake- We 
jfet out in the Morning, and reached it by Noon : 
1 enquired for Captain Pultncy, and foon found him 
out. I acquainted him who I was, and gave him 
my Father's Letter. He read it, and received me 
very kindly. It was to this Effedl: 
Dear Pultney, 
" T Hope you'll forgive this Trouble of your 
** JL Friend. I have Tent my Son to you, in order 
** to get him fome Poft by Sea, I know it is in 
^ your Power to do it : Something has happened that 
* £ hinders my providing for him as I ought, I 
tC would have waited on you in Perfon, but a Gap 
4< has happened in my Affairs that I ill all never 
" clofe again. Dick will tell you all. Let me 
ti conjure you by our old Friendlhip to take all 
< the Care you can df him ; and whenever he 
" comes to England, let him come to you, for as' 
" yei I know not where to* lead my wretched Life; 
« fo 
Capt. Richard Falconer. S 
« fo that 1 {hall confide in you, and let you know 
" by a Letter, or Meffengcr, *s foon as poffible, 
* where I (hall fettle. 
Your we/I faithful 
Friend and Servant. 
R. Falcon fr. 
Falconer, (faid the Captain) I am' heartily 
forry for your Father's Misfortunes, which he tells 
me in his Letter you will inform me of. After I 
had related to him every Circumftance, he told me 
he would provide for me as foon as poffible, and till 
then I fhould be as welcome to him as his own 
Son : In the mean Time, faid he, I would have you 
verfe yourfelf in the Mathematicks, which may be 
of Ufe to you : I'll take Care to provide you a 
Mailer, and lnftruments, which accordingly he 
did , and as I had a great Defire to be abroad, and 
had fome fmall Knowledge of it which Ucarned at 
School, apart from my other Studies, I foon at- 
tained to the Theory of it. 
After I had run through the whole Courfe, and 
the Captain was informed I was capable, he got me 
to be Mate (or rather Afliftant) on Board- the AWhn 
Frigate, Captain Wafe Commander : and on the fc- 
cond of May, 1699, we *" et ^ a *'» (bound fovjamaka) 
with a fair Wind, As foon as we loft Sight of Land, 
I began to be extremely fea-fick, and bore the Jcfts 
qf the Sailors but indifferently, who cryed, There's 
B 3 an 
6 The Adventures of 
an excellent Matter's Mate, he'll hit Jamaica to a 
Hair, if the Illancl were no bigger than the Bung- 
hole of a Calk. I muft confefs, I believe myfelf to 
be the only Perfon who ever fet out on his firft 
Voyage as Mailer's Mate, without having feen a 
River that v/as navigable. But in a Day or two I 
was perfe&ly well, and was never troubled with 
any Sicknefs afterwards. 
We had nothing material happened to us till we 
entered the Bay of JSfcaj, where we were cncoun- 
ter'd with a dreadful Storm ; the Billows ran Moun- 
tains high, and our VefTel feem'd to be the Sport 
of the Waves ; A Ship that overtook us the Day be- 
fore, and accompany'd us, tho' it were not at half 
a Furlong Pittance, was fometimes loft, by Reafon 
pf the Height of the Waves. The Storm continued 
with this Violence three Days, and at laft abated 
fomething of its Fiercenefs, but ftill blew very hard. 
The other Veflel, by firing a Gun, and making a 
Signal, made it appear (he was in Diftrefs, but the 
Sea ran fo high it was impoflible to give them any 
Affiftance, yet we bore down to them (being to 
Windward) as nigh as we could without Danger to 
ourfelves; we enquired into the Matter, and found 
fhe had fprung a Leak ; they had all Hands to 
pump by Turns, but yet the Water gain'd on them. 
They beggM of us to hoift out our Boat (their own 
being flav'd) to give them Succour upon Occafion : 
Accordingly we put out our Long-Boat, with two 
of our Men in it, but the Rope that held her to the 
Ship, broke by the Violence of the Waves, and 
drove 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 7 
drove away with the two unfortunate Men in her, 
and what became of them we could never learn ; 
but undoubtedly they perifh'd by the Sea, or Hun- 
ger, we being twenty Leagues from any Shore. The 
Ship, after prodigious Labour of the Sailors, andin 
Jefs than ten Minutes, funk to the Bottom ; out of 
tifty-feven !Uen, but four were fav'd, and they, by 
good Fortune, laid hold on Ropes we threw out for 
that Purpofe; but it had not been poflible to fave 
any, if we had not bore down to Leeward whea 
we faw them in the laft Extremity. And here we 
o-ught to admire at Providence ; for this very VeiTel 
was a Pyrate, one Captain Jones, Commander, who 
in an open large Boat fet out from Dover, and, nea r 
OJIenJ J ftole upon a French VefTel in the Night, mur- 
dered the Captain and fome others, and fet a)] the 
Sailors afhore that would not embrace their De- 
fjgns, and had refolv'd to attack us as foon as the 
Storm was over. The four Men that were fav'd, 
were three Englifbmen and one Fretxlmany who 
faid they were fore'd, with feveral others, by the 
above-mention'd Captain Jems, to take to that 
Courfe of Life; but whether true or falfe, I caii't 
tell ; indeed they behav'd themfelves very well 
with us all the Voyage, and were entered into our 
Books as four of the Ship's Crew, inftead of two we 
left on Shore, who were not to be found when we 
fet fail, and the two poor Wretches that were loft in 
the Boat. The Storm full continued, but the Wind 
fair, fo we ran it away with a riv'd Forefail all 
Night, and the next Morning we had a violent 
B 4. Storm 
S The Advbxtures of 
m 
Storm of Rain, and fome Thunder, but about Noori 
the Sky cleared up, the Rain ceafed, and the Tempeft 
was laid; the Wind however continuing fair, with 
a middling Gale, 
May the 28th, tve difcove/ed the Canaries, and 
the Peak of Tcmrijf] and paffed this Ifland, or ra- 
ther Rock, of a prodigious Height, At Night the 
Wind rofe again, and continued to blow very hard 
for two Days. As I was walking on the Deck one 
Morning, rny Chops were faluted with a Fifli which 
diopped down ; I took it up, panting at the Gills 
for Life ; it proved to be a flying Fifh, purfucd (as 
J fuppefr) by fome Dolphin, or Albacore; the Man- 
ner of thefeFiihes avoiding their Enemies, is jump- 
ing out of the Water, and flying till their Wings are 
djy, then fall down again into the Sea. The Dol- 
phin that chafes them, is one of the fmefl coloured 
Fifties that fwims, I have obferved our Painters 
draw them bending like a Bow, but I think it is 
as ftrait a Fifh as any in the Sea. We caught one of 
them with a Fizgig, an Infhument made of fcveral 
Rous of Iron Spikes, bearded like Hooks, and 
a Staff four or five Feet long to it; to this they tie a 
Cord of a great Length, and dart it with all their 
Strength; the wounded Fifh immediately flounces 
downward many Fathoms, and up again, which the 
Darter obferves, giving him Rope and Play till his 
Wcaknefs makes him more tame: then they draw 
him up the Ship's Side, and cut him in Pieces. The 
fiill. we caught in this Manner was about fix Feet 
long, which we dreffed, and Part of it ferved the 
whole Ship's Company for Dioner; as foon as it 
was 
Capt. Richard Falconer, 9 
was caught, it loft that beautiful Colour it had in 
the Water; as for my own Part, notwithstanding 
their praifing it, I had ra'ther eat a Herring or a 
Mackrel than this rare Fifh. I don't know whether 
thefe Fifh can hear, or love Mufick, but this 1 am 
fure of, we had an excellent Trumpet on Board, 
which diverted us in good Weather, and I have ob- 
ferved, that at the Sound of it, the Number of thefe 
Dolphins feemed to increafe, and fwim within two 
Feet of our Veflel, but that may be pure Accident; 
yet I fancy there's fomething in it, that occasioned 
the Fable of Amphion and the Dolphin. Sharks are 
taken as we take common Fiih, only the Hook is 
about two Feet long, and an Iron Chain above that 
about four Feet long, and a long Rope to that; 
they generally bait the Hook with a Piece of Beef of 
three or four Pounds, which the voracious Fifh fwal- 
lows immediately, Hook and all ; then they give 
him Play a while, and when he is pretty well fpent, 
they draw him in with a Tackle : There's always 
one (lands ready with an Axe to make a Divorce 
between his Tail and his Body, oiherwife he would 
give fuch large Thumps with it that might do the 
Ship Damage; I myfelf v\as thrown dov.& buc 
with a Touch of it. This that we took, had in it* 
Paunch the Collar-bone of a Man and a Eoatfwain's 
Silver Whittle, witharedRibbonin.it, intire, not 
fo much as bruifed, which was given to me as apre- 
ient, to malic me Amends for the Fall i received; it 
may be fcen at my Bookfeller's, if any one has the 
Curiofity to afk for it; as to the Collar-bone, not 
^ 5 any 
io The Adventures cf 
any one would accept of it, fo I return'd it to the 
watry Element again. 
We patted the Tropick, attended by the Tropick* 
Birds, a Fowl fomething bigger than a Pidgeon ; 
but one would think, as it flies, it had an unlighted 
Candle fix'd in its TaiL I> cannot let go the Cere- 
mony of pafling this Tropick: When you are in the 
Latitude, the old Sailors afk the re 11 of the Ship's 
Crew, Whether they were ever that Way before ? If 
not they muft either pay a Bottle and Pound, (as 
they call it) or be duck'd : They that don't pay, 
are fix'd to a Rope at the Main-Yard-Arm, and 
duck'd three Times in the Sea; at which the reft of the 
Crew Huzza ! and fire a Volley of fmall Shot. 
When Admiral Bembow went with his Squadron 
of Men of War, the whole Fleet duck'd, but the 
Admiral gave them Notice, by firft firing a Gun, 
which was immediately follow'd with a Volley of 
Muflcets, and Huzzaing, by every Ship in the Fleet. 
A Day or two before our Account is out, we fend 
a Man to the Topmaft-Hcad, in order to difcover 
Land, where he ftays an Hour, and looks about 
him: He that difcovers it firft, is rewarded with 
a Bottle and Pound: that is, a Bottle of Rum and 
a Pound of Sugar, which is demanded as foon as 
the Anchor is caft in a Place where fuch Commo- 
dities are to be had. Now the Bottles and 'Pounds 
- 
that accrue from the People that are not willing to 
be duck'd, in palling the Tropick , are referv'd by 
the old Sailors for a merry Bout, when fafe in Har- 
bour, 
Capt. Richard Falconer. il 
bour, which mail not be touched by the frefli Men, 
a6 they call 'em. 
July the third, our Man at the Topmaft-Head, 
inftead of crying Land, (as we expected) called out 
a Sail ! a Sail ! which, in a Quarter of an Hour, 
we difcovered plainly upon Deck. We did not 
know what to think of it, we knew we were near 
Land, and confequently in Fear of thofe Pyrates, 
or Buccaniers, that infeft thofe Coafb : Our Cap- 
tain called all Hands aloft, and told us, Gentle- 
men, 'Tis One to one, but this VefTel we fee may 
be a Pyrate, if fo, how muft we behave ourfelves ? 
If you are refolved to (land, it, I'll ftand it to the 
laft ; if not, we'll furrender without firing a Gun, 
which may induce them to be civil to us. The Sail- 
ors cried, Let's fight 'em, let's fight 'em. With 
that we put our Chefls into the Hold, and brought 
up our Hammocks, to place them in the Netting on 
the Quarter- Deck ; we cleared our Guns, which 
were twelve, and muftered our Men, which amount- 
ed to Thirty Eight, PaiTengers and all, who were 
as willing to fight as any of us, they having fome- 
thingon Board that was valuable ; and fome of them 
perhaps all their Fortune. We kept our Way, and 
the Ship bore up to us with all the Sail Ihe could 
make. Night coming upon us, our Man at the Top- 
maft-Head difcovered Land, and another Ship to 
the Windward of us. With that, we called another 
Council, and perfifted in our flrft Opinion of fight- 
ing ; but yet to ufe all Means poilible of making to 
Shore, (which was Barbadoes) : But for all our En- 
B 6 deavour$j 
* 2 7 he A D V E K T U R E S of 
dcavours, the firfl: Ship got' up with us, and about 
Twelve o'Clock at Night hailed us, and commanded 
us to hoift out our Boat, and to come on Board him, 
with our Captain. We anfwered, We had never a 
Boat, (as indeed we had not) but we told him, if 
he would ftay 'till Morning, fomething might be 
done. At I aft he threatened to fink u9* if we would 
Dot &hd our Captain on Board immediately , and 
thereupon fir'd a Gun, which ftruck our Veffel on 
her Quarter. With that we fir'd our Broad fide 
upon him, accompany'd with fome fmall Arms ; 
which, they little expeaing, I belfcve, did fome 
Damage, and put them in Confufion. Whereupon 
we tack'd about, and with our fix Guns rak'd her 
foieandafts but was immediately feconded with 
a Broad-fide from them, which killM us two Men, 
and wounded a third. Upon' which, with loud 
Xluzza's and Firing, they immediately boarded us on 
our Starboard-Quarter, and poured into us at leaft 
iourfcore Men : We refilled them with all the Force 
we had, but all to no purpofe ; they drove us into 
rhe Fore-caftle, where, by good Chance, we made 
ihift to barricade ojirfelvcs y but they threatened to 
turn our own Guns upon us, if we did not fur- 
render immediately : But our Captain being refo- 
lute, order'd us to fire upon' them with our fmall 
Arms. Now we had under the Gratings, clofe to 
our Steerage, a large Cittern, lin'd with Tin, 
where we had unwittingly plac'd feveral Carriages 
of Powder, but happily for us, whether it was our 
-firing, or in the Buttle- fome Match dropt in, I 
know 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 
know not, but the Powder took Fire, blew up the 
Gratings, with fome Part of the Quarter-Deck, 
and Thirty of the Enemy, at leaft, into the Air, 
Upon that we fally'd out, and drove the reft, 
with our Cutlaflcs, into their own Veffel again r 
with the Lofs of feveral. But this fignified little, 
for with the Fall and Breach of our Quarter-Deck y 
the Powder-Room was intircly lropp'd up nor 
could we, without great Difficulty,, clear it from 
the Lumber, fo that we had not any Powder, but 
what was in the Mens Cartouches^ for their Muf- 
kets : However, wefir'd brifkly with them ; yet never- 
thelefs they prepared to board us again, with all 
the Menaces imaginable. - This Fight continued at 
leaft four Hours, and the Dawn began to break 
upon us, which difcover'd to us the other Ship we 
faw over Night, and we diflinguiih'd Euglijh Co- 
lours ; with that we gave a great Shout, and nVd 
our fmall Arms again. The Enemy no fooner faw 
the Ship with Englijh Colours, but they cut off 
their Grappling-irons, and did their Endeavour to 
make off, but their Rigging was fo fhatter'd, that 
their Sails could not be hoifted. In the mean Time 
the other Ship came up to us, and, without hailing, 
pour'd a Broad-fide into the Pyrate, and there foU 
low'd a defperate Fight between them. As for our 
Ship, it was of little Ufe„ fo we fteer'd off, and 
dear'd our Gun-Room,, and in half an. Hour (the 
Fight continuing all. that while) we had charg'd 
our great Guns, and returned to . the fight * bus 
upon the Inftant we faw the Pyrate finking; the 
14 The Adventures of 
Englijh Ship had tore a Hole between Wind and 
Water, that ihe funk in a Moment, and but eight 
Men fav'd, who to)d us their Captain was a Pyrate 
from Guadalupe ; that when they were finking, they 
had not above twenty Men left, out of an hundred 
and fixty; and molt of them wounded. The Ship 
that gave us this Reafonable refcue, was the Guer/fey 
Frigate, whofe Station was Barbadoes. We lay by 
for an Hour or two, to repair our Rigging, 
andhail'd her, defiring them to fend a Boat on Board 
for our Captain, becaufe we were without one, 
which accordingly they did. Captain Wafe and 1 
went immediately on Board, to pay our Refpe&s 
to their Commander, who receiv'd us with all ima- 
ginable Civility. We had on Board our Ship feven 
Sailors and two Paffengers kill'd : the one Jofepb 
Ridge of Barbadoes, and the other Daniel Thomson of 
Mc<vh 9 Merchant; and four wounded. The Gucrn- 
fey had fixteen Men kilPd, and three wounded ; 
among which was the Lieutenant, who died the 
fame Day of a Wound he receiv'd in his Thigh, 
with a Mufket Ballchew'd, which made the Wound 
mortal. The Captain invited us to dine with him, 
which we did ; where we were treated with a new 
Difh, (at Ieaft to me) a Pollo> that is, Fowls boil'd 
with Rice and fait Pork ; which was very palatable. 
We took our Leave of the Captain, and went on 
Board of our own VefTel, and at five o'CIock in 
the Evening [July the 4th), after faluting the Town, 
caft Anchor in Carlifle Bay. 
Barbados, 
Capt. Richard Falconer. rlf 
Barbadoes, for its Bignefs, is the richeft and beft 
peopled Ifland in all America ; it is feated in thir- 
teen Degrees, twenty Minutes ; in Length, twenty- 
four meafur'd Miles, and in the bioadeft Part 
about iixteen : It refembles a Leg of Mutton, with 
the Knuckle off. The North and Eaft Sides are 
fortify 3 d by Nature, from any Harm from Ships of 
War, by Reafon there is no Anchoring Place. On 
the South-Eaft and Wefterly Part, are four excel- 
lent, commodious, well fortify'd Harbours. The 
chief is that where we now ride, which will con- 
tain a thoufand Sail of Ships, free from the Danger 
of any Winds. At the Bottom of this Harbour 
Hands the Capital of the Ifland, calPd St. Michael's ; 
with a Fort at each End, and a Platform in the 
Middle; which makes it of Strength fufficient to 
oppofe a royal Navy : 'Tis a neat large Town, 
with two Churches, one with a handfome Organ : 
For Largenefs, I think this Town may compare 
with our City of Salijbury, but better inhabited. 
As for the other three, which are, l , Charles Town* 
2. James's Town. 3. Little Brijlol in Sprigbfs Bay, 
I can give no Manner of Account of: But for my 
Reader's Satisfa&ion, if he will confult Legon's 
H'Jiory of Barbadoes, he may come to the bell Know- 
ledge of the whole Ifland. They are govern'd by 
the fame Laws as we in England. A Native of Bar- 
badoes told me, the whole Ifland contain'd at Ieaft 
12000 Inhabitants, Slaves included. 
July the 20th, (after our Captain had left hisPaf- 
fengers, and Part of his Cargo) we fet Sail for Ja- 
maica ; 
'6 The Adventures of 
maka : Here you muft Note, that from Barhadoes to 
Jamaica, you always have the Wind in your Stern* 
We pafs'd Mariimco, Dominica, Guadalupe, and 
Antigua, and the firft of Augujl anchor'd at Nevis, 
where we had immediately the Friends of Mr. Da- 
niclTbompfon, Merchant, on Board us, to unlade the 
Goods ; for they had heard of his Death, by a Vef- 
fel from Barbadoes a Week before. 
Mcvis, or AV<wV, lies in feven Degrees, nine- 
teen Minutes ; it is fix Leagues in Circumference: 
There is but one- Harbour in the whole lfland* 
which fome call Mcvis Harbour, or Bath Bay, where 
lies the Town, under the former Denomination* 
It is pretty well fecured with a Fort and Platform 
of great Guns. I was inform'd by one of the In- 
habitants, that there is a Mineral Water, very good 
to bathe in, which cures the fame Diftempers with 
our Baib in Somerfetfoire. 
The Englijh fettled here Anno Dcm* 1628, and 
have increafed from one hundred and forty, to five 
thoufand and upward. They fend abroad as much 
Sugar, Ginger, Cotton, and Tobacco, as any llland 
of its Bignefs in the Caribhees. They are very regu- 
lar in their Government here ; they neither allow 
Drunkennefs, nor Whoring, (I mean in common, 
as in Barbadoes, Ja?naica, &c.) Here 1 was firft 
faluted with a little Fly, calPd a Mujteto; and 
tho' it is fmall, yet it has a devilifh lharp Sting 
with it. They get into our , Stockings, and are fo 
very troublefome to new Comers, that there's 
Juirdly any Bearing of them. If you fcratch the 
Places . 
Capt. Richard Falconi 17 
Places itung by them till the Blood comes, it may 
prqve dangerous; I mvfelf kept a fore Leg three 
Months upon that Account. I was alfo in.forrn'd 
there waa a Flea they call .Ckigos, which breed in» 
Duir, or Afhes ; and of all the Infe&s in the 
Canibees* this is the moll dangerous : they get 
into the Nails of the Toes imperceptibly, and from 
thence run over all the Body ; tho' they chiefly fix 
thcmfelves in the Bottom of the Feet: Which oc- 
cafions an Itching, followed with Holes in the 
Skin. They make Bliiters as big as Peas in the 
Flefh, where their young ones breeding, caufe Ul- 
ceis and rotten Flelh, which there is no Remedy for,, 
but to eat away the Parts afFe&ed with Aqua-fortte 
and burnt Alum. While we lay here, there was a 
Sword-Fiih ran himfelf afhore, (which was fuppos'd 
to be done in eagerly chafing fome other Fiih :) It 
had no Scales, but a dufky Skin, and a white 
Belly, rough like a Smith's File, a flat head, two 
Fins on each Side, two on the Back, and one in- 
/lead of a Tail. It is a Fi£h of piodigious Swift- 
nefs : The Sword (which is fix'd in the Head) is 
fix, feven, and fometimes eight Feet long : Near 
his Eyes are two Noftrils out of which he throws 
the Water a great Height into the Air. This Fiih 
often encounters with the Whale, and proves too 
hard for him ; for with his Sword he rips up the 
Whale. I bought one of thefe Swords of a poor 
Inhabitant, for four Bottles of Englijk Beer, (which 
is a great Rarity with them) that he got in a Piece 
2 8 The Adventures 
of Wreck, but thruft in To far, that the End in 
getting out, was broke three Inches. 
Next to Mevh 9 lies St. Cbripphtr'i (or, as we 
generally call it St. Kit's) in feventecn Degrees, 
and twenty-live Minutes, Northward of the Equi- 
noftial. ft is twenty five Leagues in Circmference, 
the Soil light and fandy, and produces Fruit 
common with us in England. In the Middle of this 
Ifland rifes a high Mountain, from which run 
Streams of frelh Water, that fometimes {well fo 
high with fudden Rains, that they drown all the 
Country near them. This Ifland is inhabited by 
both Englijb and French, who even in the Time of 
War Jive very friendly together. There was for- 
merly difcover'd a Silver Mine here, which the 
Englijb and French claim an equal Title to ; but nei- 
ther make any Ufe of it, by Reafon of the Want of 
Mi ners. The Englijb Liberties are better peopled 
than the French, but the French have more Conveni- 
ences, and better fortify'd Places than the Evg/ijb. An 
Englijb Fry ar belonging to the French Jeluits, (who 
gave me this Defcription) told me that the French, 
had built a Town, calPd Bajfe Terre, (in a Harbour 
of the fame Name, and Chief in the Ifland) full as 
big as Grave/end, with very handfome HouYes, for 
the Merchants, and Trades People, which are many ; 
where there Jsalfo an Hofpital to maintain their indi- 
gent Sick, togetherwithahandfomeFree School, with 
large Endowments, for the Children of the Ifland. 
Bat what they moftly brag of is, their Cattle, which 
is built about a Furlong from the Sea, at the Foot of a 
high 
Capt. Richard Falcoker. 19 
highMountain, lhadow'd with great Trees. IntheWay 
thither, ftand the Houfes of the Governor, and other 
9 
Officers, for more Security ; feated in a Walk of O- 
range and Lemon Trees, from the Brow of the Sea 
up to the Cattle; which is three Story high, built 
with Freeftone and Brick : The Halls and Chambers 
are very lightfome and high, and the Walls are adorn'd 
with Cedar; On the Top is a flat Terrace, which 
yields a delightful Profpect all over the Country. The 
Winds which blow from the Hills, fo temper the 
Heat, that it makes it more pleafant than any other 
Jfland of the Caribbees. As to the Englijb Plantati- 
ons, they are not much inferior to the French, they 
have fix Churches, and two Chapels, for Divine Ser- 
vice. This Ifland was planted jointly by Englijb and 
French, in 1625. Captain Thomas Warner, for the E?ig- 
lijh, and one De/nambuc for the French. The Natives 
made a vigorous Refiftance, but to little Purpofe. With 
this Succefs they return'd back to their feveral Coun- 
tries, and went again and fettled there ; but the Englifh 
having more Supplies from London, daily encreafedf 
when on the contrary, the Merchants at Paris grew 
weary, feeing no Return for all the Charges they 
had been at. But whilrt this Bufinefs feem'd to go 
o 
on with Succefs, an Accident happen'd, which ruin'd 
all at o'rfce. The King of Spain fet out a Fleet the 
fame Year, of thirty one Galloons, three Galleafes, 
and four Pinnaces, with four Thoufand Men, tinder 
the Command and Direction of Frederick de Toledo, 
from Cadiz, Jntonia, Nunncs, Batrico, and Franci/co de 
Almeida, Commander of twenty Galleys, from Portu* 
2 o 77<<? Adventures ^ 
gal; thefe join'd with the abovemention'd, vvirh a 
Refolution to drive the E?igliJ}y, French, and Dutch* 
entirely out of the Amcri can] flands. Coming before 
Mevis> they took nine Englijh Veflels: After that they 
fail'd to St. Christopher's, where Captain Dejnamhuc 
(altho' not prepared for Defence, becaufe their Forti- 
fications were not finihYd) drew all his Forces near 
the Shore, to hinder their landing: Sut Captain 
RoJJey, who commanded another Port, fufrer'd them 
to land without the leaft Refiftance. Whereupon 
young Dejnamhuc, Lieutenant of a Company under 
RoJJey, fally'd out, and fell valiantly on the firft Com- 
pany of Spaniards, killing- many of 'em, and put them 
to the Rout ; but the Spaniards being feconded by a- 
nother Battalion, he was flain, after having made a 
llout Refinance, and forfaken by all his Men. Rofey, 
upon this, abandons his Intrenchments, and flies to 
the Hills, and high Grounds : Whereupon the Spa- 
niards became Mailers of the Forts, but durft not 
follow RoJJey, for Fear of an Ambufcade; which Fear 
prov'dtrue: For DcJnamLuc, undermining the Fort, 
retir'd on board fome VelTel prepar'd for that Purpofc, 
and made off. In the mean Time, the Powder taking 
Fire, blew up the Fort, and fix hundred Spaniards, 
into the Air. The Englijh relying upon the League 
between Spain and England, made no Refinance, but 
fent Agents to Toledo, fcfr. to put him in Mind of 
the League between their Matters : To which he re- 
pty'd, That St. Chrijlophcr' } s , being Part of the Wcfttrn 
World, was given by the Pope to his Matter Philip. 
Neverthelefs 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 21 
Neverthelcfs he gave them fix of the nine Veffels they 
took at Mevis, to imbark themfelves, on Condition 
they would fail immediately for England; which 
they agreed to; but the fix Veffels not holding all, the 
reft were left on the Ifland, for another Opportunity: 
No fooner was Toledo out of Sight, but the remaining 
Part of the Englijh Inhabitants took fre/h Courage, 
and rebuilt feveral Forts, and made every thing rea- 
dy for Defence, ifOccafion fhould be. In the mean 
Time Dejnambuc fuffered a great Deal of Hardfhip, 
through ill Weather, and Want of Provifion ; hav- 
ing been at feveral Iflands, intending to fettle, with 
his little Company, but not liking any of them, and 
hearing that the Enemy were gone to the Havana* 
and the Englijh were bufy tilling their Ground, he 
return'd to his former Statiorj, where they fuffered 
many Hardlhips ; till fome Veffels from the Nether- 
lands arrived, and furnifiVd them with Pro villous, 
Ammunition, and Cloaths, upon Credit : But in a 
few Years they paid all, and grew rich, from their 
plentiful Stock of Tobacco, Sugars, Ging-er, and 
Indico, till they brought it to the rich and flouxifh- 
ing State it now remains in. 
Having ended our Affairs, wefet Sail for Jamaica* 
the 2 1 ft of JuguJ? 9 1699 ; and, on the 7 th of Sep- 
tember, anchor'd fafe in Port Royal Harbour, in the 
great and flourifhiug Ifland of Jamaica, without any 
Accident. This was our laft Station : Here we 
were to unlade the remaining Part of our Goods, 
and take in its Return, Rum, Sugar, and Spice. 
This 
22 The Adventures of 
This Ifland of Jamaica is the only Mart of all 
America for the Englijb, who drive a large Trade 
here ; but Wickednefs is in its full Perfe&ion ; I re- 
member Captain Wafc alk'd one of our Men, that 
had fpentfome Money aftiore, what was his Opinion 
of the Honefty of the Women of Port Royal? Why 
truly, fays Tar % very bluntly, if there's one honeft 
Woman Ihould happen to tumble down, I believe 
there's never another to take her up* Provifion is 
prodigious dear here ; two or three of us went on 
Shore to Dinner, one Day, at Port Royal, where we 
had only a roafted Turkey, wretchedly lean, and no- 
thing nigh fowell tailed as our Englijb Turkeys, and 
our Eating came to thirty Shillings; but th^rvto-make 
amends, Money, is plenty enough: We had a 
Sailor on Board, that had been a Taylor by Trade; 
this Fellow got Leave of the Captain to go on 
Shore for a Month, where he clear'd, by working 
Journey-Work, twelve Pounds for that Month ; 
But then he had the Ship's Provifion carry 'd on 
Shore to him two or three times a Week ; had he 
been to have paid for his Diet, he had fav'd but a 
fmall Matter. I was mightily furpriz'd to fee a 
Market for Turtle, in the fame Manner as our 
Butchers. This is a Meat, or rather Fifh, of an 
odd Nature, but of an excellent Tafte ; the 
Lean looks like the Flem of Pork, but fome- 
thing of a deeper red ; the Fat is a Sort of a 
light green, but very lufcious ; this is the common 
Diet of the Slaves, or meaner Sort of Peo- 
ple! but if Strangers eat too much of it, it is 
apt 
Capt. Richard Falconer* 23 
apt to give them the Bloody-Flux, This is a very 
reigning Diilemper here, and carries off Abundance 
of new Comers. The Ifland of Jamaica lies — - 
Leagues North from the Southern Continent of Ame- 
rica* in the Sea calPd Mare del Nor; and South from 
the Ifle of Cuba, about twelve Leagues ; and 
twenty Weft from Hifpaniola* in eighteen Degrees 
Northern Latitude ; and beareth from Rio de Hack, 
North Weft* an hundred and fifty Leagues ; from 
Santa Martha* N. N. W. an hundred and thirty five; 
from Carthegena* N. an hundred and fourteen ; 
from Portohcllo* N. E. and by jV. an hundred and 
ninety ; from the Ifthmus of Darien* N and by E* an 
hundred and feventy ; and from the Bay of Mexico, 
an hundred and fifty. Its Form is almoft oval; be- 
ing in Length, from Eaft to Weft* about fifty- four 
Leagues ; from North to South* in the broadeft Part, 
twenty three Leagues, growing narrower toward each 
End, like a Rowling. Pin, (a good Comparifon.) In 
Circumference, one hundred and fifty Leagues. The 
Air of this Ifland is more temperate, and the Heat 
more tolerable, than any of the other Iflands, byRea- 
fon of the cool Breezes which conftantly blow from 
the Eaft* with frequent Showers of Rain, and Dews 
that fall in the Night. Thefe Dews are very perni- 
cious to carelefs drunken People, that lie expos'd all 
Night to them. This is alfo the only Ifle of the Bar- 
loventi* which is not fubjeft to violent Storms, and 
Hurricanes, as the other Iflands are. And the Difea- 
fes that are predominant here, are only bred by In- 
temperance ; as Surfeits, Bloody-flux, Fevers, and 
Agues ; 
24 Adventures of 
Agues ; or occafioned by ill Diet, or Slothfulnefe. 
This Ifland is well water'd with Springs and Rivulets 
of frefli Water, (with many handfome Rivers ftored 
with feveral Sorts of Fifh ;) and is all over (efpe- 
cially in the Weftem Parts) full of high Mountains 
and Hills : It is alfo well wooded ; for the North and 
South Parts chiefly abound with large and tall 
Woods. Neither are there wanting Savana's, or 
Plains. The Commodities of this Ifland are very 
many ; and firft, for Vegetables ; the Sugars are fo 
good, that they now out- fell thofe of Barbadoes 5/. 
per Cent. Tobacco is fo excellent, that it is bought 
up fafter than the Planters can cure it: The In- 
digo is alfo here very good : The Cotton is much 
the beft of all the neighbouring Jflands. Tortoife- 
fhcll is very plenty here. Here are alfo great 
Variety of Dyewood, as Fuftiek, Red-wood, a kind 
of Log-nvood, Cedar, Mahogany, Lignum vi/sir, Ebony, 
Cranadille, and many others. Nay, there are many 
Mines, both of Silver, Copper, and Gold; but that 
the Inhabitants think it would be dangerous to break 
them up, for fear of drawing the Spanijh and French 
Buccaniers upon 'em. There are feveral Fifhermen 
who have found Pieces of Ambergreafe upon the Sur- 
face of the Water, near the Shore- Ginger grows 
better here than in any other Part of America-, and 
Cod-Pepper very plentifully: And alfo, a certain Kind 
of Spice call'd, Piemcte, in Form of Eafl-India Pep- 
per, of a very aromatical and curious Tafte, parta- 
king, as it were, of feveral Spices together: It 
grows wild among the Mountains, and is highly 
valu'd 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 2$ 
valued among the Inhabitants. Of IVXedicinal Plants 
1 have Teen feveral, asGuaiacu/n, China-root, Ca/JiaFiJ- 
tula, Veuillard, Jchiotes, Tamarines, Conirayerva, Ope- 
ras, Adiantiwi-nigru7n K Alots, Qucurms, Agrifiii, Sumach, 
Acacia, Miffelto, with many other Drugs and Bal- 
fams. The ingenious Sir Hans Sloan has wrote an 
elaborate Book of the Plants of this Ifland* Co- 
chineal is product by a Plant that grows in. this 
Country, but not brought to Perfection, without 
much Care and Induftry. This Ifland is alfo very 
well ftock'd with Cattle, as Horfes, Cows, and Af- 
fes ; there have been many Mules, but the Inhabi- 
tants made fo little Ufe of 'cm, that now there are 
but few. Sheep are large and tall, and their Meat 
indifferently good, but their Fleece worth nothing. 
Goafs (or Cabivates) are without Number, being a 
Beafl. peculiar to the Country. Hogs, both wild 
and tame in Abundance. I have been hunting the 
wild ffog in Porto Movant Bay, and it gives good 
Diverfion, tho' fometimes dangerous : You go Ajuth. 
fome Ten or a Dozen in Company, arm'd with a 
Musket and a Cutlafs; as foon as ever (with your 
Dogs) you have found 'em out, you all take Aim, 
and fire as quick as you can, but if you don't kill 
them immediately with your Shot, they fet upon 
you opcn-mouth'd, fo that you muft either hew 
'em down with your Cutlaffes, 6r club your Muf- 
kets. Generally as foon as you have 'em, you flay 
'em, as you do Mutton, and J Bariicue' f em, even in 
the very Place where you kill 'em ; that is, you dig 
a fquare Hole in the Earth, then clap four Stakes at 
C each 
?.6 The Adventures of 
each Corner^ and on 'em put your Meat, fo make a 
Fire under it, and when one Side is done enough, 
you turn the other. For tame Fowls, they have of 
all the Kinds that we have in England; befides Gui- 
nea Hens, Parrot h Parachetes, Machmvs, and Boobies, 
(which are Boobies* indeed, for they will fit upon a 
Tree, or Poft, till you come and take 'em.) They 
have three Crops a Year, in this Ifland, and the 
Trees are always green. They have three Sorts of 
Bread, one of EngUJh Corn, another of Guinea 
Wheat, and the third of a Root they call Cafa<vi> 
which is rank Poifon, till prefs'd and bak'd in an 
Oven; 'tis very white, hut taftrelefs, and the Bread 
made of it, the Size of our thin Oat-Cakes. But 
of all the Fruit this Ifland produces, the Pine- Ap- 
ple is the beft, which grows very low, with Leaves 
ibmething like the Indicus Fiats that I have feen in 
hardens here in England ; the Tafle is fo excellent, 
that I know not what to compare it to, it having 
the Relifh of all fine-fiavour'd Fruits. There's a 
Fruit that grows upon a low Bulh, call'd the 
Prickle-Pear, the Infide of which is red, and on 
the Top is a little thorny Thing like a Star, which 
if you do not take away before you eat it, may 
prove pernicious. If you eat but two of this 
Fruit, it will make your Urine as red as Blood. 
Plantains are very good Fruit, which is, when 
bak'd in the Ames, u/ed by the Slaves inftead of 
Bread: 'Tis a Fiuit with a Skin on it, like our 
Beans, which is taken, off, and then the Fruit ap- 
pears, a,bout the Size of a Bolognia Saufage. Ban- 
nana* 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 27 
nanus is another Fruit fomething of the fame Kind, 
but (horter, and more lufcious : Both thefe Fruits 
are ripe all the Year, for when fame are lit to 
gather, others are green, and fome in Bud, The 
Oranges and Lemons, are neither of 'em good, in 
my Opinion : But their Limes arc wonderful ; they 
grow upon a Tree full of Thorns, where you muft 
be fure to prick your Fingers, if you'll gather 'em, 
Thefe, with Spring Water and Sugar, was the chief 
of my Liquor, while we ftaid there. The Potatoes 
are very fine here, exceeding, in my Opinion, even 
thofe of Ireland. Then there's another Root call'd 
Yams, fomething like a Jerufalcm Artichoke, butlar- 
ger and ftringy. The Onions of Jamaica are much 
milder and better tafted that our Englijb Onions, and 
very wholefome : they ufed to make a great Addi- 
tion to our Crogick Brewis ; that is, Bifket foak'd in 
fair Water, for fome Time, then the Water thrown 
away, and the Bifket ftrew'd over with Salt, Oil, 
and Lime-Juice, toge[her with Onions ; and fo eaten 
as a dainty Diih. There is a fenfitive Plant in this 
Ifland; the Stalk, furrounded with Leaves full of dark 
red Spots, bears a fweet fmelling violet- colour'd 
Flower ; the Leaves, as foon as touch'd, clofe up to- 
gether, and die ; and accordingly as they are held ia 
the Hand a fhorter or longer Time, this Alteration 
continues. Ginger grows plentiful here ; the Male 
Plant(for there are Sexes)hath generallybiggerLeaves 
than the Female : The Stalks, which are without 
Knots, have more Leaves upwards than downwards, 
and fpreads along the Earth, ftill taking Root anew. 
Cz * When 
28 The Adventures of 
When the Leaves wither, then the Ginger is com- 
monly ripe, butithas not that Poignancy whilft green, 
as when dry'd. The Cotton of this Place (of which 
the Cloaths and Hammocks are made, and vended in 
mod Parts of the Wejiern World) grows on a Tree 
about the Height of a Peach-Tree, with a ftrait Stem, 
or Body, out of which fhoot Boughs of an equal 
Length, and at equal Diftances: Between the Leaves, 
which are narrow and long, grow red Flowers, and 
from 'em, oval Cods, which, when ripe, inclofethe 
Cotton, and a Seed like Pepper. Of hurtful Crea- 
tures, there is the Crocodile, or Alligator , which in- 
fefts many Rivers and Ponds ; this is a Creature of a 
monftrous Size; I have feen one twenty -fix Feet long; 
it moves fwiftly and flrongly forward, but turns 
flow - r they are impenetrable every where but in the 
Eye, or Belly ; they have four Feet, or Fins, with 
which they go, or fwim ; their ufual Courfe of get- 
ting their Food is to lie on their Backs as dead, then 
with a fudden Onfct they fpring upon their Prey, 
whether Man or Beaft : But 'tis eafily avoided by a 
Man, by Reafon of an aiomatic Smell that comes 
from the Body, which may be fmelt five hundred 
Yards ; but if a Man has got a Cold, and can't fmell, 
if he has Eyes they are eafily avoided ; for if they 
run right forward, it is but flipping on one Side, for 
they are as long in turning as a Coach. The Oil that's 
made from thefe Creatures, is good for feveral Dif- 
tempers. They Jay their Eggs (about the Size of a 
Turkey's) and cover 'em with Sand, which heated 
by the Beams of the Sun, hatches the young ones, 
who 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 2-9 
who naturally creep into the Water. One of thefe 
Creatures fwam after us fifty Yards in Porto Movant 
Bay, and rais'd his Head upon the Edge of our 
Long-Boat, which was deeply laden with Calks of 
Water; our Carpenter, who had been felling of 
Timber to wood the Ship, ftruck him a very great 
Blow on the Nofe with his Hatchet, that I am fure 
hurt him, for he gave a Sort of Shriek, which no- 
, , . „ fl .,«.u-oi^Jwoici wnere 
. ooierv'd him to run his Head into the Mud, as if 
it pain'd him, which makes me think that their 
Heads are not invulnerable, as is reported* The 
Guana is another Creature amphibious as the Attiga- 
tor, but nothing nigh fo large: There's an Ifland 
near Jamaica, call'd Guana Ifland, inhabited by no- 
thing elfe; our Seamen eat thefe latter, but much 
Good may it do 'em, for their £le(h look* like a 
Piece of a Black- a- moor' % Arm ; but how it taltes I 
can't tell, neither do I ever defign to try. The Co- 
coa Nut is a Fruit that is both Meat, Drink and 
Cloathing to the Natives (1 mean the Blacks): the 
Rind fcrves for weaving of Cloaths, nay and rigging 
their Canoes, before they knew the Europeans ; and 
when you have taken off the Bark, you mull be be- 
holden to a Saw to cut off the Monkey's Face, which 
is the Top, with three Marks that make it fome- 
thing refjmble that Animal; then the JEnfide con- 
tains, fir ft a liquid Subflanee, like Whey, but very 
ftveet ; after you have taken out this Liquor, round 
the Nut is a Sub/lance a Quarter of an Inch thick, 
which you cut out, and that's the Meat, which is 
C 3 very 
3° Tkc Adventures of 
very delicious and grateful to the Taftc, but not 
wholefome, if eat of too much: There's another 
Thirg that's very remarkable, and that is the Ph?~ 
f:k Nut, much of the Tafte of our Pig-Nuts, but 
one or two of 'em will do your Bufinefs, upwards or 
downwards, as well as Dr. Anodyne Necklace's Sugar- 
Plumbs. As I was going one Day to dine with 
Captain Kendal, (a Gentleman Inhabitant within a 
0 A fi- f ~ r i * TT V bv a Black 
a Servant of his, I faw in the Hedge a fair ,, rx . . 
growing on a Bu-flv, which 1 readily gathered, and 
was conveying to my Mouth, but prevented by the 
Black's giving me a Blow on the Hand, which ftruck 
it from me; I immediately drew my Sword in the 
Scabbard, and fell to belabour the poor Fellow for his 
Infolence, for I having been familiar with him, 
and talked to him along the Road, thought he made 
our Englijh Proverb true, if you gi<ve an Inch they'll 
take an Ell; but it feemed the Fellow faved my Life 
by it, for this Fruit, which was called a Mangincd 
Jppky was rank Poifon, but what I never had feen 
or heard of before ; I was fo concerned for the Blows 
1 had given the poor Fellow that I gave him a Dol- 
lar to make him Amends. I remember I was after- 
wards warning myfelf at a River, in the fame Bay, 
and it raining very hard, I went under a Tree, to 
fave my Cloaths from being wet, and in placing 
them together in a Cavity of the Shore the Drops of 
Rain fell on a Mangineel Tree, and fo on my Back, 
bu t in lefs than half an Hour my Flelh burned very hot, 
and white Blifters appeared upon my Skin, infomuch 
that 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 31 
that I was in a high Fever; bat a Native of the 
Place being with me, ran for fait Water and wafhcd 
me all over, and afterwards got fome Oil, and dip- 
ped my Shirt in it, and put it on my Back, which 
gave me Eafe immediately ; but the Spots remained 
upon my Skin feveral Years afterwards. One of our 
common Sailors by eating two or three of thefe 
Apples dyed in three Days raving mad. This Ifland 
was firft difcovercd by Co'umbus> Anno Dorn. 1499. 
After he had conquered the Natives, and built a Ci- 
ty called Sevilla, (afterwards St, J ago dele Vega) con- 
fining of about Xeventeen hundred Houfes, two 
Churches, two Chapels, and.an Abbey,, he made his 
Son Diego Columbus Governor of the whole f /land, for 
his Matter Ferdinand King of Spain-, The firft Attempt 
made upon this Ifland by the Englijh, was A, D. 
1 592, under the Command of yir* Aitthony 'Shirley, but 
after vanquiihing the Spaniards they deferted it, as 
not thinking it worth, their keeping, and re- 
turned home. The Spaniards .again. pofleJEng it, 
remained unmolefted, till Jnm\ Dom. 1654, when 
Oliver Cromwell, then Lord Protestor, fitted out a 
FJect of Ship* to make a J>e/ceat on flifpaniola,. under 
ihc Command of Colonel Fenabhs\ but being disap- 
pointed of their Hopes, .and meeting with ill Suc- 
cefs, Jteered away for Jamaica* and oa the, 10th of 
May (after a flout Refinance) made themfelves Maf- 
ters of it. The Ifland is fuppefed to contain two 
hundred and fifty. thou. fa nd Inhabitants^ Slaves in- 
cluded. The chief Towns are, 1/?, St. Jago> about 
fix Miles up the Country. z% % Pafage-Town y fix 
Miles from that. $dly> (And indeed the largeft, before 
^ 4 the 
5 Z The Adventures of 
the Earthquake deftroyed it) Pert Poykl; it contain- 
ed a thoufahd Houfes, many of them eminent Build- 
ings ; but as it is now builton a fmall Neck of Land, 
which forms the Haibour, I take it to be about the 
Bignefs of Deptfcrd. At both Ends of the Tdwn is 
a large Fort, known by the Name of the fquare and 
.round Fort : This fquare Fort, Or Cattle, contains a 
'hundred 'Pieces of Ordnance, and the other about 
thirty, befides feveral Cannon on fh'e Platform, 
vAiich reaches from one Fort to the other; fo that, 
without Treachery, they neeu! not fear an Attack 
either by Land or by 'Sea. About a Mile Farther, is 
another finall Fort, catted 'La/tdnvaYd Fort, which 
fecures the Town from any Attempt by Land : Off 
the Mouth of the Harbour, towards the Sea, lie fe- 
veral fmall I/lands, 'upon the molt Weftm of which 
(lying within half a League of the Town, and by 
which all the V^/Fels 'mutt pafs) they have erecled a 
Port which contains ieight Guns. The chief Har- 
fcour, after Port Royal, is Port St. Anthony, on the 
Norths a very 75ife, commodious 'landlocked Har- 
bour, only the coming in is fomething difficult, 
the Channel being narrowed by a » little Ifland 
that lies off the Mouth of the Pork 2d. Porto Movant* 
a very capacious Harbour, where Ships do conveni- 
ently Wood >and water, and ride fafe from alj 
Winds, yt, On the South is Port Gagtuay, which is 
much the largeft of all that has been mentioned, it 
being five Leagues over in fome Places; it is land- 
locked by a Point of Land that runs S. TJ\ from the 
Main of the Ifland : The Road is fo deep that a 
Ship' of a thoufand Tons may lay her Side to th e 
Shore 
Capt. Richard Falconer- 3 j 
Shore of the Point, and lade or unlade at Pleafure, 
with Planks afloat. 
Now finding our Affairs would detain us half a 
Year longer, J got Leave of the Captain to go in a 
Sloop, with fome of my Acquaintance, to get Log- 
wood, and on September the 25th we fet Sail for the 
Bay of Campecbe, with a fair Wind. The old Man- 
ner of getting this Wood is as follows ; a . Com* 
pany of defperate Fellows get together in a Sloop, 
well armed, and land by Stealth, but in Cafe of 
any Refinance, the whole Crew attends on the 
Cutters, ready armed to defend them ; indeed there's 
a Colony of Englijb that fell this Logwood, but 
many chufe the other Way ; all this was ftrange to 
me, for I knew nothing of the Matter, till we 
were out at Sea. There was one Fellow there that 
told me, that about ten Years before he went with 
a Veffel, and they took the fame Method as ufual, 
in getting it, and landed all their Men but fix, 
that ihcy left on Board to look after the Veffel ; in 
the mean Time the Spaniards having Intelligence of 
their Defcent, fent a hundred Men in feveral Ca- 
noes, to feize their Veffel ; which accordingly 
they did, without any Refiftance from the fix Men 
on Board. After they had clapped thefe Men 
under Hatches, they fearched and ranfack^d the 
Veffel, fending every Thing on Shore that was of 
any Value ; then they prepared to trepan the Crew,, 
as they came on Board, which happened the very 
next Night, when fome of the Men coming oti 
Board with a Load of Logwood, the Spaniards 
C 5 caufed 
34 ¥be Adventures cf 
caufed the fix Men to ftand upon Deck, and on 
Pain of Death, not to difcover the Truth of the 
Matter, which happened as they defired, for the 
Men coming on Board careleily without their Arms, 
were all feized immediately and clapped in Irons. 
The reft that were on Shore, wondering at the Stay 
of the Boat, fent a Canoe with fix Men, to know 
the Reafon of their Delay, which were likewife 
taken in the fame Trap with the former. The 
Man that told me this Story, was one of thefe lall 
fix, who found Means fecretly in the Middle of the 
Night to flip into the Water, and fwim afhore, 
tho* half a League off, where he happily inform'd 
the reft of the Crew (which were forty three) of 
the Misfortune that had happened to the reft of 
their Companions : Whereupon they confulted what 
they had beft to do ; when it was unanimoufly 
agreed, to feize upon three large Canoes, that lay 
at the Bottom of the Bay, that belonged to fom e 
French Hunters that were on Shore ; which was done 
accordingly : On Board they immediately got, well 
armed, and fleered away for their Sloop : But as 
they defigned to trick them the fame Way as the 
others had done their Companions, they confulted 
what to do if they fhould be difcovered before they 
could get on Board, which was probable enough. 
At length it was agreed to carry on the Plot in 
order to deceive them, and as foon as ever they 
could get over the Ship's Side, to aflault the Ene- 
my with all the Vigour imaginable, appointing 
two or three to releale their Companions, and put 
Arms 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 35 
Arms into their Hands, to be affiftant in recovering 
their Liberties. Every Thing happened as was 
fuggefted, for when they came within half a 
Furlong of the Veflel, .they were hail'd by fome of 
their own Men, as it is ufual in fuch Cafes ; which 
was anfwered by them in the Canoes, with fwearing 
and curfing at 'em., for not coming aihore with 
their Long-boat, as ordered, buttoforce 'em to bring 
their Wood aboard in Canoes. They afked from on 
Board, how many were come with them ? All (an^ 
fwered they in the Boat) but three, that we left A- 
ihore to look after our Arms, and a fmall Re- 
mainder of Logwood, which you muft go and fetch 
immediately with the Long-boat, (which they pre- 
tended could not go to them before, by Reafon Ihe 
had a Hole broke in her Bow, againft a Piece of 
Rock, that gave them a great deal of Trouble in 
getting her to the Veffel.) Our People fmiled to 
themfelvcs to hear they had got their LeiTon fo 
ready. In alking and anfwering thefe Queilions 
they had reached the Veflel, and getting nimbly up 
the Side, they drew from under their Watch* Coats, 
their Piftols and Cutlafles, and firft fired upon the 
Spaniards, who were running to feize them, 'half 
unarmed, as not fufpedYing any Refinance : Thole 
whofe Office it was to releafe t^ie. Prifoners under 
Hatches, did it immediately, by killing the two 
Centinels that watched over them ; and then com- 
ing up with this frefn* Recruit foon overcame the 
Spaniards* and make them call for Quarter : Which 
was not granted till they had thrown down their 
C 6 Arms* 
36 
Arms. When they had furrendered, they chained 
them ^11 under Hatches; and To the Cdnquerors 
became Prifoners a«d the Prifoners Conquerors. 
After the Aclion \v*as over, they looked after the 
Dead, which was faun d to -be'nifce Spaniards,- and 
fcne Englijbmdn, who was fup^ofed to be killed by 
otfr own Men, in the firft Fire. 
r Vp(5n this good Succefs, they having Ncrcice that 
there lay a rich Ship in theOBarbfcur before the Town 
of Cdmpeche, they refolved to try rheirgoodi Fortune 
farther, which they contrived as follows : They hoift- 
ed tyanijh Colours, and failed away immediately for 
the Port of Campeehe*, where they arrived by next 
Morning, faluted -the'Caftle and Town with feven 
Guns, as Friends, and were paid back the Comple- 
ment. The Shore was filled with Numbers of People, 
to fee the Eiiglijhmen brought afhore Prifonors ; but 
they were miftaken. The Ship which they had aDe- 
fignupon layabout a 'League from the Town, as ha- 
ving arrived but two Days before, but was to put 
farther in that very Evening, before the Sea-Breeze 
failed ; our Men boarded her on the Starboard Side, 
which lay from the Town, and took her, without 
firing a Gun, cut herCables, and made out to Sea, 
before the Town knew what was the Matter: But 
-as foon as ever theyfmelt the Trick, Q>>$p&n*/h Man 
of War of thirty Guns (being all that was in the 
Harbour) flipped hrenCables, arid crouiisd all the Sail 
me could, to come up with 4s ; we finding Ore jgain- 
ed upon us, called* a .Council, and at lalt refolved 
to bring up moftx&four Spunijh Prifoners* bound, and 
expofe them to the whole v Fire of the Enemy. 
1 Which 
Capt. Rich-a-rd Falconer, 37 
Which fttcceeded accordingly, for the Ship coming 
clofe upro us without any firing on either Side, com- 
manded us to ftrike. Upon that we ordered the 
Spatujh Captain to lay before them the Condition; 
which profited little at firft, but after many Intrea- 
ties from them, and Threatnings from us, the 
others were prevailed upon to iteer off, and make 
towards tbe Town) while we made rhe.beft of our 
Way. But the Spaniards making up to the Town 
again, was met by feveral armed Boats, with the 
Governor himfelf in one of them, who gave a ftrift 
Command not to regard any Thing, but ufe a 14 
poflible Means to retake the Ship, and the Pyrates 
(as they termed us.) When we perceived the Boats 
making up to the Ship, and obferved her tack about 
to give us Ch-ace, we guefled at the Matter, and 
finding (he gained upon us, we put jourfelves into a 
Pofture of Defence, and propofed to engage her in 
the Prize we took laft, which carried 20 Guns; We 
muftered our Men, and found we had 71, but then 
we had 200 Spanijb Prisoners, who, we feared, if by 
any Accident theyfhould get loofe, might prove our 
Ruin; whereupon a ; Confutation -was immediately 
held to put molt of them to Death. Upon which 
the Captain of the firft Prize ftood up, and faid (in 
-pretty good EngliJbJ Gentlemen, you have taken us 
fairly, and done no more than we ourfelves did to 
you; now feeing that Ship which purfues ys, and 
gains upon us every .Moment, is coming in order to 
£ght you, we ihall run a more certain Danger by 
t, by being your Prifoners, if you expofe us to the 
Jure of their - Cannon, as you did before; and if they 
do 
3 8 Tie Adventures of 
do really Fire, I may as well take them for an Ene . 
my, as you, fince we are fure to receive the mod 
Damage. But to make the Matter fhort, being the 
Time is fo, I propofe to you that if the Veffel fires 
at you, we may reafonably conclude, they have no 
Manner of Regard for us, fo we fhall not have any for 
them, and, if you'll give us that Liberty, we will 
freely fight under your Command, and endeavour, 
as far as in us lies, to defend your VelTel, as much 
as if it was our own. This Speech of the Captain's 
was approved of by the reft of the Prifoners ; 
fo that at laft we agreed to fet fixty of them at 
Liberty, and the reft faft bound under Hatch- 
es, where we put two Centinels, with two Pater- 
reroes fixed, charged with fmall Shot, with Orders 
that if there feemed to be any Thing like Diftur- 
bance, to lire in upon them. The fixty we chofe 
out to be afiiftant to us, were ordered to the great 
Guns, fo that we flill had the Command over them, 
becaufe they had no Arms. After we had fettled 
every Thing, we lay by, (feeing it impoffiblc to es- 
cape without fighting) in order for their coming up 
to us, which they did in a fhort Time, and coming 
within Hail, they ordered us to ftrike immediately, 
and make no Refifiance, or elfe they would. have 
no Regard to their Friends on Board our Ship, but 
fink or take us, and put every Man of us to Death. 
Upon which the Spanifb Captain that was our Prifo- 
ner, made Anfwer, That if they offered to rire a 
Gun, every Spaniard on Board refolved to fight againft 
them as Enemies : Which was anfwered, They mult 
obey the Governor's Orders, who had jujft left them, 
and 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 39 
and was returned on Shore. Upon this they fired a 
Broadfide upon us, but we returned it immediately 
with our fmall Arms, and great Guns, which were 
well plyed by our Spanijh Prifoners. The Fight con- 
tinued half an Hour with all the Fiercenefs imagina- 
ble; at laft the Spaniard prepared to board us with 
his Boats at the fame Time, but were received fo 
brifkly, and fo damaged by our Hand-granadoes, 
that they were obliged to make to the Ship with 
great Lofs. The Hand-granadoes, flood us in great 
Stead, for we difpatched three or four of cur Men 
into the Main-Top, who from thence difcharged 
feveral Granadoes, that by their own Report killed 
and wounded above thirty Men. They attempted 
to board us once again, and came on brifkly with 
firing and loud Shouts, to terrify us ; but we return- 
ed them their Shouts and Firing with Intereft, for 
with a lucky Shot we drove away their Main-Mart, 
which put them into ftrange Confufion : This Acci- 
dent (if we could have laid hold on't) might have 
given us an Opportunity of out-failing them; but 
that was not once thought of, for Defire of Revenge 
made us fight like Furies. The next Broadfide we 
gave them, Itruck away their Rudder, which ren- 
dered them incapable of iteering their Veffel, or 
tacking about : Upon which we perceiving what had 
happened, tacked about, and with a Broadfide that 
raking her fore and aft, killed them, by their own 
Confeflion, fixteen Men, for it fplit two of their 
Guns, whofe Splinters aid mod of the Execution. 
"Now what we call to Rake Fere and Jft % is to hy 
the Side of our Ship againft the Enemy's Head or 
Stern, 
4° The Adventures of 
Stern, and fire into them, fo that every Shot goes 
from one End of the Ship to the other, inftead of 
going acrofs, fo that of Confequence one Shot that 
Way will do more Damage than ten diredly Side 
to Side. The Heat of the Spaniard now began to 
abate, but yet Ire he&ored as much as ever; at lafl 
a lucky Shot entered her Powder Room, and blew 
up her Main-Deck, with feveral Spaniards, into the 
Air; upon which were heard fuch Groans and Yel- 
ling, from wounded and dying Men, that were 
enough to frighten Men lefs inured to fuch Encoun- 
ters : With this Succefs we prepared, in the Confu- 
fion, to board them in our Turn, but was preven- 
ted, by feeing their VefTel finking ; whereupon they 
liruck down their Colours, and afked for Quarter 
and Help ; underftanding their Diltrefs, we imme- 
diately gave them Afliiiance, by putting out our 
Boats, and faved all the Men they had left, which 
were ninety-five, out of four hundred and odd. 
This Succefs fluflied us mightily with Hopes of 
fucceeding in any Enterprize, We loft out of our 
Spaniards twenty-fix, and o>{ Eriglijb nine killed, and 
two wounded, who died the next Day. The Spaniards 
were of fignal Service to us, and fought bravely, even 
to Defperation ; well knowing, if they fhould be 
taken (after fighting on our Side) they muft all in- 
evitably fufter Death : which proved happy for us ; 
for it had been impoffible to have efcaped them, even 
if all the Spaniards on Bo.ard us had Hood neuter. 
After 
Ca'pt. Richard Falconer, 41 
After we'had cleared our Veffel of the Blood and 
dead Men and refreihed ourfelves, we cailed up oar 
Spuni/h Prifoners, th*t they might re r re(h themfelves 
likewife, and returned the others (who had fought 
fo bravely in Our Defence) our hearty Thanks ; and 
the Spanijh Captain expreffed himfelf fo handfomely, 
that our Matter freely offered hiftn our Sloop, victu- 
alled and ready fitted Up, to do w'hat he thought fit 
"with. Upon this kind Offer the Captain fmiled, 
and told him he would not take it without buying: 
And as for Money, I have not a fmgle Dollar, (pur- 
fued-he) but if you'll liften to a Stratagem 'of mine, 
I'll engage to farnjfh you with Money for your Vef- 
-fel, and fomething over and above. With that he 
„propofed to take fix of the Spaniards that had fought 
for -us, and in our Long-Boat to go on Shore to the 
Governor, and demind a Ranfom for the Frifonerc 
we had taken; which was agreed to: Accordingly 
they >\vent afhore, and told the Governor, If he did 
not immediately fend fifty Dollars a Man^ for two 
hundred and twenty, they would be every Soul tied 
Back to Back, and thrown into the Sea. Upon 
which there was a Gathering made through the 
Town, and the Money raifed immediately, and in 
twelve THours the Captain returned with irooo 
Dollars, gave our Captain 5000, diftributed 3000 
among the Sailors,  and rkept the reft for hlmfclf. 
The next Day we fet the Spaniards that were faved. 
from the Man of War on Shore, and as many more 
that were willing, out of the other Ship, and of our 
own Sloop ; fo that Captain Fernando, our friendly 
Spaniard^ 
4 2 The Adventures of 
took his Leave of us, with eighty of his Countrymen, 
with Intention for the South- Sea ; and we ileered our 
Courfe, in our rich Prize, for Jamaica, where we 
fliared it : Every common Sailor had to his Share 
£00/. Moreover the Captain ordered me in parti- 
cular 200/. more, for the Service I did in fwimming 
afhore unperceivcd, to give them Notice. 
After ending his Story, I afked him how he had 
improved his Money from that Time ? Pfha (faid 
he) that, and fwe Times as much, is gone fince 
then. And this is no Wonder, for Sailors are' fuch - 
Fools, that (vhat they get with the utmoft Danger, 
-they fpend as the meaneit Trifles, We failed before 
the Wind fix Days together, towards the Bay, but 
on the Seventh, the Clouds darkened, and the Wei- 
kin feemed all on Fire, by Times, with Lightning, 
and the Thunder roared louder than ever 1 heard it 
in my Life \ in Ihort, a dreadful Hurricane ap- 
proached, which was fufpe&ed by a deceitful Calm, 
'and Showers of Rain, defcribed by the inimitable 
Sha&efpeare, thus : 1 
We often fee againft Come Storm 
A Silence in the Heav'ns ; tie Rack f and fill ; 
The bold Winds Jpeechlefs, and the Orb belotu 
As bujh as Death. 
The Sailors had furled their Sails, and lowered 
their Top-malls, waiting for it under a double- 
reefed Fore-fail : Which at laft came with moft ex- 
treme Violence, 
Either 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 
43 
Either Tropick now 
y Gan thunder : At both Ends of Hea<v* n the Clouds 
From many a horrid Rift abortive pcur'd 
Fierce Rain with Lightning mix y d> Water with Fire., 
In Ruin reconciled. Dreadful was the Rack, 
As Earth and Sky woud mingle. Milton. 
In vain the Majler ijfues out Commands* 
In -vain tin trembling Sailors ply their Hands , 
The giddy Ship, between the Winds and Tides, 
o U " I**' 1 7 an< * forwards* In a Circle rides , 
Stunnd with the atjj*,^ 0 ,„ w; th enjhoots amain, 
. Till counterbug\dy ,Jhe flops, and Jlrtp* # . 
The Face of Things a frightful Image bear % 
And prefent Death in various Forms appear. 
TDryden. 
The Storm lafled with all its Violence three Hours, 
and at laft infenfibly abated,, till it was ftark Calm, 
and not one Breath of Wind was itirring, nor any 
Sign of one, but a little Froth on the Surface. 
The Tcmpcjl is overblown, the Skies are clear, 
And the Sea charm' d into a Calm fo fill, 
That not a Wrinkle ruffles her f moot h Face, 
Dryden. 
After the Storm was over, we loofened our Sails, 
in ExpeSation of the Wind, which in half an Hour 
ftole out again, as frightened at the violent Storm. 
or, 
44 Tbi Adventures of 
or, (if you'll grant me to make a Simile) like a 
poor Debtor that deals out of his Lurking-place, 
when the bluftering Bailiffs are gone out of Sight. 
About fix in the Evening, we faw a Water-Spout : 
this is an aerial Engine, or Limbeck, that draws 
up the fait Water of the Sea, and diftills it into 
frefh Showers of Rain : This Cloud comes down in 
Form of a Pipe of Lead of a vafl Thicknefs, and by 
the Force of the Sun fucks up a great Quantity of 
Water. I ftood an Hour to obferve it ; after it had 
continued about half an Hour in the Water, it Are** 
up infenfibly, by Degrees, till ~" lUU in the 
Clouds; but in tH* ^«ng of the fame, it (hut out 
fome ^ ^ne Water, which fell into the Sea -again, 
with a Noife like that of Thunder, and occafioned 
a Smoke in the Water that lafted for a confiderable 
Time- The Sailors informed me, that thefe Water- 
fpouts fometimes did great Damage to Ships that by 
Calms were too near them when' they fell. One 
Fellow told .me, tHat he faw a Bark of fixty Tons 
fucked out of the Sea by one of them, which caufed 
the Breaking of the Spout, and funk the VefTel 
with the Fall of the Waters, In the Streigkts> when 
Ships approach thefe airy Engines, they fire off a 
Gun, and that breaks them before they come too 
near. The Perfon told me that at the Fall of the 
Water, the Sea was curled as much as if you had 
thrown a large Stone into a (landing Pond of Water. 
We have fometimes at a Diftance feen fourteen ox 
fifteen at a Time at Work, but I never faw one fo 
large as this. 
In 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 45 
In the Evening we caught a fmall Shark, with 
two fucking Filhes that ftuck clofe to her till laid 
on the Deck, and then dropped down of their own 
Accord. This is allowed the Remora of the An- 
cients. It is about the Bignefs of a Mackrel, with 
a flat Head, and is of a grifly Subltance. Thefe 
flick to the Sides of Veflels very frequently, and 
fometimes fwim upon the Surface of the Water, and 
are even caught with a naked Hook. I have fome- 
times feen thefe Fifties Ricking to a Log cf Wood, 
in the V/ater. When we hogged our Ship, (a Hog 
is an Inftrument of fix Feet fquare, fomething like 
a Harrow, and Stumps of old Brooms fixed clofe in 
the middle Part ; this is put to the Bottom of the 
Ship, with a Rope before and another aft, fixed 
to the Capitand, which cleans the Veflel from all 
Sorts of Filth) 1 have feen many of them in the Hog 
together, with Barnicles and Oyfters, and feveral 
other Shell- fi fh. 
Oclokr the 6th, we anchored at Trijl Ifland, in 
the Bay of Campcachy y and fent our Men on Shore at 
Logwood -Creek, to feek for the Logwood-Cutters, 
who immediately came on Board. The Bargain was 
foon ftruck, and in Exchange for our Rum and Su- 
gar, and a little Money, we got in our Lading in 
eight Days, and fet Sail for Jamaica the 15th Day 
of Otfober. 
Now in getting up to Jamaica again, generally 
takes up two Months, becaufe we are obliged to ply 
it all the Way to windward One Day it being ftark 
calm, I went into the Water to wafh nryfelf, tho* 
I was di/Tuaded hy all th« Sailors, by Reafon of that ' 
Coail 
4-6 The Adventures of 
Coaft being infefted with Sharks, which often affault 
People and bite off a Limb : But being there had not 
been any feen that Day, I would venture, yet tied a 
Rope about me, for Fear of any Accident that might 
happen, or the Wind ftriking up of afudden. But I 
had not been long in the Water, before they cried 
from the Gunnel, A Shark ! But I thinking they 
only bantered, as fometimes they do, when any 
one is in the Water, did not mind them, til! at 
laft they pulled me by main Force, up the Side of 
the Ship ; when looking into the Water, I faw a 
fwinging large Shark, with his white Belly tur- 
ned up in order to bite at me. Upon which I 
thanked God and good Friends that had pre- 
vented him, by fwiftly pulling me up ; though the 
Rope had rubbed off the Skin, and fomc Part of 
my Flefli, with the Force. Now a Shark cannot 
get his Prey, without firft turning himfelf upon his 
Back, becaufe their upper Jaw is much larger and 
longer than their under: Which often prevents Ac- 
cidents. 
I one Day went down into the Hold, to bottle 
off a fmall Parcel of Wine that I had there, for Fear 
it would four, and not being a very cleanly Place, 
I was foon in a filthy Pickle : Coming upon Deck 
again, I wanted to clean myfelf, but did not care 
to go into the Water, as before, fo went into the 
Boat a-ftern, that we hoifted overboard in the 
Morning to look after a Wreck that we difcovered 
upon the Water : Being in the Boat, I began to 
wafh myfelf, and when I had dreffed myfelf 
again, I pulled a Book out of my Pocket, and 
fate 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 47- 
fate reading in the Boat ; when, before I was 
aware, a Storm began to rife, fo that 1 could not 
get up the Ship's Side as ufual, but called for 
the Ladder of Ropes, that hangs over the Ship's 
Quarter, in order to get up that Way ; but whether 
it was not fattened above, or whether it broke thro* 
Rottennefs, as being feldom ufed, I cannot tell, 
but down I fell into the Sea ; and though the Ship 
(as they told me afterwards) tacked about to take 
me up, if it was poffible, yet I loft Sight of them, 
through the Du/kinefsof the Evening, and the Storm 
together. Now I had the moft difmai Fears that 
could ever poffefs any one in my Condition : I was 
forced to drive with the Wind, which fate (by good 
Fortune) with the Current, and having kept myklf 
above Water, as near as J could guefs in this 
Fright, four Hours, 1 felt my Feet every now and 
then touch Ground ; and at laft, by a great Wave, 
was thrown and left upon the Sand ; yet it being 
dark, ' I knew not what to do; but 1 got up and 
walked, as well as my tired Limbs would let me; 
and every now and then was overtaken by the 
Waves, but not high enough to warn me away. 
When I had got far enough, as I thought, to be 
out of Danger, 1 could not dtfcover any Thing of 
Land, and I immediately conjectured that it was 
but fome Bank of Sand, that the Sea would over- 
flow at high Tide : Whereupon I fate down to reft 
my weary Limbs, and' fit myfe'lFfor Death, for that 
was all I could expedt, in my own Opinion. Then 
all my Sins Came flying in my Face, which' I re- 
pented 
48 The Adventures of 
pented of with all the Sincerity imaginable : I of- 
fered up my fervent Prayers to our Almighty Cre- 
ator, not for my Safety (becaufe I did not expe<5t any 
fuch Thing) but for all my part Offences ; and I 
may really fay, I expected my Diffolution with a 
Calmnefs that made me think I had made my Peace 
with Heaven. At laft I fellafleep, (tho' I tried all 
I could againft it, by rifing up and walking, till I 
was obliged thro' Wearinefs to lie down again.) 
In the Morning when I awaked, 1 was amazed to 
find myfelf among four or five very low fandy 
Iflands, but all fcparated half a Mile or more (as I 
guefled) by the Sea. With that I began to be a 
little chearful, and walked about to fee if I could 
find any thing that was eatable, but to my great 
Grief I found nothing but a few Eggs, that I was 
obliged to eat raw ; this laid my Condition before 
, my Eyes in a moft horrid Manner, and the Fear of 
flarving feemed to me to be worfe than that of 
drowning; and oft did I wilh that the Sea had 
fwallowed me, rather than thrown me on this de- 
folate ifland ; for I could perceive by the Evennefs 
of them, that they were not inhabited either by 
Man or Beaft, or any Thing elfe but Rats, and 
feveral Sorts of Fowl, , 
Upon this Ifland there were fome few Buflies of a 
Wood they called Barton Wood, which ufe.d to be 
my Shelter at Night; but to eompleat my Miiery, 
there was not to be found one^Drop of frefli Water on 
the Ifland ; fo that I was forced to drink my own 
Urine for two or thf ee Days together 5 which made 
my 
Capt. Richard Falcon £R. 49 
Hiy Skin come off like the Peel of a boiled Codlin. 
At laft my Mifery fo increafed, that I was often in 
the Mind to put an End to my wretched Life, but 
defifted, on the Opinion that I had of fome Alli- 
gator, or other voracious Creature, coming to do it 
for me. Strange Circumftances indeed ! to wifh to 
be devoured alive as the lelfer Misfortune. 
I had lived a Week here upon Eggs only, when, 
by good Fortune, upon a Bum I difcovered a Boob? 
fitting. I ran immediately, as faft as I could, and 
with a Stick knocked him down : I never con fidered 
whether it was proper to eat or no, but I fucked 
the Blood,. and eac the Flefh, with-fuch a Pleafure 
as none can exprcfs, but them that have felt the 
Pain of Hunger to the fame Degree as myfelfV 
After 1 had devoured this Banquet, I walked about, 
and difcovered many more of thefe Birds, which I 
flew. 
Now my Stomach being pretty well appeafed, I 
began to con/ider whether I could not, with two 
Sticks, make a Fire, as I had feen Blacks in Jamaica : 
1 tried with all the Wood I could get, and at laflr 
happily did it. This done, I gathered fome more 
Sticks, and made a Fire, picked feveral of my 
Boobies, and broiled them as well as I could ; and 
now I refolved £0 come to an Allowance. This 
Bird is a Water Fowl, about the Bignefs of a large 
Crow, of a grey Colour ; it has a long firong BilJ, 
and Feet like a Duck, and its Flefh feemed to me 
to tafte fomething like a Duck's, but ftronger, and 
I> a little 
5 o 7^ Adventures of 
a little fifty : And it is fuch a Booby, that it will 
not get out of your Way without beating. 
At Night I and the reft of my Fellow-Inhabitants 
had a great Storm of Rain and Thunder, with the 
reddeft Lightning I had ever feen, which well wafhed 
us all, 1 belief 5; as for myfelf, my Cloaths (which 
were only a Pair of thin Shoes and Thread Stock- 
ings, and a Cotton Waiftcoat and Breeches) were 
foundly Wet; but I had this Happinefs, to find in 
the Morning feveral Cavities of Rain- Water, which 
£ut in my Head a Thought of making a deep Well, 
or hollow Place, that Imight have Water continu- 
ally by fhe, Which ! brought to Perfection in this 
Manner : I took a Piece of Wood I found on the 
Ifland, and pitched upon a Place under a Burton 
Tree, where with my Hands and the Stick together, 
I dug a Hole, or Well, big enough to contain a 
Hogfhead of v\ ater, then put in Stones and paved 
it, and got in and ftamped them down hard all 
round, and with my Sticks beat the Sides clofe, ib 
that I made it capable of holding Water for a Jong 
Time. 
But now the Difficulty was, how to get the Water 
there, which at laft I contrived very well, for with 
my Shirt I effe&ed it, by foaking it in Water for 
fome Time, and then afterwards it would bear it 
very well ; fo with this Holland Bucket I could 
carry two Gallons of Water at^ Time, which would 
not leak out above a Pint, in two hundred Vards ; 
fo in two Days Time I had filled my Weil. 
Now 
Capt. Richard Falcon £ r. 51 
Now I began to think of Life again for a while, 
for I had ready broiled forty of thefe Boobies > de- 
igning to allow myfelf half a one a Day. J alfo 
made myfelf a Cupboard of Earth, by mixing Water 
with it, which was four Feet in Length, three in 
Height, and two in Breadth, though it lafted but 
four Days, the Sun drying it fo faft, that it cracked, 
and afterwards fell in Pieces. What moft amazed 
me, and pleafed me together, was, that my Boobies 
continued fweet without the leail Taint. I had a 
fmall Ovid printed by Elzevir, which I had by 
good Fortune put in my Breeches Pocket, when I 
was going up the Ladder of Ropes, and by being 
preffed clofe was not quite fpoiled, but only the 
Cover off, and ftained a little with the Wet. This 
was a great Mitigation of my Misfortunes, for I 
could entertain myfelf in this Book, under a Burton 
Bufh, till I fell afleep. I remained always in good 
Health, only a little troubled with the Head-Ach, 
for want of a Hat, which 1 loft in the Water, in 
falling down from the Ladder of Ropes. But I re- 
medied this as well as I could, by gathering a Par- 
cel of Chicken- Weed (which grows there in Plenty) 
and ftrewing it over the Burton Bulhes, under which 
I fate. Nay, at laft, finding my Time might be 
longer there than I expected, I tore off one of the 
Sleeves of my Shirt, and lined a Wooden Cap that 
I had made of green Sprigs, and twifted with the 
green Bark that I peeled off, fo that if I had been 
feen in this Figure, I fhould have appeared like 
T>z a Mad. 
S 2 The Adventures of 
a Madman, with the Baflcet of a Cudgel upon his 
Head. 
One Day coming from warning myfelf (which 
I ufed often to do to cool me) I heard a flouncing in 
the Water, and turning my Head, to fee from 
whence the Noife came, I faw the oddeft Fifh, I 
believe, that ever was known. It had (as I fup- 
pofe) chafed fome other Fifh very eagerly, and run 
itfelf too far on the Sand, and the Tide being al- 
moft at the lowed, it had left it there. It was (as 
near as I could guefs) about fifteen Feet long; it 
had a Head like a Hoife, and out of the Mouth 
came two Horns curled like a Ram's Horn, only 
twice as large ; it had but one Eye, and that was at 
the Extremity of the Nofe ; it feemcd, as it 
Jlounced, to be fome thing of a changeable Afii- 
colour, with a Tail that tapered to the End in a 
lharp Point: It looked fo terrible to me, that I was 
afraid to approach it; as it laboured it feemed to 
groan ; it lay in this Hole of Water half an Hour, 
with its Body in, and its Tail out ; and as foon as 
the Tide came up to it, it maked its Tail to and 
fro, as a Dog does when he fecms pieafed, all the 
while it felt the Water ; it ftruggled but now and 
then, and at laft, when the Water was pretty high, 
it turned its Head, and made a Noife fomething like 
the Clucking of a Hen with Chickens, but louder; 
and when, it had Water enough to fwim away, it 
Jay moving up and down a Quarter of an Hour, be- 
ing as I fuppofe hurt with its ftruggling. But when 
it 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 53 
it had recovered kfe!f> (as I imagined) it gave a 
Spring into deep Water, and I faw it no more. ^ 
I had been here now a Month by my Reckoning, 
and in that Time my Skin looked as if it had been 
rubbed over with Walnut-fhells. I had a Mind 
feverai Times to have fwam to one of the other 
Iflands ; but as they looked only like Heaps of 
Sand, I thought I had got the beft Birth, fo con- 
tented myfclf with my own Station, Boobies I 
could get enough (who built on the Ground) and 
another Bird that lays the Eggs which I ufed to eat, 
but I nev- wwwed uj taftc vhcm t though as their 
x,ggs were good, we may fuppofe their Flefh was 
fo to : But however, I was fo well fatisfied with my 
Boobies, that I did not care to try Experiments. t 
This Ifland, which I was upon, feemed to me to 
be about two Miles in Circumference, and was al- 
moft round, and on the Weft Side there is a good 
anchoring Place, for the Water is very deep, within 
two Fathoms of the Shore. God forgive me, but I 
often wifhed to have had Companions in my Mif- 
fortune, and hoped every Day either to have feen 
fome Veffel come that Way, or a Wreck, where per- 
haps I might have found fome Neceffaries whfch I 
wanted: But I would often check myfelf in:thefe 
Cogitations, as not becoming a Chnftiao, yet they 
would as often awake in my Mind,* in fpite of 
all my Devotion and other good Thoughts ; it 
being natural to defire Company. I ufed' to fancy, 
that if 1 fhould be forced to Hay there long, I fhould 
forget my Speech ; fo I ufed* to talk aloud, afk my- 
D 3 feJf 
54 J"** Adventures of 
felf Queftions, and anfwcr them ; but if any 
Body had been by to have heard me, they would 
-certainly have thought me bewitched, I ufed to afk 
anyfelf fuch odd Queflions. All this while I could 
not inform myfelf where I was, or how near any in- 
habited Place. 
One Morning (which I took to be the 8 th of No- 
<z}cm!>er) a violent Storm arofe, which continued till 
Noon ; when in the mean Time I obferved a Bark la- 
bouring with the Waves for feveral Hours, and at 
lait with the Violence of the Tempeft, was perfect- 
ly thrown out of the Waier upuu iK* CVcw. vvithin 
a quarter of a Mile from the Place where I obferved 
them. I rati to fee if there was any Body I could be 
affifting to, where I found four Men (being all that 
were in theVeffel) bufy about faving what they could 
out of her: When I came up with them, and hailed 
them in EngUJh, they feemed mightily furprized; 
they afked me how I came there, and how long I 
had been there ? When I told them my Story, they 
were all mightily concerned for themfelves, as well 
as for me, for they found there was no PofTibility of 
getting their Bark off the Sands, being the Wind had 
forced her fo far ; With that we began to bemoan one 
another's Misfortunes; but 1 mud confefs to you, 
without lying, I was never more rejoiced in my 
whole ^ife ; for they had on Board Plenty of every 
thing for a Twelvemonth, and not any thing fpoiled. 
Their Lading (which was Logwood) they had thrown 
over-board to lighten the Ship; which was the Oc- 
cafton of the Wind forcing her fo far : Had they kept 
Capt. Richard Falcoker, 5> 
in their Lading they would have bulged in the Sands 
half a quarter of a Mile from the Place where they 
did, and the Sea flying over them, would not only 
have fpoiled their Provifions, but perhaps been the 
Death of them all- By thefe Men I underltood 
where we were, viz. upon one of the Ifles of Mcraties^ 
which are live Iflands, or rather large Banks of Sand - T 
(for there is not a Tree, nor Bufh upon any but that 
where we were) they lie in the Latitude of Twenty- 
two Degrees North, Twenty-five Leagues from Jm- 
catan, and about Sixty from Qampechy Town. We 
worked as fall as we could, and got out every Thing 
that would be ufeful to us before Night. We had 
fix Barrels of fait Beef, three of Pork, twoofPeafe, 
and two of Flour, and eleven Barrels of Bilket ; a 
fmall Copper, and Iron Pot ; feveral wearing Cloaths, 
and a fpare Hat, which I wanted mightily; We 
had befides feveral Kegs of Rum, and one of Brandy, 
and a Che/1 of Sugar, with many other Things of 
Ufe'; fome Gun-Powder, and one Fowling- Piece. 
We took off the Sails from the Yards, and with fome 
Pieces of Timber ere&ed a Tent big enough to hold 
twenty Men, under which we put their Beds, 
that we got from the Bark. It is true, we had no 
Shelter from the Weather, for the Trees were fo low 
they were of no Ufe to us. I now 1 thought myfelf in a 
Palace, and was as merry as if I had been at Jatnai- 
ca> or even at home in my own Country : I could joke 
now and then, and tell a merry Tale. In fhort 
when we had been there fome Time, we began to be 
very eafy, and to wait contentedly, till Providence 
Ihould fetch us out of this Ifland. The Bark lay 
D 4 upon 
S 6 The Adventures of 
'upon the Sands, fifty Yards from the Water when 
at the high eft, fo that" Tufed to He in her Cabin, by 
reafon there were no more Beds afhore, than were for 
ray four Companions, *vfe. Thomas Randal* of Cork 
in Ireland, (whofc Bed f was larger! , v/hich he did me 
the Favour to fpare a Part of now and then, when 
the Wind was high, and I did not care to lie on 
Board) Richard. White* of Port RoyaU William Muf- 
grave, of Kino-fton in Jamaica, and Ralph Middklon, 
of Coqjoes in the IJle of Wight* Thefe Men, with 
Eight Others, fet out of Port-Royal about a Month 
after us, bound for the fame Place : But thofe others 
lying afhore, and wandering coo far up in the Coun- 
try, were met, as it is fuppofed, by <bme Spaniards 
and Indians, who fet upon them : Yet by all Appear- 
ance they fought defperately, for when Mr. Randal 
and Mr. Middleton went to feek for them, he found 
all the Eight dead, with fifteen Indians, and two 
Spaniards', all the Englijhmen had feveral Cuts in 
their Heads, Arms, Breafts, (Jc. that made it very 
plainly appear they had fold their Lives dearly. 
They were too far up in the Country, to bring down 
their Dead ; fo they were obliged to dig a Hole in 
the Earth, and put them in as they lay in their 
Cloaths. As for the Indians and Spaniards, they 
ftripped them, and left them above Ground as they 
found them, and made all the Hafte they could to 
embark, for fear of any other unlucky Accident that 
might happen. They fet fail as foon as ever they 
came on Board, and made the befl of their Way for 
Jamaica, till they were overtaken by the Storm that 
in ip wrecked 
Capt, Richard Falconer. $7 
fhip wrecked them on Make Shift IJland (as I had 
named it.) When I told them of the ftrange Fifh I 
had feen, there was not any of them, but Mr. Muf- 
grave, that had ever feen the like, and he told me 
when he was a Prifoner in Mexico, he had feen one 
there, and they called it the Ram Fijb ; but he told 
me, I was miftaken concerning the Eyes, for they 
were on the Top of the Head, but very fnull, not 
bigger than a Mufket-Ball; and that which I took for 
an Eye, was a Hole that they fometimes fpouted 
Water through. This that he faw at Mexico was 
can led about for a Siew in a Cart, but it was but 
eight Feet and a half in Length, and was by Order 
of the Viceroy fent two Leagues into the Bay, to be 
buried, for it flunk fo intolerably they were afraid 
it would breed an Infection. 
Now we had all manner of Fiihing-Tackle with 
us, but we wanted a Boat to go a little Way from . 
Shore to catch Fifh, therefore we fet our Wits to 
work, in order to make fome Manner of Engine, 
and at laft we pitched upon this odd Projeft. We 
took fix Calks, and tarred them all over, then 
Hopped up the Bungs with Cork, and nailed them 
clofe down with a Piece of tarred Canvas ; thefe 
fix Cafks we tied together with fome of the Cords of 
the VelTel, and upon them we placed the Skuttles 
of the Deck, and fixed them, and made it fo 
ftrong, that two Men might eafily fet upon them ; 
but for fear a Storm fhould happen, we tied to one 
End of her a Coil or two of fmall Rope, of five 
hundred Fathoms long, which. we fixed to a Stake 
D 5 on 
S$ Tie ADVBNTtTftES cf 
on the Shore ; then two of them went out, (as for 
my Part, I was no Fifherman) in order to fee what 
Succefs they fhould have, but returned with only 
one Nurfe, a Fifh fo called, about two Feet long, 
fomething like a Shark, only its Skin is very rough, 
and, when dry, will do the fame Office as a Seal- 
ikin. The fame boiled in Lemon Juice, is the 
only Remedy in the World for the Scurvy, by ap- 
plying fome of the Skin to the Calves of your Legs, 
and rubbing your Body with fome of the Liquor, 
once or twice. We fent out our Fifhermen the 
next Day again, and they returned with two old Wives 
and a young Shark, about two Feet long; which we 
drefTed for Dinner, and they proved excellent 
Eating. In the Morning following we killed a 
young Seale, with our Fowling-Piece, but firft ihe 
was fo kind as to give me a Blow on the Forehead, 
that cut the Skin, and bled very much, which was 
done with her Fins, for as they run towards the 
Water, they throw backwards the Gravel, as Horfes 
do when they gallop hard ; this we faired, and it 
eat very well, after lying two or three Days in the 
Brine. 
We paft our Time in this Mafofhift Ijfand, (for we 
had given it that Name) as well as we could ; we in- 
vented feveral Games to divert ourfelves ; OneJDay, 
when we had been merry, Sorrow (as after Gaiety 
often happens) ftole infenfibly on us all, I, as 
being the youngeft, began to refleft on my fad 
Condition, in fpending my Youth on a barren 
Land, without Hopes of being ever redeemed. 
Whereupon, 
Capt. Richard Falconer, 59 
Whereupon, Mr. Randal, being the eldeft, rofe up 
and made the following Speech, as nigh as I can 
remember. 
Mr. Falconer, and my Fellow- Sufferers; but it i$ 
to you, (pointing at me) that I chiefly addrefs my 
Speech, being you feem todefpairof a Redemption 
from this Place, more than any other. Is not the 
Providence of a Power Supreme fhewn in every 
Accident in the Life of Man ; even you yourfelf, 
how much better is your Condition now, than you 
could have imagined it would have been a Month 
ago? There is a Virtue in manly Suffering, and to 
repine feems to doubt of the All- feeing Power, 
which regulates our Anions. If you feem confcious 
of your deferring (as a Punifhrnent for any Crime 
you have committed) what has happened to you, 
why do you not with a contrite Heart lift up your 
Voice to Heaven, and fincerely aft: Forgivenefs of 
all your paft Offences, and that Way free yourfelf 
of thofe grofs Errors that are crept into your weak 
Faith. Think you that the Divine Providence that 
caff Jonas from the Bowels of the Whale, has not 
the fame Power ftill left, to aid and fefceh us from 
this Place. 
Here (purfued he) we have every thing that can 
be required to fatisfy Nature 5 we have Beds to lie 
on, and a Covering from the Weather; we have 
Provifions for a Twelvemonth, and if we Jhould 
continue here a longer Time, we need not fear 
ftarving, the very Ifland producing wherewithal to 
fupport Nature, as Eggs and Fowls ; and tho' there, 
D 6 is 
6o The Adventures of 
is no Rivulet of frcfh Water, yet it rains fo fre- 
quently, we need not fear even that, being we 
have Vefiels enough to fave it in: You have the 
leaft Reafon to fpurn at Providence of any one heie, 
that had only a Hole in the Earth to fave your Wa- 
ter, which had not !afted two Days longer, before 
we (very happily for you) were thrown on Shoie. 
Is there not a Providence in being thrown on Land, 
when you expected drowning before the Morning 
dawned, which happened otherwife? Is there net 
a Providence in getting Food, when you expected 
to ftarve ? Is there not a Providence in getting Fire 
by rubbing two Sticks, which you know you cculd 
not effect fince, though we have all endeavoured at 
it? Was it not a Providence, that your Booths re- 
mained- fweet-, even till the Day that we came 
here? * And was it not a Providence that we were 
thrown here,' which brought jou all Sorts of Pro- 
vifions, (I mean all that is neceffary) with Flint 
and Steel-i and other Utenfils ? And can you then 
doubt of a farther Providence, that have had all 
thefe? Beudes, even Company is fome Allay to 
Sorrow J' yod' were alone before, and had only 
yourfelf to talk to. Our Bark is ftrong and firm, 
and by Degrees, I do not doubt but with Time 
and much Labour to get her into the Water again. 
I have been on Board her this Morning when you 
were all ailcep, and examined her carefully iniide 
and out, and fancy our Liberty may foon be ef- 
fected; I only wonder we have never thought be- 
fore of clearing the Sand from our Vcfiel, which 
once 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 6i 
once done, 1 believe we may launch her out into 
deep Water; we ha"e all our Tackling, Sails, and 
Maft?, entire, without Damage; I do not defpair of 
the Mercy of God in working our Deliverance, 
whofe Ways are paft the Knowledge of us poor in- 
fignificant Mortals, I myfelf have more than once 
been in the fame, or worfe Condition. 
In a Voyage I made twelve Years ago, I fuf- 
fcred Shipwreck, and not one Perfon faved'but 
myfelf : I fat out from the City of Cork in Ireland* 
on Board a Bark bound for the Baltick ; we paffed 
the Strcighis of Eljenore and Hcljinburgh without 
meeting any Thing material ; when one Evening it 
began to thunder, lighten, and rain prodigioufly ; 
the Storm was fo violent that we expedled every 
Moment when we fhould be drove on Shore on the 
Coail of Sweddand or Norway, and be darned to 
Pieces. The Storm continued fo long, that all^our 
Malls came by the Board, our VefTel fprunga Leak, 
and the Water gained upon us every Moment; at 
laft it overpowered us fo much, that we left Pump- 
ing, as believing it impofliblc to fave ourfelves, 
and recommended our Souls to the Mercy of the 
Lord. At laft our Ship funk downright, and moil 
of our Men with it; but I and two more had the 
good Fortune to lay hold of the Main-Maft, (that 
had been cut above Deck, being it was fprung 
below, and thrown over- board to prevent any Dan* 
ger) which was tangled in fome of the Cordage ; 
but the Ship finking downright, with the Rope that 
was turned to the Main-Maft, gave it fuch a Tug, 
that pulled it under Water ; but afterwards looting 
that 
6z T»j Adventures of 
or flipping off by good Fortune, it rofe with two 
of us again, but the third was never feen after. 
The other that faved himfelf upon the Mail, was 
the Matter, a Man about fixty Years old, who held 
pretty well for about an Hour, but at laft through 
Weaknefs and Age (recommending his Soul to God) 
- fell off, but yet culled for Help, and I being wil- 
ling to give him what A Alliance I could, laid hold 
of him, which I had no fooner done, but he grafped 
at me, and laying faft hold of the Skirt of my 
Waiftcoat, (having never a Coat on) pulled me off 
the Malt ; but with his Weight, and fome Strug- 
gling I made to fave myfelf, my Skirt ripped off, 
and the Matter funk to the Bottom, and I by good 
Fortune laid hold of the Rigging that hung to the 
Mall ; fo once more got on ftride it, but with little 
Hopes of Life; yet doing my Endeavour to fave 
myfelf, bat with a Resignation to the Will of Hea- 
ven, At lad, after being toffed about for two or 
three Hours more, the End of the Maft ruftied with 
fiich Violence againit a Rock (as I fuppofed) that 
with the Shock I was thrown off ; but laid hold of 
fome of the Cordage again, and held fall till it 
fixed itfelf in fome of the craggy Clifts of the 
Rock. 
By this Time the Tempeft was very much abated, 
and the Waves not dafhing fo often, nor fo fierce, 
I found that the Maft hung on the craggy Clifts of 
the Rock, which I climbed up as faft I could, left 
another Wawe (hould dafn me againft it, and beat 
my Brains out. After I had got as high as 1 could, 
and out of Danger of the Waves, I kneeled down 
and 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 63 
and returned Thanks to the Almighty for my won- 
derful Deliverance ; which was wonderful indeed ! 
For tho* the Mart beat fo often againtl the Rock, 
yet I efcaped without being fo much as bruifed. 
When I had poured out the Fulnefs of my Soul to 
the All-feeing Power, that had protected me from 
fuch an imminent Danger, I compofcd my felf to 
Sleep, but with a Calmnefs wonderful, (even to 
myfelf) wonderful in every Circumftance, that the 
Almighty Providence ihould chufe me out of thirty 
poor Souls that perifned in the fiormy Deep, for a 
Monument of his Mercy. 1 flept, but yet my 
Dreams were troubled ; I thought in my Sleep, I 
was caft on Shore upon a bairen Rock, where there 
was not a Creature but myfelf, no Food, nor any 
Thing to fuftain Nature; which proved too true. 
I was awaked by fomething that licked my Face, 
which in my Fright 1 laid hold on, but foon let it 
go again upon finding it hairy, which flartled roe 
very much ; and tho* it was ftill dark, I could not 
get to Sleep again for the Concern I was in, for 
fear fome devouring Creature fliould come and feize 
me. I liftened, and obferved the Storm was laid, 
and the Dawn approaching, I began to compofe my 
Mind, and put my Truft in him, that had hitherto 
preferved me. 
When it came to be light enough to perceive any 
Object, I rofe up and began to view the Place; 
when, to my great Surprize, I found it to be only 
a large Rock, about half a Mile in Circumference, 
as near as I could guefs ; but the north Part fo in- 
acceflible 
64 The Adventures of 
acceffible, theje was no getting to the Top of it: 
Looking about me, I faw coming fawning towards 
me a iar^e Bitch, which was the Creature that 
awaked me by licking my Face. I mull confefs I 
was furprifed and pleafed, and made much of my 
new Companion. I hoped from it I mould find 
fome human Creatures; but fearching about, and 
not meeting with any, I was more grieved than be* 
fore ; yet ftill I refigned mvfelf to the Will of him 
that fees alJ Things, and knew it was in his Po.i-er 
to fetch me out of Darknefs and the Shadow of 
Death. In walking up and down, in a little Cavity 
of the Rock, I met with feven young fucking Pup- 
pies, that I found belonged to the Bitch my Com- 
panion, for (he gave them fuck, which I (layed a 
little while to obferve. Then a Thought came into 
my Head, that this might be fome Refort for Fiilur- 
men, and I mould very (hortly fee fome that would 
take me from this defoJate Place. 
I began to fearch about for fomething to fuftain 
Nature, but could find nothing but fome Ptny- 
*winklcs, and other little Sheli-filh, which I ventured 
to feed upon, for I now began to be very hungry. 
I wondered mightily at my poor Bitch, how fhegoc 
Food to fupport herfelf, and her feven young ones. 
I obferved fhe ufed to leave me two or three Times 
a Day, but returned in a Quarter of an Hour. One 
Day I had the Curiofity to watch her, but (he went 
fo faft, that I could not come up to her, but full 
I followed, and at laft came to the Point of a Rock 
where Ihe went down, and looking below, faw her 
feeding 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 65 
feeding upon a dead Seal \ but haw it came there I 
could not fuppofe, neither could I go down the 
Rock to fee farther, it being fo dangerous a Place : 
When fhe had eat her fill, fhe came up again, and 
went to give her young ones fuck. I was mightily- 
put to it for Water, though there were good Quan- 
tities in feverai Cavities of the Rock, but fo hard to 
come at, that fometimes I ventured breaking my 
Neck to get it; befides, I could not exped that 
would always laft, for the Sun was pretty warm, 
though not intolerable. I had in my Pocket a Knife 
and Fork and a Cafe of Lancets, but they were 
r'jfted by being wet, and of no Ufe to me, fori 
could get nothing to exercife them on ; indeed my 
Fork ferved me to twill out my Pen-twinkles* 
1 had been here now fifteen Days, and nothing 
to feed on but thefe Sort of Shell-fim ; yet ftill my 
Strength and Health continued to a Miracle : I flept 
well, though my Bed waa fomcthing hard ; it was 
compofed of Part of the Rigging that came on Shore ' 
with the Maft, which I had untwifted, and pulled 
into Okum, and laid it under a hollow Part of the 
Rock, where no Rain or Wind could hurt me, un- 
lefs it blew hard South, which when it did, would 
force a little into my Bed-chamber. 
Looking out one Day, I faw a Boat coming to- 
wards my rocky Iiland; the Sight raifed my Spirits 
wonderfully; but obferving her narrowly, I found 
fhe was only driven by the Wind and Tide, without 
any one in her : However, I got down my Rock, 
and waited for her coming on Shore, which fhe did 
withia 
66 The Adventures of 
within twenty Yards of me; I immediately got in 
her to rummage her, and, furprifmg Providence! 
found twenty dried Fifh, a Salt-box filled with Bif- 
ket, and about half a Pint of Brandy in a Bottle. 
After giving God Thanks with great Sincerity of 
Soul, I fell to, and eat heartily. There were two 
Oars in the ?oat, a Boat-hook, a fmall Filhing-net, 
and a Tinder-box, with a Grapling-iron and Rope 
for a Cable : Upon this I began to be exceeding 
eafy, and thought myCelf to be in a happy Condi- 
tion : I brought my Fifla on Shore, and flowed it in 
my Bed-chamber, and over it (for fear of my Bitch) 
put feveral Pieces of Ropes. I had a Tinder-Box, 
and could ftrike a Light, but had no Candle to 
burn, or any Provifion to drefs. 
After I had fettled every thing aa I would have 
it, I refolved to take my Boat and go round the 
Rock, to fee if I could difcover any Thing on the 
other Side of the inarceffible Part. Whereupon I 
took two of my dried Fifh, and half a dozen Bif- 
kets, and put myfelf on board : But my poor Bitch 
came to tne Shore Side, and took on fo mightily* 
that I went and took her in. I rowed half round 
(as near I could guefs) the firft Day ; but what 
made me fo long was, that in fome Places 1 was 
obliged to row half a League from the Shore, to 
avoid fome Shallows which Jay out towards the 
north-eaft Side. I ventured to lie in my Boat all 
Night, and the next Morning went onwards with 
my Voyage, and at laft came to that Part of the 
Rock that I could not get over when I was amorc. 
Here 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 67 
Here I found upon the Ground a Ned of Eggs, 
about the Bignefs of a Duck-egg ; yet I could not 
difcover what Fowl owned them ; but I took them 
all away, and ventured to fuck one of them, which 
I found as pleafant as a new laid Hen-egg. Her 
the Bitch grew very uneafy, and by her whining and 
fruitlefs Endeavours to pafs the Rock, (which was 
perpendicular) let me underftand (be wanted to be 
with her Puppies. Finding nothing here for my 
Benefit, but my Eggs, I got on Board, and endea- 
voured to go round, which I did, till Icame to the 
Place where the Seal lay that my Bitch found, but 
it flunk abominably ; yet fhe fell too, and after 
^vin^ eat, ran up the Rock, and fo (as I fuppofe,) 
to her Puppies. 1 wnt on g 0 ard again ; but there 
arofe fuch a Fog on a fudden, that T could hardly 
fee the Length of the Boat, fo rather chore to go 
back again than venture farther out of my Know- 
ledge, which I did in a little Time, the Sea being 
higher oyer the Sand, and arrived at my own Ha- 
bitation. 
I pulled up my Boat as high as I could, and went 
on Shore, and coming to vifit my young Compa- 
nions found the weakeft dead for want of the Dam, 
which I immediately took, cut open and flayed off 
the Skin, when after being dried, I made me a 
Cap of, by cutting it in Form, and fewing it toge- 
ther with fome fine Rope Yarn that I twilled on 
Purpofe, and my Fork I ufed inftead of a Needle. 
The Fat ferved me to make Candles in this Manner, 
by pulling to Pieces fine Rope Yarn and twilling it 
hard 5 
68 7%e Adventures of 
hard; then I llruck a Light, and with an Egg- 
Shell heated my Fat, and drew the Rope Yarn 
through it, fo I provided myfelf with a new 
Sort of Candle. But then I had but a frnall 
Piece of Match, and when that fhould be gone, I 
ihould be at a firangeLofs how to light my Candle. 
.. Finding my Proviiion decreafe, I came to an Al- 
lowance of a Quarter of a Fitfi a Day, and Half a 
Bllket, and not to touch that if I could get any 
Shell-Fifh, which began to be fcarce too, for fome 
Days I could not find above ten or twelve, and 
when I came fir ft there, I -jfed to take them up 
by Handfuls. Upon this I began to reflect, that 
Winter was approaching, and confequently very 
cold Weather ; and then perhar' J ^*«ujd not get 
any Food ; I r<» roJvC<J within myfelf to venture in 
my Eo4t, and fail which Way the the Wind fhould 
direct me ; but then I was put to it for a Sail, (for 
we had cut off the Yards and Sails of the rVIain- 
Maft, before we threw it over Board) but at lait I 
thought of a White Dimity Waiflcoat that I wore, 
which was lined with Linnen > this 1 unripped and 
fowed together again, fo pieced the Lining to the 
Outfides, and made me a tolerable Sail. But in 
the mean Time the Wind blew fo high, that I durft 
not venture out ; and continued fo long, that my 
Provifion was diminifhed to two Fiih, which almcft 
put me to my Wit's End. Shell-Fiih were not to 
be had. So at laft I refolved to kill one of my 
Bitch's Whelps ; which I did, made a Fire with 
fome Boards I found at the Bottom of my Boar, end 
xoafted 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 69 
roafted it ; it was palatable, and eat wonderfully 
well, they being not two Months old. 
I don't queftion but you'll laugh at me, when I 
fhall tell you that it went very much againft me to 
kill this harmlefs Creature ; but my Neceffity had 
no Law; befides, I had obferved but two Days be- 
fore, that the Seal, which was the Dam's Food, 
was gnawed to the Bones. n fhort, after fome 
Smugglings with myfelf, I killed five of the fix, 
and faked two of them ; for after eating my Bilkets 
out of the Salt Box, I found a Handful or two of 
Salt at the Bottom, which I made Ufe of in that 
Manner. The Entrails I boiled and gave to the 
Dam and t'other Puppy, who eat of it heartily, 
making no Scruple though their own Flefli and 
Blood. The fixth and laft Puppy I refolved not to 
kill at all if I could help it, it being fo like the 
Dam, and would always be with me if it could, 
when the others would only play about the Hole 
where they lay. 
In thbrt, I began to find the Weather cold, and 
fo refolved to fet Sail in my Boat, with my two 
Companions, my Bitch and Puppy; and on the ift 
of September, after being on the Rock from May the 
30th, I fet Sail with the Wind about N. E. a mid- 
dling Gale, and Iteering with my other Oar; for 
you muft know my Boat-Hook was my Mall, and a 
Piece of flit Wood that I faved from the Fire was my 
Yard ; fo that I could make Shift to ply it to- 
Windward upon Occafion, but was refolved to fail 
before the Wind till I difcovered Land ; for my 
Boat 
yo TJje Adventures tf 
Boat being pretty large, and my Sail but fmall, I 
could not make my Way as I might have done with 
a Sail fitted to the Boat ; fo that I couid notdifcover 
Land that Night, but failed on till about Midnight ; 
then I was fo fatigued that in Spite of myfelf, I 
was obliged to lie along in the Boat, and fell aflcep, 
and flept till I was awakened by a Fifherman in a 
Boat, whom I underftood not, but found by his 
■ 
Dialeft to be a Dane. I gave him to understand 
my Condition, by (peaking and Sighs together, 
which he feemed to be forry for by beating his 
Breaft, and fhaking his Head. 
He carried me alhore to a Village, where they 
made very much of me, and gave me Cloaths ; but 
I would not ftir without my Dogs. My Boat was 
fold, and the Money given me for my own Ufe. Af- 
ter I had ftaid at the Village three Days, I was car- 
ried to Copenhagen, to Mr. Bridgwater, the Paftor for 
feverai Englijh Merchants, who made a Gathering 
for me, which amounted to twenty-feven Pounds in 
E?iglijb Money. The King of Denmark, fent a Pi?r- 
fon to me, who underftood Englifh very well, and 
took down the Particulars of my Voyage in the Da- 
nijf? Language, that I faw afterwards printed there; 
but no one could ever fix upon the Rock that I lived 
on. One faid it was fuch a One, another fuch a 
One; and fome conjeftured it to be a Part of the 
Main Land of Sweden, which I ftiould have found if 
I had ventured when hindered by the Fog. 
But I forgot to tell you, that by printing this 
Account, a Man came to demand his vBoat, that he 
faid 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 71 
faid he had loft by the CareleiTnefs of a Boy, to whom 
he had given it in Charge, who ncjle&ing to fatten 
it on Shore, it drove oat to Sea, and came where I 
had the good Fortune to meet with it, or rather 
guided by the Eye of Providence, to be the Means 
or Inftrument of faving my Life; which, but for 
that, I mufthave inevitably perifhcd. The Fifher- 
man that owned the Boat, had a new one given him 
in the Room of it, and to the Value of five Pounds 
for the Things it contained. 
The Gentleman that was ordered to take the 
Notes mentioned above, brought me a hundred Eng- 
Guineas, collected from Merchants and Gentle- 
men of the City. The King likewife ordered me 
a hundred more from his Privy Purfe; fo that on 
November the 18th, I went on Board an Englzjb Ship, 
called the Happy, Captain John Gib/on, Commander. 
We immediately fet fail for London, and arrived at 
Deptford, December the 25 th, being Chrijlmas-Day, 
1688 ; but finding Things out of Order in England, 
I thought it was no Place to fettle in. So January 
the firft I took Horfe for Brijlol, and from thence 
embarked for Cork, where I had fome ftnall Effects, 
and happily arrived there January the 14th; where 
I was welcomed from Death, by all my Friends. 
But 1 forgot one Thing which happened to me at 
Copenhagen. Drning with the Gentleman that fpoke 
Englifoxery well, and feveral other Danes ; I hap- 
pened to drink to him in Englijh, with, Sir, my bum- 
ble Service to you, and afkedliftn if he 'would Pledge 
me: Upon which, he teld me, Imuft never mention 
Pledging 
7 2 The Adventures of 
Pledging among Danes ; for, added he, it is the 
greateft Affront you can put upon them. How fo, 
Sir, faid I ? Why, laid he, I know it is your Cuf- 
torn in England, but if you all knew the Meaning of 
it, you would furely abolifli it. Whereupon, I 
prefled him to tell me the Foundation of that Cuftom 
according to his Notion. Why, faid he, when the 
Danes invaded England, and got the better of the 
Natives, they ufed often to eat and drink together; 
but ltill allowing- the Danes to be their Matters : And 
very often, upon fome Pique or lntereft, they ufed 
even to ftab them when they were lifting the Cup 
to their Mouths. Upon the Englifo being frequently 
murdered in this Manner, they contrived at laft w hen 
they were at Meals, or drinking with the Danes, to 
fay to to their next Neighbour, Here's to you \ Upon 
which, the other cryed, Vll fledge you: Which was 
as much as to fay, he would be a Surety or Pledge, 
while the other drank; and accordingly the other 
would guard him while he drank. When done, the 
other would drink; and then he that drank before, 
was to ftand his Pledge likewife. Nay, it came to 
be fuch a Cuftom at laft, that when one EngUjhman 
came into the Company of feveral Danes, he would 
fay in taking up his Cup, to his next Neighbour, 
Will you pledge me, with an Emphafis? upon the 
other's anfwering he would, he might drink without 
Fear* 
After flaying the Winter at Cork, I defigned to 
embark with Captain Clark, on Board the Ship Gil- 
liflowcr % and accordingly we fct out from Cork, jipril 
the 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 73 
the 23d, 1689, for B eft on in New England, and fo 
for Virginia \ we arrived at Bofton June the 3d, hav- 
ing a qnaick Paflage. After having done our Builnefs 
there, we fet fail for Virginia. We doubled Cope- 
Cod without any Danger: But one Night a Storm 
rofe, that flung us on Shore upon the Main, within . 
fix Leagues of Cafe- Charles, where our Men were all 
faved, but in a poor Condition. Our Ship lying 
upon the Sands a Furlong from Shore, fourteen out 
of twenty of our Men that could fwim, went into 
the Long-Boat, and went on Board the Ship to get 
fome Neceftaries ; as foon as they had got what" 
they wanted, they came towards the Shore again ; 
but the Boat being deeply laden, could not come 
nigh enough to Shore to unload, fo that they refolv- 
cd to go faither to feek for deeper Water, and bid 
us follow along the Shore, which we did ; but rJhcv 
doubling a Point of Land we 1 oil 'Sight of them: 
However we followed on fttll, when goiug over a 
little Swamp, we perceived feveral Indians in a Wood 
on our Right Hand. Whereupon we began to be 
in a defperate Fright, but Hi II we marched on ; when 
coming to the Skirt of the Wood, they let fly 
their Arrows at us, which killed one of our Compa 
nions, and wounded two more, one in the Arm, 
and the other in the Side of his Neck; as for rrv 
Part, I ftill remained unhurt, but had an Arrow 
flicking in the Sleeve of my Waiftcoat. After the 
Indians had fired, they ran to us with incredible 
Swiftnefs, whereupon (having no Weapons) wo 
kneeled down to them, and implored their Mercv 
One among them fpoke Englijh pretty well, who 
^ laid 
7+ The Adventures of 
laid, You Englijh White Men, we will kill yott 
to be revenged of your Brothers at La?nejicwn^ 
who kill us many Indians $ we will take you 
to our f?~ewivaxce y (i. e. King,) and he will order us 
to burn you, where we will drink your Blood, and 
feed upon your Flefh. They hurryed us along that 
Night at lead twenty the Miles up in Country, and 
next Morning brought us to their Village, where 
was their Wcronxance, fick in his Cabin ; but hearing 
of our coming, he rofe up, and with feveral of his 
Officers (who are called Cockoroojh) came towards us. 
After he had examined the Indians (as we fuppofe) 
how we were taken, he ordered a great Fire to be 
made, and had us all tyed to one Stake fixed in the 
Earth; but we were no fooner tyed, and the Signal 
giving for firing the Wood about us, but we were 
untyed and brought back to the Tent, to ftay, as we 
were informed, till the next Day, till more Indians 
could come to be Speftators of our Tragedy. They 
had Gripped us naked, and in my Breeches-Pocket 
had found my Box of Instruments, which they ex- 
amined very narrowly, and afked which of us it be- 
longed to? When they were informed it was mine, 
I was immediately fen t, for before the Werc*wance : 
who aiked me, by his Interpreter, the Name and 
Ufeof every Instrument, Which I informed him: 
When he came to my Lancets, and being informed 
they were to bleed, he afked in a great Paffion, If I 
was the Murderer of the Indians that were taken by 
the Englijb? But when I let him know it was to let 
Blood in many Diftempers, for Eafe for the Body, 
and that we were Strangers to thofe EngiiJ}? that kil- 
led 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 7; 
l^d their Indians, he abated of his Anger, and afk- 
ed nie if I could fhew how I let Blood ? which I 
told him I could, if any one wanted it, and was not 
well. Whereupon the IVerowance faid he was not 
very well ; but he would have me try upon one of 
my. Companions, before he would let me bleed him. 
1 told his Interpreter that he mould tell him I would 
feel his Pulfe, that I might know whether it was 
proper to let him Blood or no 5 Feel his Pulfe! 
What's that? faid the Interpreter, who thought I 
meant fomething elfe ; whereupon I took him by the 
Hand, and fhowed him what I meant When the 
Interpreter had fatisfyed him with what I faid, he 
beckoned me to him, and held out his Hand, which 
I felt, and found he was in a high Fever. I told 
the Interpreter that he mud be let Blood, for his In- 
difpofition was a Fever, and explained hisDiftemper, 
which he finding to agree with his Condition, feem- 
ed co be mightily pleafed ; but he would have me 
bleed fome other of my Companions before him. I 
pitched upon one that it would not injure, and bled 
him upon the Ground till he had bled enough, and 
then tyed up his Arm. The Wtrowance and the reft 
of the Indians were amazed to fee him bleed fuch a 
f 
Quantity, and > allied me if he mull bleeds 
much? I told them, yes, or rather more; but that 
I would have fomething to fave the Blood, becaufe 
I could make a better Judgment of the Caufe of his 
Diilemper. Whereupon they brought me aC^///'. 
iajb, which 1 fuppofed might hold a Quart; and 
upon this I tyed up his Arm, and let him bleed 
till I had taken about fixteen Ounces from him, 
E 2 fo 
76 Tie Adventures of 
fo tyed up his Arm again. When I had done, he 
wanted to go into his Hammock to Sleep; but 1 
told him he muft not go to Reft till Night, which 
he com ply ed with. The next Day he was much better, 
and fent for me again, from the Place where they 
had kept us walking all Night, by finging and 
dancing round us ; and if any of us offered to fleep, 
they would jogg us and hinder us. When I came to 
him I unbound his Arm, and he looked at the Ori- 
fice, and finding it clofed, was moie amazed than 
before; then he made his Interpreter afk me con- 
cerning his Blood, which was corrupted ; and when 
I told him if I had not bled him, he would foon 
lave died, he got up, and made mc fit down upon 
a Mat which lay in his Cabin, and told me by his 
Interpreter, if I would (lay with him, he would fave 
both me and my Companions, if we would fight 
ae-ainft the Whites, and marry Indian Women, that 
ihould be allotted us. I told him I would afk my 
Companions, who rejoiced at the Propofals ; and 
though all marry ed before, yet they made no Scru- 
ple of having another Wife. As formyfelf, (though 
uot marryed) I did not much care for fuch a tawny 
Rib, therefore told the IFcrowance, none of our Pro- 
fcSon ever marryed : he being well fatisfyed with 
this Anfwer, fpared all our Lives. For my Part I 
had a Houfc allotted mc to myfelf, that is a Place 
about the Height of one Story with us, and covered 
with the Barks of Trees ; the Fire-Place is in the 
Middle of the Houfc, and all the Chimney is the 
Door. The Country is generally pretty even, and 
agrees very well with an Englijh Conftitution; I 
need 
Ccrpt. Richard Falconer. 77 
need not defcribe the Climate, for I fuppofe you al! 
know the Nature of it as well as I. All the In- 
dians that ever I faw, were well limbed, and near 
fix Feet high. 
The Marriages were made the next Day without 
much Ceremony, they were only joined by their 
Priefts, without any Queftion on either Side, and 
fo carryed Home to their feveral Tents, All the 
while I was here, they were making Preparations 
to go againft the Englijb. One Day I was fent for 
and nrri— a ^ *£ el tne Puile ot the King; after I 
had done, he aflted me if I could tell any Thing of 
the Affairs of the Englijb by feeling the Pulfe; but 
I told him, that was impoflible, without I was with 
them in Perfon, Whereupon the King aflced me 
if 1 would go to (he Englijb, and come to him again, 
and give him a true Account of them ; but faid he, 
you muft leave your Sagamore (meaning your Box of 
Inftruments) behind you. I told him I would make 
it my Bufinefs to inform rnyfelf in every Particular, 
but that I did not know the Way; he told me I 
mould have a Canoe and four Indians that mould car- 
ry me within a League of the Englijb. I muft con- 
fefs I went with Joy and Sorrow ; with Joy to leave 
fuch a curfed Place, where Death threatened me 
every Day ; with Sorrow to go without my Com- 
panions. We went into our Canoe, which lay about 
fix Miles from the Place where the King lived, but 
took no Provifions with us, becaufe my Indians were 
to provide for me by catching of Fifti, in which they 
arc very dexterous. We went down the River that 
the Indians called Kusiarra River, till we came to 
R 5 Cl>r/tfr<Kx- 
7 8 The Advfntuus of 
Chefaf tack-Bay ; then we rowed in our Canoe paii 
Rii/fePs Iflands, and made toward Cape, or Point- 
Ccmfort ; but coming about a League or thereabouts 
near the Ifland, a Boat came down the River, and 
upon what Account 1 cannot tell, but they fired a 
Mufquet, which being heard by the Indians, they 
immediately jumped over-board, and fwam back a- 
gain to Shore. I was not mu'ch concerned I mull 
own, for there was no Danger:of their being drown- 
ed, for mo ft Indians fwim like Fifties. I took the 
Paddles and maae rnc vtuxtr my ^v- T ^ Paint-Com~ 
Jlrt, which I paffed, and entered Paivhattan River, 
(being diredled by my Indians fo to do) and directed 
my Way to Lamcfiown, where I arrived very late, 
and was mightily rejoiced to find my Companions 
all well in Health, and ready to embark the next 
Day for Bojlon, in a Veffel bound for that Place. 
After refrefliing mvfclf, and felling my Canoe, I 
with the reft of the Company fet fail the next Day, 
and after various Adventures am arrived where you 
fee me. 
Now think with yourfelf, Mr. Falconer, whether we 
need doubt the. Providence of God in helping us 
from this Ifland? There is nothing here like the 
Hardfhips I have undergone, and yet hare been 
happily freed from; and therefore you need not 
defpair. Defpair is the Frenzy of the Mind, and 
ought to be avoided, by having a true Notion of the 
Power we ferve. Upon this I happened to fmiJe, 
but was mightily checked by Mr. Randal, who afked 
me with a clouded Countenance, what I fmiledat ? I 
replied 
Capt. Richard Falconer* 79 
replied his Story might have had the fame Effect 
upon fome old Women, (if ic were in Print) that 
the Sufferings of our Saviour had upon a Perfon in 
Years. What mean you by that, faid Mr. Randal? 
Why, PIJ tell you, but I would not have you angry 
at it, for I really believe every thing you have faid 
to me : But a Reverend Divine once at Sta?nford in 
Lincolnjbire, was preaching a Sermon upon Chrift's 
Paffiori, where he expatiated on the many Sufferings, 
arid what our Saviour underwent to redeem us Mor- 
tals from the Curfe that was laid upon us : An old 
Woman (one of the Auditors) took the Parfon by 
the Sleeve as he went out of the Church, and faid to 
him, Indeed, Sir, you have made a very feeling 
Sermon, which has moved me very much,' and more 
cfpecially to aft you a Queftion or two. Say on, 
good Woman, faid the Parfon. Pray then, Sir, 
(faid flie) how long is it ago fince this Matter hap- 
pened ? Almofl feventeen Hundred Years ago. And 
how far off? (added the old Gentlewoman) A great 
Way off, fome three or four thoufand Miles from 
hence. Alack-aday! cried the old Woman, I'm 
glad on it ; Why fo, faid the Parfon ? Becaufe (ad- 
ded ihe) 'tis fo long ago, and fo far off, I hope in 
God it is not true. As to your own Belief, (Mr. 
Falconer, faid he,) I leave it to yourfeif, but I don't 
like jefting with facred Things ; The old Woman's 
Ignorance was Compaflion ; yoiy Knowledge feems 
to be prophane. 
I have known a great many airy young Fellows 
that have talked idly on fuch Things, to make 
E 4 People 
R o Tic Adventi/res of 
People have an Opinion of their Wit ; but yet, I 
believe, even in the very Time of their Utterance, 
their Confcicnce told them,- they were doing what 
was not pleating to God or Man. I really took 
Mr. RiUiJiiPs Way of exprefling himfelf very kindly, 
and as I outfit \ for there appeared fo much Since* 
rity and Candour in all that he fatd, that it would 
move any one that had a Senfe of Heaven or human ' 
Nature. Therefore I begged his Pardon, and was 
he artily forry if I had faid ought that might any 
Ways offend him; which he freely forgave. After 
we had fpent the Night in Refledion of what had 
palled, the next Morning we (after imploring the 
Alfiziance of the Almighty) went to work to clear 
the Sand from our Veffel, which we continued 
working cn for fixteen Days together, refling only 
on Sundays, which at laft we effected. We had 
thrown up the Sand on each Side, down from the 
Veffel, quite, to the Surface of the Water, when it 
was lowed. Now thp next Thing we had to do, 
was to get Poles to put under our Veffel to launch 
her out; which we got from the Burton Wood, but 
with much Difficulty, for we were forced to cut a 
great many before we could get them that were fit 
for our Purpofe. L After we had done this, we re- 
turned God Thanks for our Succefs hitherto, and 
on the Day following refolved (God willing) to 
thruft off our Veffel into the Water, but were pre- 
vented by Mr, Randal's being taken ill of a Fever, 
occafioned (as we fuppofe) by his great Fatigue in 
working to free our Ship from the Sand, wherein 
he 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 8i 
he fpared no Pains for to encourage us as much by 
his Anions as his Words, even beyond his Strength* 
The Concern we were all in upon this, pccafiooed 
our Delay in not getting our Veflel out, befxdes one 
Hand out of five was weakning our Strength. 
Mr. Randal never thought of his Inftruments till 
now, which he wanted to let him felf Blood, but not 
feeling them about his Cloaths, we fuppofcd they 
might have been overlooked in the Veflel, fo I ran 
immediately to- fee if! could find them ; and getting 
up the Side, my very Weight pulled her down to 
the Sand, which had certainly bruifed me to Death, 
if 1 had not by the Appointment of divine Provi- 
dence funk  into the Hollow that we had made by 
throwing the Sand from the Ship. I crept out in a 
great Fright, and ran to rny Companions, who with 
much ado got her upright, and afterwards we fixed 
fome fpare Oars on each Side, to keep her up from 
falling again: For the Pieces of Wood that were 
.placed under her, were greafed to facilitate herflipping 
into the Water, and we had digged the Sand fo en- 
tirely from her,, that {he relied only on them, which 
occasioned her leaning to one Side with my Weight 
only, which had.not happened, I believe, if I had 
endeavoured to have got on Board on the other Side, 
which was ■highefly but chwfing- the low'eft for my 
more eafy Entrance was the Caufe of the Accident 
that happened to me. When we were entered into 
the Veflel, and found our Endeavours to find the 
Box of Inftruments fruitlefs, we were all mio-htiiv 
concerned, for we verily believed that bleeding 
E 5 ^ would 
% 2 The Adventures of 
would have cured him; nay, even he himfejf faid, 
that if he could be Jet Blood, he was certain his Fe- 
ver would abate, and he ihould be eafier ; yet to 
Tee with what a perfect Refignation he fubmitted t<!> 
the Will of Heaven, it would have infpired one 
With a true Knowledge of the Being good Men en- 
joy after a Diflblution from this painful Life. He 
was ftill worfe and worfe ; but yet fo patient in 'his 
Sufferings, that perfectly amazed us all. He con- 
tinued in this Manner a whole Week, ; without tail- 
ing any Thing but Water-gruel ill made, for what 
little Oatmeal we had, was four. When we fa'w by 
the Courfe of Nature, it was impoflible he fhould 
laft long, we all were very much grieved X as for nvy 
own Part, I could not forbear fhedding Tears, for I 
had taken fuch an Affection to him, that alxnoft 
equalled a Child's Love to a Parent. He feeing me 
weep, called me with a faint Voice towards him ; 
and when I was near hrm, he made me lit down by 
him. T> After feVeral kind 1 Expreffions, which made 
my Tears flow more plentifully," he faid to me, Mr. 
Falconer* If you grieve for me, dry your Tears I de^ 
fire nothing but your Prayers. I am going to pay a 
Debt incumbent on me by Nature, and a Debt that 
mull be paid, which was contracted at my Birth, and 
Death will n6t admit of any Evafion ; all Mortals 
owe the fame Acknowledgement, but fome fquan- 
der away that Subftance which fliould be freely paid 
when called for. How happy are they that provide 
againft fuch a Creditor, that may come at any Hour 
of Day or Night, and lawfully demand his Duer 
Here 
Cnpt. Richard Falconer. 83 
Here is no Shuffling as in worldly Matters, no put- 
ring off the important Vifitor; therefore as we are 
fure he will call upon us, Tis'gobd to be always 
provided againfl the Time. How happy are honeft 
Mind's', when they have provided to fa tisfy their 
worldly 'Creditors ; they then live in a Contentment 
tffMind, peculiar to ah honeft Heart: But what 
mull be faid for thelaft Debt, upon which depends 
the Welfare of the Soul, bur doing well or ill here- 
after, is it not of the utmoft Importance ? There- 
fore as I am endeavouring to pay that Debt, whofe 
utmoft Limit will foon expire, help me by your 
Prayers to firiifh what I hope I have well begun, 
and, as a Friend's Advice, prepare to make up 
your Accounts to Heaven, for you know not how 
foon they may be called for ; befides you will have 
one lefs to eat of the Provifion that is left. After 
this, being tired with fpeaking fo much together, 
he turned to reft himfelf, but his Fever was fo vio- 
lent, he could take no Eafe in Body, though tran- 
quil in Mind. Sp finding we could not expeft his 
Life, we prayed for a fpeedy and" painlefs Releafc 
from it". After this we gave him forric Water (which 
he often begged for in vain) to cool h\s Mouth. 
When he had drank it, he faid he 'found himfelf a 
little eafier, and the Pain and Burning fomethinc* 
abated, which we took as a Lightning before 
Death, or as the Spirits collefled together to make 
their laft fruitlefs Efforts. 
When he found himfelf juft upon the Point of 
expiring, he made this fliort Prayer, which was fo 
E 6 * imprinted 
^4. - -Adventures of . 
imprinted in my Memory, that I fliall never forget 
it : O Almighty Creator of Heaven and Earth, 
whofe. all-feeing Eye looks into the inmoft Corner 
of the Heart 1 Pardon iny Offences, which I heartily 
repent of, ^hd.rejy upon the infinite Grace of thy 
wonted Mercy to abfolve me of all my part Crimes* 
through the Merits of my Lord and Saviour Jefu* 
Chrift. Then, lifting up his Hands and Eyes to 
Heaven, expired, with the Happinefs of ccHKinuing 
in his right Senfes in fuch a Fever, which is almoft 
k 
always attended with a Frenzy.^ 
After, oar Sorrow for his Death was fomethinn; 
abated, we confulied hoy/ to bury him, Mr. Mid- 
dkton and Mr. Mufgrave were, for fe wing .him in his 
Hammock and throvving him into the Sea ; but 
Air. White and myfelf were for burying him on the 
£aud, which they agreed to; fowe digged the 
Hole which I dcfigned for my Well, feven Feet 
t t 
Joiw, and feven deep, and returned him to Earth 
from whence he came. Upon the Bark of the Tree 
that ihaded his Grave, I wrote this Epitaph : 
* Under this Tree lies the Body of Thomas Rat:- 
1 dtd, Gent, born in the City of Corky Adno Domini*. 
1 1641. who was thrown afhor.e with Richard JVhkc^ 
* William Mufgra-vc, and Ralph Middktoti* all of 
* JrmaUay to the Confolation of Richard FaIco?:sr of 
' Bruion in Somerfetfoirc> who was unfortunately cali 
* on Shore before them on the 18th of Septemk** 
K yet received from their Converfation a Mi- 
< tigation of his own Misfortune., Whofe Chance 
' it is ever to read thefe lories, pay a Tear to the 
' Memory 
Capfc. R.i chard Falconer. 85 
* Memory of Thomas Randal, and endeavour to make 
1 as good an End as he did, who died a natural 
* Death, on Friday December the 21ft, 1699, in his 
' perfeft Mind, and a true Notion of the Power of 
* God to pardon all his Faults, whofe Failings were 
' correfted by a fin-cere Penitence, dying every Day 
* he lived.' 
This took me up a whole Tree. Mr. Randal 
made no Will ; yet I claimed his Dog,- being the 
Whelp of the Bitch he found upon the Rock which 
he was thrown upon in the Baltick> the Bitch being 
dead fome Years before. We were forced to tie 
him up after we had buried Mr. Rxnda! y for with 
his Feet he would fcrape Holes in the Grave two 
Feet deep, and howl prodigioufLy. 
After this we prepared once more to launch our 
Veilel ; but firft we put on board what Provifion we 
had left, and all the Things that we took from 
thence. Mr. Randall Death gave me (with the 
others Permiflion) a Title to a Bed, which I wanted 
before. So that I took up the Cabin which was 
allotted me, and laid on board every Night. And 
now we bent our Thoughts entirely on our Veffel, 
and on Monday the 31 ft of December launched her out 
into the Sea, and defigned to.fet fail the next Day. 
After we had fixed her faft vuth two Anchors and a 
Halfer on Shore, we went on board to dine and 
make ourfelves merry, which we did very heartilv, 
and to add to our Mirth, we made a large Can of 
Punch, which we never attempted to do before, be* 
ing we had but one Bottle of Lime-juice in all, and 
what 
86 Tb$ Adventures of 
what (indeed) we defigned for this Occafion ; in 
fliort, the Punch ran down fo merrily, that we were 
all in a drunken Condition ; but when it was all 
gone, we refolved to go to reft : But all I could do, 
could not perfuade them to lie on board that Night 
in their Cabins, (yet without a Bed ;) but they 
would venture, though they were obliged to fwim 
a hundred Yards before they could wade to Shore; 
but however they got fafe, which I knew by their 
hallooing and rejoicing. 
Having brought my Bed on board, I went to reft: 
very contentedly, which I did till next Morning ; 
But oh ! Horror ! when I had drefled myfelf, and 
going on Deck, to call my Companions to come 
on board to dine, which was intended over Night, 
and afterwards to go on Shore, and bring our Sails 
and Yards on board, and make to Sea as /aft as we 
could, I could not fee any Land, which fo overcame 
me on the fudden, that I funk down on the Deck, 
without Senfe or Motion : How long I continued 
fo I can't tell, but I awaked full of the Senfe of my 
lamentable Condition, and ten thoufand Times 
(fpightof my Refolution to forbear) curfed my un- 
happy Stars, that had brought me to that deplorable 
State. O Wretch that I am ! what will my. un- 
happy Fate do with me ; is any one's Condition 
equal to mine? (1 would cry.) But 'tis a jnft Pu- 
nifhment, in not rendering to God the Tribute due 
for his Mercies, that? we had hitherto known. In- 
stead of coming on board to be. frolickfome and 
merry, we Ihould have given Thanks to him, that 
gave 
Capt. Richa r d Falconer. S7 
gave us the Bleflingof thinking we were no longer 
ftbje£t to fuel! Hard'fhips, that we might probably 
have undergone, if we had been detained longer on 
that Illand. If poor Mr, Randal had remained 
among us, this Misfortune had not -happened. -Me 
by his wife and prudent Care and Conduct,' would 
have prevented this unlucky Accident. What mull 
my poor Companions think -that are left in a more 
miferable Condition than myfelf, if it be poflible* 
I have no Compafs, neither am I of myfelf capable 
of ruling the VefTel in a Calm, much lefs jf there 
fhould a Storm happen, which are too frequent in 
this Climate* . 
After I had vented my Grief in a Torrent of 
Words and Tears, I began to think how the VefTel 
fhould have gone to S*a without my Knowledge; 
and by Remembrance of the Matter the Night be- 
fore, found by our Eagernefs and fatal Careleflhefs* 
we had forgot to' fatten our Cables to the Geers; 
and pulling up the Halfer that we had fattened to 
one of the Burton Trees on Shore, perceived that 
the Force of the Veflel had pulled the Tree out ot 
the Earth* Then I too late found that a Hurricane 
had rofe when 1 was found aflcep; and ftupified by 
too much Liquor, and carried off the VefTel. This 
Reflection wounded me deeper than before, which 
I followed with Curfes on that Liquor that tteals 
away our Senfes, and makes worfc than BeaHs of 
human Creatures* 
Now I began to call upon him that hears us in 
the Time of Trouble ; even when the Wind blows 
loudeft> 
The Adventures »f 
lauded, whofe Nod can ihake the Frame of Earth 
from oft' its Bafis ; and with-a Heart fincere, and 
vicious Thoughts corrected, 1 fent my Soul in pe- 
nitential Words and Tears before his Throne of 
Mercy,, imploring a fpeedy Ending of my Life or 
Troubles; when I began to be fomething better 
contented in my Mind, and thought of foftaining 
Nature,, almoft fpent.wjuh the JEatigqe and Griev- 
ing. One great Comfort 1 had of my Side, which 
my poor (former) wretched- Companions wanted, 
that was Trovifion in Plenty, and frefh Water ; fo 
fchat when 1 began to confider coolly, J found 1 had 
not that Caufe to complain which they had, who 
were left on a barren Ifland, without any other 
Provifion than that very fame Diet which I was 
forced to take up with, when firft thrown afliore; 
that is,, the Roohies, whofe Numbers were mightily 
diminished before we defigned to leave the J Hand. 
What made me mod uneafy, was to think what 
mv Companions could judge of me, whether they 
fhould take it for Defign or Chance; but then 1 
(tilled that Thought, by knowing they muft needs 
fee that the Tree was forced away with Violence 
beyond the Strength of Man- Beiide, I had . ano- 
ther fmall Comfort, that was the Company of my 
Dog, which lay on Board with me, which I ufed to 
tnlk to as if he were a rational Creature ; and the 
poor Beait would ftand and fiare me in the Face, as 
if he were fenfible of what I faid to him. It was a 
very, handfome Creature of the Dcjiijh Kind, hut 
very good natured, and would often go to the C:w 
bin 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 89 
bin where I lay, which was that of his old Matter, 
and whine mightily. 
1 remained tofled upon the Sea for a Fortnight 
without discovering Land \ for the Weather con- 
tinued very calm, but yet fo hazy that I could not 
perceive the Sun for feveral Days. One Day fearch- 
ing for fome Linnen that I had dropped under the 
Sacking of my Bed, (for I did not lie in a Ham- 
mock) I found an old Glove with 75 Pieces of 
Eight in it, which I took and fewed in the Waift- 
band of my Breeches, for Fear I mould want it 
fome Time- or other I made no Scruple of tak- 
ing it, for I was well afTured it did belong to poor 
Mr. Randal Befide I had heard the other People 
fay, that they were fure he had Money fomewherej 
and after his Death we fearched for it, but coufd 
not find any, 
January the 20th I difcovered a Sail to Leeward 
of me, but fhe bore away fo faft, that there was not 
any Hope of Succour from her, and I had not any 
Thing to diftinguifh me; and I fuppofed though I 
could fee them, yet they could not fee me by Reafon 
of my Want of Sail, which would have made me 
the more confpicuous. The next Day I difcovered 
Land, about fix Leagues to the S. W. of me, which 
I obferved my Veffel did not come nigh, butcoafted 
along Shore ; but I was well affuied it was the Pro- 
vince of Jucatan belonging to the Spaniards^ and 
was the Place we came from. Now all my Fear 
was that I mould fall into their Hands, who would 
make me do the Work of a Slave ; but even that I 
thought 
$o The Adventures ef 
thought was better than to live in continual Fear 
of Storms and Tempefts, or Shipwreck. 
I coafted along in this Manner for two or three 
Days, and at lafl discovered Land right a-hcad, 
which I was very glad of ; but yet mixed with 
fome Fear, in hot knowing what Treatment I fhould 
have. 1 began now to think of fome Evafion, and 
not to tell .them the Truth, of belonging to the£/g- 
<uwft/ Ve/Tel, butrefolved to tell them that we were 
taken by a French Privateer, and after being 'rum- 
maged, were turned off as ufelefs. 
Januaty the- 30th, I made the Bay and Town of 
Francifco di Campechy y asj it proved afterwards, and 
was alrnoft upon it before I was met by any thing 
of a* Ship, or a Boat j but at laft two Canoes came 
: on Board with one Spaniard and fix Indians* who 
were much furprized when they underftood my 
k Condition by fpeaking broken French, which the 
Spaniard underwood. They immediately carried me 
on Shore, and from thence to the Governor, who 
was at Dinner ; they would have had me ftaid till 
he Jiad dined ; but he hearing of me, commanded 
me to come in, where he was at Dinner with feveral 
Gentlemen, and two Ladies ; and though 'tis very 
rare any one fees the Women, yet they did not 
offer to veil themfelves. I was ordered to fit down 
by myfelf at a little Table placed for that Purpofe, 
where I had fent me of what cbmpofed their Dinner, 
which was fome Fifli and Fowls, and excellent Wine 
of feveral Sorts. -  
The 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 9t 
The chief Town of the Provihce of Jucatan, lies 
twelve Leagues from the Sea on either Side, which 
is a Bifhop's See, and the Refidence of the Gover- 
nor of this Province. ValladoliJU the fecond City ; 
and Campcchy the third ; yet though but the third 
reckoned, it far exceeds the red for Riches and 
Magnificence. It is a well- fit uated neat-birilt 
Town, and by Computation, contains near two 
thoufand Houfes. It is well fortified both by Art 
and Nature : By the former in a ftrong, well built 
neat Cattle, that contains a hundred Brafs Cannon, 
and feveral Mortars ; and the latter by a Ridge of 
ixuu. tnat runs a i] along the Side of the City. 
There isin the Uanu 0 very neat Piazza, confiding 
of about thirty high Arches. Tiao Town has the 
chief Trade ; for from this Place, the uther 
Cities and Towns are furnilhed with all NeceiTaries 
that come from trie Havana* and other Places in 
America ; and likewife from Old Spain. Yet for all 
their Power, Riches and Strength, Capt. Parker, an 
Englijhman y with one Ship, and' a fmall Bark, and 
whofe whole Crew contained but a hundred and 
forty Men, landed in the Middle of the Day, and in 
Spite of all their Forces, which tferetWb hundred 
Horfe, and five hundred Foot, took the Place, 
with the Governor and feveral other Perfons of 
Quality,, together with a rich Ship laden with 
Ingots and feveral other valuable Ladings, beTore 
they knew of the City's being taken. This Pro- 
vince of Jucatan* contains in Compafs nine hundred 
Miles, and is fituated between eighteen and twenty 
Degree* 
9 Z m 7 be Adventures of 
Degrees Northern Latitude. The Air is very hot, 
and not altogether fo wholefome as Tome other 
Parti of America are. The Diftempers that reign 
here, are moftly Fluxes and Fevers, which carry oft" 
Abundance of new Comers. This Province was firft 
difcovered by Ferdinand* Cortez, among his Conquefts 
of Aeiv Spain; and though not altogether fo fruit- 
ful, yet by the Induftry of the Inhabitants, 'tis as 
rich as any of the other Provinces of New Spain \ 
for they are moft either Merchants or Tradefmen : 
And it is the vulgar Opinion, that thefe People are 
more hard and barbarous, than any other Part of 
the Spanijh Weft Indies ; yet, for my own Part. T *~ 
ceived more Civility from them, * had been 
among my own Fiends in England, 
Theic is a Tradition here among the Inhabitants 
that they ufed a Ceremony much like our Baptifm, 
and which had, in their Language, the Term of 
Regeneration, or fecond Birth, which they thought 
to be the Seed or Groundwork of all good and juit, 
r Things; and after being initiated, they were cer- 
tain it was not in the Power of the evil Spirit to 
hurt them in Body or Goods : Neither were they 
.permitted to marry, without firfl taking that Order 
upon them, which, they ufed to diftinguilh by an 
OJlricWs Feather, larger and longer than any 
other they ufed to wear for Ornaments upon their 
Heads, 
They have another Tradition, that this Province 
of Jucatan was firft inhabited and cultivated by a 
white- bearded People, that came from the Eait ; 
after 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 93 
after being to/Ted many Moons upon the Sea, and 
buffering many Hard/hips for Want of Food and 
frelh Water, and other Neceflaries ; yet relieved 
from Want and their Enemies, through the Power 
of the Deity they worlhipped, who even commanded 
the Sun to mine, or not to Ihine ; who made it rain, 
or dry Weather; who could heal Sicknefs, or fend 
Diftempers; in fhort, a God that kept all the other 
petty Deities in Awe. 
This Story, if true, feems to confirm an old Tra- 
dition of our Welch Chronicles, that tells us of one 
Madoc ap Owen, Son to Guhictb, a Prince of that 
Country, who was drove, by fome Difguft, from 
his own Country, with feveral Companions ; who, 
after various Adventures at Sea, were driven on an 
unknown Land to the Weft many hundred Leagues, 
where they had Communication in a friendly Man- 
ner with the Indians, and made a Settlement. 
Whereupon Madoc ap Owen returned for Britain 
again, and got to the Number of two thoufand 
Men 2nd Women, befides Children, which mixed 
with the Natives, and left among them feveral of 
their Opinions and Manners ; which they retained 
till the laft, when Cortex, fubdued them; but now, 
by the Cruelty of the Spaniards , the Natives are al- 
moft extinguifhed . 
After they had feaflxd mc for two or three Davs 
they fent me about with feveral Officers appointed 
by the Governor, to make a Gathering, which wc 
did withSuccefs; for in three Days we had got 
feven hundred and odd Pieces of Eight : And two 
Merchants 
94 The Adventures of 
Merchants there were at the Charge of fitting up 
my Bark, in order to fend it for my poor Compa- 
nions. When it was finifhed, they gave me fevernl 
NecefTanes for my(e\f and Companions, to hearten 
us up; as fome Bottles of fine Wines; two Bottles 
of Citron-water, for a Cordial ; Chocolate, and 
feveral other uieful Things : But the Difficulty was 
to get Seamen to go with me : At lafl they remem- 
bered they had five LugUJhmen that were Prifoners 
there, and taken in the Bay of Campechy, upon Suf- 
pkion of Piracy, but nothing could be proved 
againftthem; which they freed withoutany Ranfom : 
This did not look like Barbarity or Ill-nature ; for 
I received as much Humanity among them, as couJd 
be expected from any of the mod civilized Nations : 
But they have a greater Kindnefs for the Englijh > 
than they have for their Neighbours the French, for 
the Englijh are more open and generous (they fay), 
and don't ufe Stratagems to deceive them, as the 
French do frequently ; though they only pay them 
in their own Coin, for there ia no Nation under the 
Sun more fruitful than the Spaniard in Plottings 
and Ambufcadcf, (as they call them) to deceive 
their Enenfies ; which yet they think lawful. 
On February the 15th, 1700, Ave fct Sail from 
Campechy Bay, after paying my xAcknowledgment to 
the generous Governor, tiff, but having nothing to 
prefent him worth Acceptance, but my OW, I 
gave him that, which he took very kindly, and faid 
he would prize it mightily, not only in the Efteern 
he 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 95 
"he had for that Author, but in Remembrance of 
me and my Misfortunes. 
We plyed it to Windward very brifldy, and in 
iifteen Days difcovered the Ifles of the Akranes ; 
but we durft not go within the Shoals, becaufe we 
were all ignorant of the Channel. So we caft An- 
chor, and hoitfed out our Boat, with two Meu and 
myfelf, and made to Shore, where we found my 
three Companions, but in a miferable Condition, 
and Mr. Mufgra<ve fo faint and weak, that they ex- 
pected he could not live long. 
When they awaked the next Day, after I was 
drove o-ffin the Dark, they were all in Defpair, to 
find the Vcilel gone, which they perceived was ocr 
cafioned by a Hurricane, that they were aflured was 
violent, becaufe it had blown down their Tent, 
though without awaking them. But when they be- 
gan to confider they had no Food, nor but very lit- 
tle frefh Water, which was left in a Barrel without 
a Head in the Tent, their Defpair increafed ; bur, 
as no Paffion can laft long that is violent, it wore o£* 
with their Care for Suftenance, which they dili- 
gently fearched for ; but not finding any Quantity 
of Eggs, or Booties, the dreadful Fear of Itarving 
came into their Minds, with all its horrid Attend- 
ants. Now they imagined that all that had happened 
to them was, as I had thought, a Judgment of Di- 
vine Providence for the vile Sin of Drunkennefs, 
when they fhould have rather implored Heaven's 
AlTiftance, in furthering them in their Delivery from 
the Place where they were. 
They 
96 The Adventures of 
They had now been five Days without eating o 
drinking, not for Want of Stomachs, but Food, 
which they endeavoured to get, but all to no Pur- 
pofe ; for the Boobies were retired, either out of 
Fear, or Cuilom, to fome other Place. Neither 
could they find one Egg more, and Weaknefs came 
fo faft upon them, with Hunger and Drought, that 
they were hardly able to crawl, fo they thought of 
nothing but dying ; when at lall they remembered 
the Body of good Mr. Randal, that had been buried 
a Week, which they dug up, without being pu- 
trified ; and that poor Wretch that helped to fup- 
port our Misfortunes when alive with his fage Ad- 
vice, now was a Means cf preferving their Lives, 
though dead. They had by good Fortune left them 
a Tinder-box in the Tent, (we having two) with 
which they ftruck a Light, and made a Fire, then 
cnt off feveral Pieces of Flefh of the Brawn of his 
Arms and Thighs, broiled them on the Coals, 
though with a great Deal of Relu&ance ; which was 
the Means of keeping Life and Soul together, till 
we came to relieve them from that deplorable Con- 
dition. Mr. Mufgra<ve we brought to a little Life 
and Streng/h, by giving him fome Citron-water in 
fmall Quantities, When I faw the Carcafe of my 
poor good Monitor lie for Food for human Crea- 
tures, my Horror at the Sight overcame my Reafon, 
and I believe I faid Things fhocking enough ; how- 
ever, when I had calmly confidercd their Condition, 
I was very forry for what I had faid, and begged 
their Pardon. After we had refrefhed ourfelves, 
we 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 97 
we once more laid him in the Earth, having fewed 
his poor Bones in one of the Hammocks. 
I muft confefs, I never think of that good Man, 
but Tears come into my Eyes, and Melancholy 
clouds all my Thoughts : For he was one whofe 
Character came up to all we could defire in frail 
Man. Honeft, without In tereft ; friendly, without 
Deilgn ; religious, attended with Reafon ; and not 
Avaddlcd up fo tight as to make it deformed : Plea- 
fant in Converfation, courteous to all, hating no- 
thing but Vice ; gentle ia reproving ; bold in all 
Dangers, in being armed with an Innocence thac 
infpircd him with Succefs : In fhort, he was a Mi- 
racle of a Man, when we confider his Life had been 
al ways at Sea, among a Crew prone to all Manner 
of Vices, and where it w„as not poflible to find a 
Pattern to follow of any Goodnefs. 
He was a fmgle Man, or rather indeed a Bache- 
lor ; for he had often told me, he could not bear ta 
marry a Woman, to put her into Frights and Fears 
when the Wind blew hard, as every good Wife 
muft cerraiiily be concerned for the Danger of her 
Hufband. Befides, as it was his Fortune to lead 3 
Seafaring Life, he could not think of marrying, to 
be abient from his other Self fo long (as he termed 
it) ; not but if he had had a fuflicient Competency, 
he faid, he believed he mould have entered into the 
Marriage State in the latter Part of Life, that he 
might have fettled his Mind, and, free from the 
Hazard and Turmoils of the Sea, flipped into hi* 
F Shrowd 
9* The Adventures of 
Shrowd with Content, among his Friends and Ac- 
quaintance at Home. 
He was an excellent Sailor, and knew moft Parts 
rf the World perfeftly well 5 underftood French and^ 
Sjniwfii a d learned to have a pretty good Know* 
ledge in the Latin Tongue. His Journals were 
rno.tly taken in Short-Hand : But he had one fmall 
Manufcripr, containing about twenty-Leaves, Spa- 
?hjh on the one Side, and Englijhon the other, all in 
Lis own Hand ; which I fuppofe he had tranflated 
for his Diverfion, and to pafs away his leifure 
Hour*. It was a Treatife of Herbs and Flowers, 
with other Rarities, to be found in the IVrjl-lndies \ 
On the Flat of his Book, he had writ in a larrre 
Hand the fe Words : This Mannfcript in Spaniih, / 
have tranferibed from the Original of the Reaver e7id F other 
Pedro di Riberia, of the Order cf Jefus, 'when lives 
Pi! a in Mexico. The TranJIaUon I have made at my 
hi Jure Hours*; and the Cures by the Simples, &c. men- 
t'Giicd in the faid Book, I have been an Eyc-Witnefs to 
of and jane were f rati fed on myjelf 
We now were got on Board once again, in or- 
der to fail as foon as the Wind would rife, it being 
itark calm, and continued fo two Days ; but at laft 
it blew a little, and we weighed Anchor, and flood 
out to "Sea; tut made but little Way. I now was 
Mailer, or Captain of a Ship, and began to take 
upon me; we were in all nine Men, all E>:ghjh>, 
that iSf myfelf hrft, Richard If 'hit c, T4\ Mufgravc, 
and Ralpi* Midd/etotty my old Companions; John. 
Stone, 
Capt. Richard Falc o ke r. 99 
Stone, IV. Kcatcr, Francis Heal, W. Warren, and Jo- 
Jepb Meadows, (all of England) the five Men 'given 
me by Don Ar.torJo , who, as I faid before, were 
taken on Sufpicion of Piracy ; whereupon a Thought 
came into my Hend, that had efcaped me before: I 
confidercd if thefe were really Pi rate? , being five to 
four, they might be too powerful for us, and : per- 
haps murder us. Frank Hood we had made our 
Cook, to drefs our Provifion, which he underitood 
a little One Day we all dined together upon Deck, 
under our Awning, it being very calm Weather; 
an Awning is onfy a Sail fixed at the Quarter- Deck, 
a-nd carried over the Booms (that is, fpSre Mafis that 
Ire along from Quarter to Fore cattle) to the Fore- 
caftle, to keep the Sun from our Meads : In Men of 
War, and great Ships, they have one midc of 
fcveral Kinds of handfome StcrT, for the Officers on 
the Quarter-Deck ; befides another on the Main 
Deck, for the common Sailers. One Dav, as I 
faid before, being at Dinner, for we aH eat to- 
gether, I aficed the five Men, what was the Reafcn 
they were taken by the Spaniard: for Pirates ? Upon r 
this they feemed nonplufcd, but Warren foon reco- 
vered himfclf, as well as the reft, and fpakc for ihe 
others, in this Manner : Wc embarked on Board 
the Ship Bonavenntrc, in the TKv?:cs* bound for 
Jamaica, where wc made a pro fpe reus Voyage ; but 
after taking m our Lading, in our Way Home, we 
were overtaken by a Storm, in which our Ship was 
loft, and all the Men p eri/hed, but myfelf and four 
F 2 Companions, 
i co The Adventures of 
Companions, who were faved in the Long-Boat : 
But the Reafon we were taken for Pirates was, that 
making to Shore to fave ourfelves, we faw a Bark 
riding at Anchor, without the Port of Campecly, 
which we made to, in order to enquire whereabouts 
we were, and to beg fome Provifions, our own being 
gone; and entering the Veflel, found but tvvo 
People in it ; the third, jumping into the Water, 
fwam on Shore, and brought three Boats filled 
with Spanijb Soldiers, which entered the Veflel 
before we could make off. Make off! faid X. 
What did you defign to run away with the VefTel ? 
No; anfwered Warren, with fome Confufion, but 
we did defign to weigh Anchor, and go farther on 
Shore, that we might land in the Morning (it being 
late at Night) : But we were prevented by their 
coming on Board us, where we were found, being 
.armed, which we had taken Care of, when we 
were in our Boat, to defend ourfelves, if we were 
obliged to land among the Savages : And indeed 
they had their Arms reftored them, when they 
were freed and fent on Board with me. 
I muit confefs, I did not like the Fellow being 
nonplufed now and then, in not knowing what to 
fay; but upon Con fi deration, thought it might be 
for Want of Words to exprefs himfelf better, which 
is the Occafion very often of People of common 
Underftanding, Stammering, and Humming, and 
Hawing, to put their Words in better Order; fo 
for that Time 1 took no more Notice, not weighing 
it 
Capt. Richard Falconer. ioi 
it in my Mind : But in the Evening Mr. Middkton 
came to me, with a Face of Concern, and told me 
he did not like thefe Fellows Tale. W hy fo ? laid 
I ; becaufe I obferve they herd together, anfwered 
he, and are always whifpering and fpeaking low to 
one another. Oh! faid I, there cannot be any 
Danger in them ; for if they had any Inclination to 
run away with our Veffel, they might have done it 
when they were five to one, before we took you in. 
I know not, rppU*«l Ji^rV*t» / /.v*», i k»yc « ii^aic ruie- 
bodes fomething. Pfhaw ! old Women's Fears ; 
(faid I) for, as I faid before, they would have done 
it when they had more Power, before 1 landed on 
Defpair IJIand, (as I called it) if they had any fuch 
Intentions. There is a Providence that rules over 
all our Actions, anfweied Middkton y that we can no 
more fee into, than the Book of Fate, but if a 
foreboding Heart may fpeak, I am lure fomething 
we fliall fuffer from thefe Fellows, that will be of 
Danger to us. If fo, replied I, there's no refilling 
the Will of Providence ; for what will come, will 
come, and there's no fending againfl it : But, 
added he, this" feems fomething like Foreknow- 
ledge ; and to refill againfl that, feems like ftrug- 
gling againfl; the Will of Heaven, that warns us by 
thefe Forebodings to prevent thefe Accidents of 
Life. 1 believe God, purfued he, has fixed a 
Period to our Breath ; but Accidents that happen in 
this Pilgrimage of Life, may be avoided by a 
F 3 timely 
102 The Adventures of 
tinuly Notice : As we are all Partakers of free Will, 
and from that, forming our own Happinefs, or 
Ivfifcry, it cannot be faid but that the Aftions of 
Life may be regulated by that Free Will. Our 
Maker never formed a Villain : Neither do their 
external Parts, differ from a virtuous Man's ^ if they 
did, they were to be eafily avoided : But as an old 
Poet fays, There'' s uo Art to find the Mind's Conjlruftim 
tn ibe Face* 
TTpnn this Difcourfe, I began to ftagger in my 
Opinion of their Honefty, and therefore werefuUcd 
to Hand upon our Guard. We took no Notice of 
cur Conference than to our two other Companions, 
but rcfolvcd to flay till Night, we having a better 
Opportunity, as we lay together in the Cabbin 
Aft; (which is as much to fay in the Stern, or 
behind) when we were to go to Supper, we called 
one another to come, but five of the Sailors excufed 
themfelves, by faying they had dined fo lately, 
that they had no Stomach as yet ; whereupon we had 
an Opportunity fooncr to converfe together than we 
defigned. For being at Supper, we opened the 
Matter to our other two Companions, and they 
agreed immediately that we were in fome Danger; 
fo we refolved in the middle Watch of the Night, 
to feize them in their Sleep. We were to have the 
fir ft: Watch, which we fet at eight of the Clock; 
then they were to watch till Twelve; and then in 
their Watch, between One an3 Two, we had 
concluded to fcize upon them as they flept ; that is, 
four 
Capt. Richard Falconer- 105 
four of them, for one of them watched with ur, 
which was Frank Hoed, the Cook ; whom we agreed 
to feize and bind fait, towards the latter End of the 
Watch, and to threaten him with Death, if he of- 
fered to make the leaft Noife. 
As foon as ever our firft Watch was fef, we fent 
Mr. Mujgra<ve to prepare our Arms; in about half 
an Hour, or thereabouts, Warnn called to //coupon 
Deck, (they lying below) to get him a little Wa- 
ter, for he was bloody dry, he faid ; whereupon 
the other went down immediately with fome Water 
in a Can to him. As foon as he was gone down, I 
had the Curiofity to draw as near the Scuttle as I 
could to hear the Difcourfc. Now you muft know 
Hot J* our Cook, had been employed that Day about 
fearching our Provisions, our Beef Calks, and Perk, 
to fee what Quantity we had, that we might know 
how long it would la ft ; fo that the others had not 
an Opportunity to difclofe the Deflgn to him. As 
foon as he was got down, I could hear JVllL Warren 
fay to him, G — d d — n ye, Trunk, we had like to 
have been fmoaked to-Day and though we had 
contrived the Story that I told them, yet I was a 
little furprized at their afking me, becaufe then I 
did not expect it ; but we dengn to be even with 
them in a very little Time; For, hark ye, faid he, 
and fpoke fo low that I could not hear him ; upon 
which, the other faid, there's no Difficulty in the 
Matter 5 but we need not be in fuch Hafte, for vou 
know, as we ply it to Windward, a Day or two 
F \ can 
1 c 4 The Adventures cf 
can break no Squares, and we can foon (afier the 
effecting our Defign) bear down to Leeward to 
our Comrades that we left on Shore ; for I fancy, 
added he, that they have fomc fmall Sufpicion of 
you now, (which in Time will fieep) and may be 
on their Guard ; therefore 'tis better to wait a Day 
or two : No, G— d Z ds, we'll do it To- 
night, when they are afleep, replied Warren \ 
whereupon there were many Arguments, Pro and 
Con ; (as 1 fancied) but they fpoke fo low, that I 
could only hear a G — d D — n ye, now and then, 
and fomethingof that Kind. 
A little while after, Heed came up again, and 
after walking up and down, and fixing his Eyes 
often upon me, who in the mean Time was pro- 
. vided with a Couple of Piftols under my Watch ■ 
Coat, and indeed were their own, that we hung up 
ready charged in our Cabin ; which was one Reafon 
, of their Defign to attack us in our Sleep, being 
they had no Arms till they could feize on them 
where they hung ; or elfc they were fuch defperatt 
Fellows, they would have done it in the open 
Day. Hood, as I faid before, fecmed to fix his 
Eyes frequently upon me, for till now I neves 
watched in the Night ; at laft, faid he very foftly, 
if you plcale Mr. Falconer, 1 have a Word or two to 
fay to you, that much concerns you all. What is 
it ? faid I. Why, anfwered he, I would have the 
xeit of your Companions Ear Witnefles too ; with 
that I called them together \ but, faid he, let's 
mire; 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 105 
retire as far from the Scuttle as we can, that we 
may not be heard by any below Deck ; fo we went 
into the Cabin, and opened the Scuttle above, that 
Mr. Mufgrave, who iteered, might hear what was 
- faid. When we were fat down upon the Floor, 
Mr. Hood began as follows. My four Companions 
below have a wicked Defign upon you ; that is, to 
feize you, and put you into the Boat, and run 
away with your Veffel : But I thinking it an in- 
human Aftion, not only to any one, but to you in 
particular, that have been the Means of their 
Freedom, therefore, I hope appointed by Provi- 
dence, I come to let you know it, that we may 
think of fome Means to prevent it. Upon this, 
(finding his Sincerity,) T told him that we were pro- 
vided againft it already ; and with the Confent of 
my Companions, told him our Defign of feizing 
them in the third Watch ; but, faid he, they in- 
tend to put their Projeft in Praaice, their next 
Watch, therefore I think it will be more proper 
for us to Counter plot them, and feize them this ; 
but as they have no Arms, faid I, and we have, 
we need not fear them. 
We had feveral Debates about this, which took 
up too much Time to our Sorrow ; for Warren mif- 
trufting Hood, it feems, got up and liftened, and 
when he found that we retired all of us to the Cab- 
bin, he got upon Deck, and ftealing foftly, came 
fo clofe. that he overheard every thing we faid, 
which as foon as he underftood, he went immediate- 
F S ly 
io6 The Adventures of 
Iy to his Companions, who waited impatiently, (as 
they told us afterwards) and let them know all our 
Difcourfe; whereupon, without paufing, they re- 
folved to attack us immediately, in the Mid ft of our 
Confultation ; which was no fooner refoJved upon, 
but done: For we were immediately furprized with 
their feizing us, which they did with that Quick- 
nefs, and fo unperceivably, that we were all con- 
founded and amazed ; they had whiped off two Pis- 
tofs in our Confirmation, which they clapped to our 
Ereafts. Jn this Confufion, I had forgot mine that 
were at my Girdle, (or elfe we might have been 
hard enough for them;) neither did 1 remember 
them till they found them about me. They had' 
fhut the Cabbin Door on the Infide, rill they had' 
bound us, and never minded Mr. Mufgra*ve knock- 
ing and making a Noife, till they had fecured 
us. Which done, they opened the I>oor, and 
feized him, who came to know what the Matter 
was, for we had no Candle in the Cabbin, and he 
hearing a Noife, amongft u?, thought we were 
feizing Hcod, and called to us to fcrrbear, (as he faid 
afterwards) and make hafte, for he was going to 
rack about, thorgh we did not hear him ; on which 
he clapped the Helm a Lee, and came down to fetch 
us out, to haul off the Sheets, £sV. and was feized, . 
and bound with us ; for they left us immediately, 
for the Sails fluttered in the Wind, by Reafon ftic 
was veering round, when the Helm was a Lee. 
After they had fixed the Vcflel, and it was broad 
Pay, they came and unbound our Legs, and gave 
us Leave to walk upon Deck; whereupon \ began 
to 
Capt. Richard F A l c one r. 107 
to expoftulate with them, particularly Mr, Warren; 
being he feemed to have a- Sort of- Commar>d^oveP 
the others. Pray, faid T to him, for what Reafort 
have you feized upon us, and bound us in; this 
Manner? Have we done you any Injury? ^'hfi 
faid he, Self-Prefervation ; I found you were going 
to do the . like by us, therefore you are but ferved 
in your Kind. And what do you defign to do with 
lis now you have your'Defire ? Do with you ! Why, 
by and by we defign : to put you in the Boat, and 
turn you a Drift ; 'but for that Son of a B— h, Hisdl 
\ve v H mmder him without Mercy ; a Dog, to betrcuy-: 
us; How, betray you ! replied I? Yes! For I over^ 
heard' thferi related the 'Manner of it as menti- 
oned above. But as you have not fo much injured, 
us, "we'll put you immediately in the Boat with a 
Week's Provifion, and a fmall Sail, "and'you fhall 
feek your Fortune, as I fuppofe you, would have 
done by us. No, an f we red I, we only de%ned ; *o>' 
confine you till we came to Jamaica^ and there to 
have given you your Liberty to go where you had 
thought fit. Ay, ay, faid IKarren, fhakrng his 
Head, that is eafily faid, nor.are we bound ttf be^ 
lieveyou. Why, 'tis plain., .fkid I, that our con - 
fulting to feiae you, was but to prevent what has 
happened. ' We are not to- enquire into the Matter* 
anfwered Wamn, and now we haveyovHn our Pow- 
er, we'll do as we think fit. Why theta/ faid I put 
us afliore at any Land that belbng^^xr iEhe Englifo\ 
and vve ftdl thinfeyota have-not done lis aiiy Enjciryi 
No, faid he, wse.mufl: go : to meet our Captain and 
fifty Men upp>a the- Main Land of Jixcatan* .where 
1 08 The ADVENTURES of 
our Veflel was ftranded not to be gotten off. Oar 
fir ft Defign when we were taken in our Boat was to 
get us a Veflel to go a Buccaneering, which we had 
done at Camfecby, if it had not been for the Indian 
that fwam on Shore unknown to us, and brought 
Succours too foon ; which we could not avoid, the 
Sea Breeze blowing very ftrcng all Night; fo we 
feeing our Danger, were forced to form the Lie we 
told the Governor, which had fome Appearance of 
Truth, for we did not ufe any Violence to the two 
old Spaniards* becaufe by good Words we thought 
to make them affifting to work our Bark back again 
to our Men. Now, purfued he, if you will all re- 
folve to go a Buccaneering with us, we'll venture to 
carry you to our Captain and Men ; if not, we'll do 
as we have propofed. We looking one upon ano- 
ther, as if we were to know each other's Refolu- 
tions; he cryed, nay, if you paufe, you ma'n'r have 
that Grace, if you defire it: Therefore prepare 
every Thing, perfoed he, to one of his Companions, 
that they may be going, they won't be long before 
they come to their journey's End- 
When they had got every Thing ready, that is to 
fay, a Barrel of Bifket, another of Water, about 
half a Dozen Pieces of Beef, and as much Pork, a 
fmall Kettle, and a Tinder-Box ; we were better 
provided than we expefted, by much. Befides, they 
granted us four CutlafTes, and a fowling-piece 
with about four Pounds of Powder, and a fufficient 
Quantity of Shot; together with all poor Mr. Ran- 
daVs Journals, after their perufing thtm, and find- 
ing 
Cap*. Richard Falconer. 109 
ing them of no Ufe to them : When this was done, 
he ordered them to tie Hood to the Mall of the Vef- 
fel, and was charging a Piftol to (hoot him through 
the Head, not confidering it was charged before, 
for it was one of them I had at my Girdle, 
and which they took from me; bat in his Eagernefs 
and H eat of Paffion did not mind it. We ail in- 
treated for the poor Fellow, and he hirofelf fell up- 
on his Knees, and begged with all the Eloquence 
he had, to fpare him, and let him go with us; bur 
IVamn fwore bitterly, nothing ihould fave him. 
Said I, Mr. Warren, if you believe there is a Power, 
that formed this Globe, and fees every Aftion of 
Mankind, think what a Crime you commit by 
wounding of him, by murdering his Image : But if 
you are an Jthei/t, and believe in no Power fuper- 
natural, yet confider what a Conqueftyou will have 
gained over yourfelf by overcoming this headftrong 
Paffion. It may be your own Cafe another Time; 
and Murder you know is punifhed with Death* 
What the Devil have we got here, a preaching Pup- 
py ? Why, doft think that I mind thy ridiculous 
Cant ? prythee mind thy own Bufmefs, and get thee 
gone, or perhaps I may begin with you, and fend 
you to the Devil before your Time. With that, he 
c ocked his Piftol, and levelled it at Hood; but firing, 
it fplit into feveral Pieces, and one ftruck JVarren 
into the Skull fo deep, that he was breathing his 
lad upon Deck; one of the Bullets grazed upon the 
Side of my Temple, and did but juft break the 
Skin; as for Hood he was not hurt ; but with the 
Fright and Noife of the Piftol, (as we fuppofed) 
laboured 
ttb ' The A D V E N T V R 2 S of 
laboured \vith fuch an Agony of Spirit, that he 
brake the Cords chat tied him by the Arms, though 
as thick as a middle t Finger, and fell down; but 
role immediately, and. not finding himfelf hurt, 
ran to us, and unbound our Arfinfiu natperceived by 
the other two, who were bufy about unfortunate 
Warren ; and' though they were called to him by them 
that fleered, (w'10 ran immediately to prevent it)- yet 
they did not mind it, they were fo concerned about 
Warren. And before he that fleered came, HoodAi&i 
unbound me, and flopped the Pel low (Meadows) by,* 
giving him a Blow with his Fift that knocked him 
down. In the mean Time, I had unbound Wbihl 
Mufgra<ue, and Middleton\ and we -went and'Teized 
upon the other two Pyrates? for now we called them , 
nothing elfe. After we had bbiind in our Turn, 
went to fee what Affiftance could be given to Warren, 
where we found that a Piece of the Barrel of the 
Piftol had Tank into his Skull, and that he was jult 
expiring ; but yet he fat upon his Breech with great 
RefolutitfriT 'fa id" he,; jdu {ce you overpowered us, 
and I likewife fee the- Hand of Heaven is in it. I 
now with Horror find (added he) that what ycm in- 
timated- to me about Heaven, to be true ; I fee it 
more in this one- Accident,, than in all the Preach^ 
inff's.of the Fathers. I was bred a Roman* hao ^obd 
honeil Parents, Romans, whole Steps, if I had fol- 
lowed, would have made my > Cvrtfcience ezfy to me- 
at- this Time ; but I forfookall Religion in general,*' 
and now too late, I fiiid that to <Uiiy with Heaven- 
is fooling ones felf; but yef-in- thi* -on^Momeint of 
my Life, that's left, I heartily repent <of all *ny pad 
Crimes . 
- 
Gaptr Rich a r d t a t c o W s r. i lit 
Crimes, and rely upon the Saviour of the Worlds 
if »  ■ 
that died for our Sins to pardon mine- With .that* 
lie crofted himfelf, attd expired, '* : ' r 
1 mull confefs, I was very farry for the unhappy 
Accident of his Death ; but yet, glad that we were 
at Liberty ; and were fomething eafy that the poor 
Soul repented before his Expiration ; not doubting 
but the piercing Eye of> Providence, law that if he 
had furvived; he would have lived a good Chriftian. 
And fure the Almighty's infinite Stock of Bounty, 
has enough Mercy to.fav£ the reperjAig Soul> ^ 
though late before his Repentance come$P* *v 
After we had fecured our Tartars, we threw Mr, 
yVarnn over-board, and bore to the Wind ; for 
after bur firft tacking about* in the Morning, when 
the Buftle;happened, they bore away with Tack at 
Cat-head,'- as being for their Purpofe. The three 
Men that were. left, defired us to Jet them Jhave the 
Boat, and go feek their- Companions; which we 
refufed, as not having Hands enough to cany our 
VelTel to Jamaica* -But we promifed them* if they 
would freely work in the Voyage, they Ihouldhsve 
their intire Liberty to go- where: they thppght v fit 
wi thout any Gomplab t : agatnft ■ them . Upon this* 
we began to be a little fqciable as before,.. a*>d they 
all declared, that that what they did was by the 
Infligation of Warren .-*:..<«< . * v>^ 
The next Day we difcovcred a Ship to 'Wind- 
ward of ujs* that bore down upon u s wi tlx acjo wd~ 
cd Sailsv We filled all. the; Sails we had, a$d eix-> 
dcavpured tog^t away from her as fait as we §puldv 
but all to no Purpofe ; we faw they gained upon us 
every 
V 
i 1 2 The Adventures of 
every Moment, and therefore feeing it was not pof- 
fible to efcape, we backed our Sails and laid by 
for them, chat they might be more civil if they 
were Enemies. As foon as ever they came up 
with us, they hailed us, and ordered us to come 
on Board, which we dnrft not deny ; when Mr. 
Mufgra<ve and I, with Hood and White for Rowers, 
\vent on board them. We found by Hood's know- 
ing them, that they were his Captain and Com- 
rades. Now, as Hood faid, we did not know how 
we (houldf-behave ourfelves, or what we ihould fay 
about Warren ; but we only told the Captain how 
we met with his Men, and that they were redeemed 
upon my Account. He never afked particularly for 
Jf r arren> but how they all did ; but when they fent 
on board to fearch our Veflel, they foon came to 
the Truth on't; for the other three told them the 
Story, though not with aggravating Circumitances : 
Upon which poor Hood was tied to the Main- mall, 
lafhed with a Cat of Nine-tails moft abominably, 
and after that pickled in Brine, which was more 
Pain than the Whipping ; but it kept his Back 
from feftering, which it might otherwife have done ; 
becaufe they flay the Skin off at every Stroke, and, 
to prevent it, they wafh it with Brine ; which is 
called Whiffing and Pickling. After this they would 
not keep him among them ; but fent for the other 
three Men from our VefTel, and ordered us all on 
boani, with another of their Men that was ill of a 
dangerous Fever, which they feared might prove 
infe&ious. They did not take any Thing from ns, 
as 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 113 
as we expe&ed at firft, only gave us this fick Mart 
to look after, which we were very well contented 
with. So we parted with them very well fatisfied, 
but much better when we were out of Sight, fear- 
ing they had forgot themfelves, and would fend for 
us back, and take our Provifion from us, or one 
Mifchief or another ; for Pyrates do not often ufe 
* to be fo courteous. 
Our fick Man mended apace, for we took great 
Care of him, and by keeping him low, only with 
Water-gruel, his Fever left him ; when I began to 
keep up his Spirits with my Cordialsthat I had by 
me, and in a Week's Time he was pretty hoddy, 
(as we call it at Sea). Now we began to converfe 
with him, and he feemed to be a fenfible good- 
natured Fellow. 
Among other Difcourfe, we alked him how Cap- 
tain M // and his Crew got a Ship ? Said he, 
I can only tell the Story as I have heard it (for I was 
fick on Shore) ; which is as follows : 
Sixteen of our Men got a Paragua from the 
Jians, who hate the Spaniards, being under their 
Subjection, and love the French and Englijb very 
well ; thefe fet out to feize uport the firft Ship that 
they thought they could compafs ; when after be- 
ing five t)ays cruifing along Shore, they fpied a 
1 arge Ship weathering Cape Catocb ; but believing it 
to be too ftrong for them, theyrefolved to work by 
Stratagem, thus : Twelve Men laid down in the 
Boat, as if very faint and weak, and made a Signal 
to the Ship, as if in Diftrefs, who very charitably 
brought 
J 14 The A D V E K T V R E S tf 
brought to ; now they had no Arms with them, for 
when they refolved to ufe this Stratagem, they left 
them a/ho;e, as making the Pretence more feafibie; 
fo that when they arrived at the Ship, they all 
went feebly up, as if not able to Hand ; nay, feme 
were obliged to be led, forfooth, to colour the Mat- 
ter the better. They then told them that their 
Ship was caft away upon LcggerheacTs Key, about: 
three Leagues from Cape Ca/ocb, and faving them- 
{fives in their Beats, they got fafe into the Cape; 
but that wandering up in the Country, they were 
met by the Indians* who'ufed them barbaroufly, 
killing eleven of their Number; and would have 
ferved the reft fo, if they had not made their Efcape 
in that Paraguay that they were fo harraiTed for 
Want of Food, having been without eating two 
Bays, that they feared fome of their Companions 
would never recover. 
The poor Spaniards (wallowed the Bait, and their 
Captain, being a very good Man, reiblvcd to re- 
lieve them, and a/ked him what they would have 
him to do for lb cm ? They begged him to land 
them on the firit Englijb Colony or Ifland in their 
Way. He anfwered, he was bound for St. Domingo 
in Bij'paniola ; but that he would put in at Jamaica, 
though fomeihing out of his Way ; yet, faid he, [ 
don't care for going to any of the noted Ports, be* 
caufc there is a War talked of between England and 
Spain, and though it was not proclaimed, they 
might meet with fome Trouble. They were migh- 
tily obliged to him, they faid, but they did i.ot 
know. 
> 
Capt. Richard Falconer. ii> 
know how to return the Obligation, but by pray- 
in or for him and his. 
They foiled very lovingly with them for three or 
four Days, till at la ft Fortune gave them an Oppor- 
tunity to put their Enttrprize in Execution. r I hey 
had Notice that the Ship leaked mightily* and th*t 
the Water came into the Breaa-rcom ; upon wnien, 
the Spaniards went down to remote the Bread to 
get at the Leak, and did not leave more than five 
Men and the Captain above, whom they inftantly 
feized, and clapped down the Hatches upon the reft. 
When they had fecured them, they armed them- 
felves wUU p;&a?< and Lances, which were placed 
in the Steerage of the Ship, and fo capitulated v>i»h 
them ; but fir it, they fleered their Courfe back 
again ; that they might not lofe any Time. As they 
came up, one by one, they bound them, till they 
were aii fo, but the Captain and the Pilot : The 
Captain they confined to his Cabin, with a Centry 
to guard him ; but they let the Pilot go loofe, that he 
might lleer the Ship. O inhuman ! cried I ; thus 
the Snake in the friendly Bofoni warmed turns and 
itings his kind Proteclor : Thus was their generous 
-Heft (if I may call him fo) betrayed by his too 
much good Nature. 
After they had brought the Ship fafd to us, we 
embarked, and put the Spaniards afhore without 
a Morfcl to help themfelves ; nay, if the Indians 
could conveniently meet with them, they would not 
leave one alive. I muft confefs, purfaed the Man, 
that the barbarous Story Ihccked my very Nature, 
and 
i 1 6 The Adventures rf 
and made me hate their Society; and I really be- 
lieve the Abhorrence of this curled Aftion brought 
my Diflemper upon me. 
How much are fome Beafts Acknowledgment of 
o 
Kindnefs more than Man ? A poor Cur, fed but 
a Cruft a Day, will follow the bounteous Hind that 
gives it. Ingratitude is the Fountain of all other 
Crimcs, for from thence flow all the reft* But all 
the Knowledge fome Men are endowed with, is but 
to find the belt Way to deceive. How happy it 
would be if fuch Creatures could (hake off their 
Humanity, and become Beads in Form as well as 
Mind ; then we mould have a Mark to inun them 
by. Our Creator lias lormed all Kind of Beails in 
Shapes that tell us what they are : But Men difRr 
in their Natures more than Beafts, or are indeed, 
under their human Form, the \ery Natures of the 
Brute Creation. How many Villains, under a 
fmooth Face and Tongue, betray their Brothers ? 
The Father cheats the Son, the Son the- Father; 
Mothers fquander the Dowry of their Daughters, 
and then proftitute them to gain them Bread , whkh 
is not Gain but Punilhment : But Ingratitude, like 
Murder, meets with its Punifhment on Earth, a& 
well as in the other World ; and an ungrateful Man 
fhould have a Mark, that all human Society may 
fhunhim. I think the Lacedemonians ufed to puniib 
Ingratitude with Death, as a Crime equal to Sacri- 
lege or Parricide. 
After having taken all their Men on Board, (and 
leaving Directions on the Bark of a Tree, for the five 
Men 
Capt. Richard Falconer. i 17 
Men that were gone upon the fame Defign another 
Way) we fet Sail, and had not been out two Days 
before we met with you. Pray r faid I, how came- 
you among them, if you liked not their Defign ?* 
Why, Sir, anfwered he, by Accident; embarking 
from Bermudas, bound for St. Catharines, or the Jfle 
of Providence, we were met with by this Pirate, in a 
Ship of twenty Guns, and a hundred and twenty 
Men, who took us, and rummaging us, threatened 
to turn us adrift without Provifion, if we would not 
embrace his Defigns, winch was Piracy. We, ra- 
ther than undergo what he threatened us withal, 
confentcd with our Tongues ; but our Inclinations 
were far from it. And from our firft being with him, 
we were plotting to make our Efcape the next Op- 
portunity. But the other four (being but five in 
all our Veffel) were unfortunately killed in that 
Engagement, where they loft their Ship, What 
Ship was it they fought with ? Why, Sir,- a Man of 
War of twenty-fix Guns, fent out on Purpofe to 
take her ; for the Captain had committed fuch Dis- 
orders wherever he came, that he obliged the Go- 
vernor of Jamaica to fend out the Ship called the 
Experiment, to cruife till Ibe met with him : which 
(he did about five Weeks ago. Our Captain, as 
foon as he faw her, gueffed at her Defign, and re- 
folved to fight her to the lad ; well knowing if he 
could take or fink her, he might be pretty fecure to 
range where he pleafed, there being^ never another 
Ship of War nearer than Barbadoes ; who. never came 
£0 far Weft. After he had made a Speech to his 
Men 
1 i 8 The Adventures of 
-Men to encourage them to fight it out, and told 
them their Advantage, they confented to hoi ft the 
bloody Flag, and neither to give or take Quarter, 
As foon as ever the Man of War faw our bloody 
Flag out, they hoiiled theirs, and there enfued a 
dveadful Fight. We began about Two o'Clock, 
and fought till dark Night, without perceiving any 
Advantage on either Side ; and then by Confent lay 
by till Morning without fighting: which we did fo 
nigh, it being calm, that we could talk to one 
another; but we did it only in thieatning Lan- 
guage. As foon as the Morning dawned, we went 
to it again, with move Fury than before, for our 
People fought like defperate Madmen, well know- 
ing if they mould be taken, they mull all die. The 
other Ship fought with a Bravery uncommon ; but 
I believe the Advantage was on our Side, though 
we had killed on Board us thirty-fix Men. 
We fought on till Noon, when we difcovered a 
Ship about three Leagues to Windward of us, 
which bore down upon us with all the Sail they 
could. We foon conjectured, they could be no 
Friends to us, fo without much Confutation, we 
rcfolved to run it before the Wind, with all the 
Sail we could make ; as for the Experiment we 
fought with, we had put it out of their Power to 
follow us, for we had fliot their Main- Mail by the 
Bbard, fo that if the other overtook us, we fhould 
have but one to deal with* We by good Fortune 
lad all our Malls firm, and we out-faiied the other 
' _1* 
Capt. Richard Pal c'o In fe It. 1 19 
Ve/Tel ; bat as fobn as fhe came up with the Experi- 
menty (who never offered to follow us) fhe iaid by, 
as we fuppofe to aflift her, and we obferved through 
our Telefcopes that (he had Spanijb Colours out. 
, We foon loll Sight of them, and then we defig'ned 
to change our Coutfe, but" were prevented by' the 
-Men difcoveritig two Feet Water hi the Hold; who 
could not find out 'the Leak, though they fearched 
with all the DHjgerfce they could : So w^e were ob- 
liged to pump, but all that we could do, the Water 
ftifl gained upon us j we refolved to bear away to 
Jucatan, a Province belonging to the Spaniards, and 
feekkout fome convenient Place, unfrequented by 
ihem, where we might find out our Leak, and flop 
it. * » 
J 
Kotwithftanding our Labour in pumping, the 
Water gained upon us ; fo we put but our Long- 
Boat, and our Pinnace, in order- to put in our Pro- 
vi'lion ; which by Morniiig we effected, and very 
happily for us ; for it was agreed upon all Hands, 
that the Ship could not fwim about eight Hours; 
and though we difcpvered Land, and were rio't above 
fix Leagues off Shore, yet we were afraid we could i 
not reach it, "as the Ship was fo heavy with Water.  
So all that could not fwim, were ordered in to the 
two Boats, with their Arms ; which held in them 
thirty^feven Men with -Officers. They thai! were 
left on Board> had Orders to pump as long as they 
could* -arid run directly in Shore to the Leeward of - 
4Sape Gatotb\ ( bu£ witMn 4>alf a League or- the Places 
1 20 The Adventures of 
the Ship funk, and the Men betook themfelves to 
fwimming, whom we met with our Pinnace, and 
took up. 
I cannot omit one barbarous Attion of the Cap- 
tain's. There were five Men wounded, who begged 
to be taken into the Boat, but the Captain refufed 
them ; and this was his Reafon, as he gave to us in 
the Boat : Said he, thofe five that are wounded, 
will take up too much Room, for they cannot fit 
as we do, but mud lie along; and another Thing is, 
they will take more Time in looking after, than we 
can well fpare. Befides, as I believe they will not 
recover, they will be fooner out of their Pain ; 
and if they fhould recover, added he, they would 
help us to devour our Provifion, which we muft take 
particular Care of, for we know not when we (hall 
get more. I muft confefs, this Ufage ftruck me to 
the Heart almoft, efpecially as to one of them, who 
feemed to have a Senfe of his Condition, and re- 
pented of all his pall Crimes. 
After we came on Shore, we found that we had 
killed on Board us forty-three Men, befides the five 
that our Captain barbaroufly murdered, by leaving 
them in the Ship when fhe funk. Two of their 
Bodies were drove on Shore the next Day, but were 
ordered by the Captain to have Stones tied to their 
Feet, and carried off Shore and funk. As foon as 
we had made us two Tents with Sails that were put 
in the Boat for that Purpofe, they began to con fu It 
ia what Manner they fhould get a Ship ; when one 
Warren 
Capt. Richard Falconer* 121 
Warren propofed to take the Boat, and four Men 
befide himfelf, with Arms, and a Week's Provifions, 
for he would not have any more, and go to the Bay 
of Campechy or Campecby Town, where he did not fear 
getting a VefTel for their Purpofe; for he faid, he 
had done fo upon the like Occaiion before. Where- 
upon the Boat and four Men were ordered for 
him : but he flaying longer than the appointed 
Time, they thought foitie Mifchance had happened 
to him, fo took off their Thoughts of having any 
Veflel from him. One Day they 'fpied a large Pa~ 
ragua coming towards Shore with nine Indians and 
two Spaniards in it, and finding it come fo near, 
that they muft of Courfe fee them, they immedi- 
ately refolved either to take or kill them all, for 
Fear they would difcover them to the Spaniards^ 
before they had got a Veflel to go off again. 
Though 1 muft confefs there was fome 
Reafon, yet I thought it barbarous to fee how 
they murdered the two Spaniards and nine Indians. 
They put out their Pinnace and ten Men well 
armed, to go and take this Paraguay as foon as 
ever they were difcovered by the Indians, they 
jumped over-board, and made towards Shore; but 
were fhot by our Men, or knocked on the Head 
with the Butt-End of their Mufquets. The two 
Spaniards had a new Kind of Death ; they tied them 
Breaft to Breaft, and their Hands behind them, and 
threw them over board ; where they ftruggled foi» 
fome Time, and at lait were drowned. I thought 
G this 
\zz The Adventures of 
this was a Cruelty exceeding all the Tyrants in the 
World, and if I had had a Boat, and our People 
r>ever a one, I would have run any Hazard to have 
faved them. Their Paragua was laden with Flower, 
and dried Fifh, with feveral Sides of dried Pork, or 
Bacon ; which was too good for the People that 
had it. As for my own Part, but little of it came to 
my Share, fori was taken ill the fecond Day after 
we came there, ar>d fo weak and feeble, that I did 
not expecl to overcome it; and if it had not been 
for a Black, that was Trumpeter to the Captain, I 
fhould have perifhed for Want of Suftenance; but 
the poor Fcliow frequently would bring me fome- 
thing or other to nourifh me ; and it is to him, under 
God, that lowe my Life. He would often tell me that 
he did not love that Sort of Life, andwifhed he could 
get rid of his Matter; but faid he, if he did but 
know I had fo much as a Thought that Way, he 
would be the Death of me. I believe this was the 
only poor Fellow that prayed in the whole Crew. 
Ke was chriftened at Plymouth in England, (and had 
very good Notions of Religion) where he was given 
to his prefent Mailer, who had made feveral V oy- 
ages into the Weft Indies, for a Plymouth Merchant ; 
but at laft finding Matters on Shore go but indiffe- 
rently, and having killed a French Officer there, 
feized upon the Ship he ufed to command, and with 
a Crew of defperate Fellows made off to Sea, and 
fleered his om Courfe for tiiC Weft Indies, and there 
commenced 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 123 
ccmmenc-d Pirate; but had met with no other Sac- 
<efs, than what has been related to you. 
Said I, this Fellow's too wicked to have Succefs 
in any Thing, efpecially when Succefs mull be an 
Addition to his Crimes : If it were pofllble to know 
his Fate, we mould find that he would have fome 
defperate End : For Men when abandoned by Pro- 
vidence Divine, though perhaps they may meet with 
Tome Succefs at firft, at laft find an End that's fitted 
for fuch Wretches who deny a fuperior Being; and 
even Atheills, notwithstanding their human Form, 
are no better than Brutes ; nay, I take a*i Aibeifi to 
have far lefs Right to Salvation, than thofe Indian 
that pray to the Devil; for they do it through Ig- 
norance, and worfhip him with a mere fincere De- 
votion, bccaufe they know 'tis in his Po*ver to do 
them Harm. With what a fervent Zeal would they 
ferve the true God, if they knew (as all who profefa 
Chriftianity do) that it is in his Power to bellow 
Blefiings, even after this Life r With what Devotion 
they worihip the Sun, who they take to be the fu- 
perior Deity, becaufe it makes the Earth green, and 
is the fecond Caufe of all the Good they enjoy r 
Then, with how- much more Reverence ought we to 
give Praife to that Power that lends Light and genial 
Heat to that Planet? If an Atkeift \\oxA<& confider the 
Works of Nature jullly, he would find it an Irnpof. 
fibility to be fo any longer; and to fancy this World 
was formed by Chance, or Accident, io to allow 
G 2 Brails 
1 24 Adventures of 
Beafts the Privilege of Nature and Reafon, to as 
great a Degree as we that pretend to Humanity. 
John Roufe was the Name of this Sailor we took 
on Board, born at Bermudas. He offered us foine 
Propofals, if we would go along with him thither, 
but I declined it, as wanting to be with my old 
Ship's Crew, and thought of feeing my own Coun- 
try again, as I believe all Travellers do, who bring 
nothing Home but Misfortunes, or the Vices of the 
Places they have travelled through. From this Man 
the faid Roufe y I had the following fhort Defcription 
of Bermudas, or the Summer IJlands. 
Bermudas (the Place of my Birth) or the Summer 
IJlands, is fuppofed by fome, to take its Name of 
Bermudas from certain black Hogs that came out of 
a Spanijh Ship that was call away on thofe Shores. 
And by others from one John Bermudas , a Spaniard, 
the firft Difcoverer of the Iflands. The Name Sum- 
mer Ijtands, is derived from George Summers, an £//- 
glffiman, who fuffered Shipwreck there. They are 
fituated in thirty two Degrees, and twenty five Mi- 
nutes of Northern Latitude ; fixteen hundred Leagues 
from England ; twelve hundred from Madeira; 
four hundred from Hifpaniola\ and about three hun- 
dred from B oft on in Newo- England. The Spaniards 
s had it firft, and after them the French; but the Sup- 
plies that were fent them from France mifcarrying by 
Shipwreck, they were obliged to abandon the Iflands. 
After this, one Wingfield, a Merchant in London, 
fent in two Ships, Captains Go/nel and Smith, with 
People to fettle there j but there was not much done 
till 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 125 
fill 16 12, when a Company was eftablifhed at Lon- 
don by Letters Patent, given by King James the firft, 
who immediately fent Captain Moor with fix ty- five 
Men, where he was two Years in fortifying the If- 
lands againft the Attempts of any Invafion from ei- 
ther French, Spaniards, or bidians* In the mean 
Time a Sort of Rats fo increafed, that they devour- 
ed every Thing that was green in the whole Jfland, 
and had like to have ftarved the Inhabitants, if Pro- 
vidence had not timely fent a'Difeafe among them 
that confumed them all. In about three Years after 
the firft Plantation by Captain Moor, there was fent 
them another Supply of Men and Provifion, by Cap- 
tain Bart let, who returned with a hundred Weight 
of Ambergreafe. The next Year, there arrived five 
hundred Men and Women, with Tradefmen of all 
Sorts. In 16 j 6, one Tuckard fucceeded in the Go- 
vernment, and was very ferviceable to the Plantation, 
in bringing and planting feveral Trees, and Tobac- 
co. He alfo divided the Country into Acres, and 
parcelled it out to the Tenants. It encreafed daily 
in Culture and Inhabitants. The Form of the If- 
lands, as they lie, refembles fomething of a Lobfter 
with its Claws off. The chief of the Iflands is cal- 
led George Ijland, and is divided into eight Parts, 
beiides the general Land. 1. Hamilton Tribe-, 2. 
Smith's Tribe-, 3. Devon/hire Tribe-, 4. Pembroke 
Tribe-, 5. Paget* s Tribe; 6. Warwick Tribe ; 7. 
Southampton Tribe-, 8. S unify 9 s Tribe. The Iflands 
are all furrounded by Rocks, that at high Water are 
dangerous to Strangers. The chief Harbours are 
G 3 Southampton 
■ 
1 26 . The Adventures of 
Southampton^ Harrington, and the Great Sound. Upon 
St, George's IJJand, they have built feveral large and 
tfrong Forts, whofe Chief are Warwick and Dover 
Ports. The Soil in fame Places is Tandy or clayed > 
and in other Places A ftVcoloured, White and Black ; 
about two Feet deep under the A(h, is found great 
Slates, which the Inhabitants make Uie of feveral 
^\Vay$; and under the Black is found a ftony Sub- 
ftance, fomething like a Spunge, or Pumice-ftone. 
The Wells and Pits, ebb and flow with the Sea, 
yet produce excellent frefh Water. The Sky is ge- 
nerally ferene; but when 'tis over-caft they have 
dreadful Thunder and Lightning. The Air is much, 
the fame as with you in, England. They have two 
HarveAs in the Year : They fow in March, and reap 
in junc\ then they fow in Augujl, and gather in Ja* 
nuary: And from that Month till May, the Whales 
frequently fwim by them. They often find great 
Quantities of Ambcrgreafc, and feme times Pearl 
Oyfters. No venomous Creature will live in any 
of the faid Iflands. The yellow large Spiders have 
not theleaft Venom in them. There's Plenty of all 
Sorts of Cattle, both wild and tame, efpecially 
Hogs, who -have mightily encreafed fince their firft 
landing; but they are not altogether fo fat as we 
could wifh, feeding only on Berries that fall from 
the Palmetto-Trees, which are very fweet. There's 
Plenty of Mulberries, both white and red, which 
produce prodigious Numbers of Silk Worms ; who 
fpin Silk of the Colour of the Berry. The Trees 
are here of different Kinds ; the Cedar is reckoned 
the 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 127 
the largeft in the Univerfe. The Leaves are downy, 
and prickly at the End : The Berries that it pro- 
duceth are of a pale Red which inclofe four white 
Kernels ; the outermoil Skin is fwect ; the innermoft 
that contains the Kernel, is fharp ; and the Pulp is 
tartim. The Tree is always flourifhing, being at 
the fame Time full of Bloflbms, green and ripe 
Fruit. The Berries when ripe begin to gape, and 
fall off in rainy Weather;' leaving a round ;Stalk on 
the Boughs, which lofes not its Rind till that Time 
Two Years after. The Berry requires one Year be- 
fore it comes, to its full Ripenefs, which happens 
about December, The Boughs moot upwards, and in 
a little Time are fo heavy, that t Key weigh down 
the Body of the Tree. There are many Plants,, "as 
the Pickle Peat\ Poifon Weed) Red Weed; Purging Bean, 
Red Pepper, and the Co/live Tree, and the Sea Feather v 
which grows on the Brink of the Sea. . There is ano^ 
ther Plant called Nucbily, which grows in -the Nich- 
es of the Rocks, wafhed by the Waves of the Sea, 
and produces a Fruit like a Pear, which they' Gill 
the Speckled Pear, from its Spots. For.Towls, we 
have all Sorts that England produces befides a great 
Number of Cranes, larger than any I have teen 
elfewhere ; with a Sort of Fowl that lives in Holes 
in the Rocks like Rabbits. As for Tortoifes, they 
are as good there as any where. 'They catch them 
in this Manner; they watch for them at Night, 
when they come on Shore to dig Holes to bury their 
Eggs in ; while they are doing of it, they turn them 
on their Backs, and not being able to get upon their 
G 4 Legs 
i zS The Adventures of 
Legs again, they are eafily taken. Some will have 
a hundred Eggs in them about as big as a common 
Tennis Ball, and very round ; but a thin Skin, and 
the Yolk lies on the Side of the Skin, or Shell, and 
may be feen on the Outfide: Thefe hidden in the 
Sand, are nouriftied by the Sun, and never minded 
by the Tortoife that lays them ; and as foon as ever 
they have broke the Shell, they all run into the Sea. 
Some fay they are full fix Years a hatching. They 
are excellent Meat, (for I can't call them Filh) and 
very nourifliing, and we ufe the Oil inftead of But- 
ter, which will keep longer, and is reckoned much 
vvholefomer for many Ufes. Befides, it is good to 
bathe the Place that is ftung by a little Infeft, called 
Mujketo. The largeft of thefe Iflands is Long I/land; 
the next, St. George's IJland \ after that, Somerfet, and 
St. David's; next, Hibernia, or Ireland If and 
then Longbei'dy Cooper's, and Smith's I/land; Non- 
fuch Gates ; and the Brothers IJland ; with many others 
as well inhabited, and provided with every Thing 
for the Life of Man ; which is elegantly defcribed by 
your Englijh Poet, Mr. Ed?mind Waller. 
Bermudas, walVd with Rocks, who does not know 
That happy IJland where huge Lemons grow, 
And Orange Trees ^ which golden Fruit do bear ? 
Th' Hefperian Garden boafts of nnoc Jo fair. 
Where Jhining Pearly Coral, and many a Pound, 
On the rich Shore, of Ambergrcafe is found* 
The lofty Cedar > which to Hcau y n ajpires, 
The Prince of Trees, is Fewel for their Fires : 
Tie 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 
The Smoak, by <wbicb their loaded Spits do turn, 
For Incenfe might on facred Altars burn : 
Their private Roofs on od'rous Timber born, 
Such as might Palaces for Kings adorn. 
The fiweet Palmettos, a new Bacchus yield, 
With Lea ves as ample as the broadejl Shield : 
Under the Shadow of whofe friendly Boughs, 
They Jit caroujing where the Liquor grows. 
Figs there unpl anted through the Fields do grow, 
Such as fierce Cato did the Romans Jhow ; 
With the rare Fruit inviting them to fpoil 
Carthage, the Mijlrefs, of fo rare a Soil, 
The naked Rocks are not unfruitful there, 
But at fome conjlant Seafons ev y ry Tear, 
Their barren Tops with lufcious Food abound, 
And with the Eggs of various Fowls are crown' d % 
Tobacco is the worft of Things, which they 
To Englifh Landlords as their Tribute pay : 
Such is the Mould, that the bleft Tenant feeds 
On precious Fruits, and pays his Rent in Weeds : 
With candied Plantanes, and the juicy Pine, 
On choiceft Melons, and fweet Grapes they dine, 
And with Potatoes fat their wanton Swine, 
Nature thefe Cafes with fuch a lavifo Hand 
Pours out among y em, that our coarfer Land 
Tajles of their Bounty, and does Cloth return, 
Which not for Warmth, but Ornament is worn: 
For the kind Spring, which but falutes us here, 
Inhabits there, and courts them all the Year ; 
Ripe Fruits and Blojfoms on the fame Trees live, 
At once they promife, what at once they give. 
130 The Adventures of 
Sofiweet the Air, Jo moderate the Clime, 
Nonefickly lives y or dies beforejns Time. 
Heav'nfure has kept this Spot of Earth uncurfi r 
Tojhew how all Things were created fir ft* 
The tardy Plants in oiir cold Orchard plac* d> 
Referee their Fruit for the next Age's Tafte : 
There afmall Grain in fome few Months will he: 
A firm , a lofty, and a fpacious Tree : 
The Palnia Chrifti, and the fair Papah, 
Now hut a Seed, ( preventing Nature's L&wJ 
In half the Circle of the hafiy Tear 
Projetl a Shade., and lovely Fruits do wear* 
And as the Trees* in our dull Region fet> 
But faintly grow, and no P erf eel ion get ; 
So in this Northern TraSt, our hoarfer Throats 
Utter unripe, and ill conftrained Notes ; 
While the Supporter of the Poet's Stile, 
Phoebus on them eternally docs fmiJe. 
O ! how I long my carelefs Limbs to lay 
Under the Plantane's Shade 
There is now in the Iflands of Bermudas, near 
forty thoufand Inhabitants, moftly Englijh. The 
Laws are the fame as in England, The Religion 
and divine Worfhip the fame. There are three and 
twenty Parifh Churches, befides Chapeb. In the 
Year 1616, five Seamen fet Sail from thence in an 
open VefTel of about three Tons, and after having 
fufFered feveral Storms and Tempefts, were fafely 
landed at Kinfale in Ireland. The French and Spa- 
niards have made feveral Attempts upon thofe Iflands ; 
l)ut always were drove away with considerable Lofs. 
About 
Capt. Richard Falconer, 131 
About a Month before I embarked for this unfor- 
tunate Voyage, we took a French Pirate, who was 
fb infolent as to come into Harrington's Sounds even 
at Noon-day, and cut the Cables of a Merchant- 
man, richly laden, bound for England; but by good 
Fortune ran upon the Flats in the Mouth of the 
Sound, in going out again : So we had Time to 
man fome Boats with fome of the Soldiers of the 
Garrifon, and fend to their Relief, where there hap- 
pened a defperate Fight for fome Time; but more 
Forces going to the Affiftance of the others, they 
took them after an obftinate Refiftance, killing 
twenty- feven of their Men, and lofing eleven of 
our own. The Captain made his Efcape in his 
Boat, in the latter End of the Engagement, when 
he perceived his Danger ; but was obliged to go on 
Shore on Ireland Ijland for fome Provifion, where he 
and four Men that were with him, were fecured,. 
and fent to Tucker's Town; where they were to be 
tried the Day I came away. 
Two Nights after we had parted with the Pirate, 
we were encountered with a dreadful Storm, that 
laftcd two Days without abating ; and our poor 
Bark, which was none of the bell, was tumbled and 
tolled like a Tennis-ball, yet we received no Da- 
mage, but that Ihe would not anfwer the Heim ; 
fo that we were obliged to let her go before the 
Temped, and trull to the Mercy of Heaven for Re- 
lief. This Storm, and the Danger we had efcaped 
from the Pirate, put me in mind of tHefe four Lines 
of the forementioncd Poet, the celebrated Waller : 
G 6 JBoJd 
132 *The Adventures of 
Bold were the Men, which on the Ocean firft 
Spread their new Sails, when Shipwreck was the worfl* 
More Danger now from Man alone we find, 
Than from the Roc fa, the Billows, or the Wind, 
We, in the middle of the Storm difcovered Land 
right a-Head, which put us all into our Panicks; 
we endeavoured to bring our VefTel to bear up to 
the Wind; but all to no Purpofe ; for lhe Hill drove 
nearer to Shore, where we difcovered feveral To- 
kens of a Shipwreck, as Pieces of broken Marts, 
and Barrels fwimming on the Water, and a little 
farther Men's Hats; then we began to think we 
mould certainly run the fame Fate, when, as foon 
as thought, our Bark was drove on Shore in a fmooth 
fandy Bay, but where we had Opportunity to quit 
her, which was happy for us ; for the Sea warned 
over her with fuch Violence, we had not any Hopes 
of her efcaping the Storm, but thought of courfe 
would be torn to Pieces. 
When we were afhore, we all concluded it could 
b.e no other Part but the South of Cuba //land, be- 
longing to the Spaniards. We were then in a terri- 
ble Fright, left we were near any Part that belonged 
to the Indians ; for Mr. Mufgra>ve afTured me, that 
there were fome Parts of the South Side of Cuba, that 
Indians dwelt in, in Spite of the Spaniards, and 
xnaffacred them wherever they met them, or any 
other Whites. We lay all Night in terrible Fear, 
and though we found the Storm abated, or rather a 
Calm 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 133 
Calm fucceeded, yet we durft not Mir till the Moon 
rofe, and then we all walked towards our YelTel, 
which we found all on one Side ; but by good For- 
tune moft of our Provisions were dry, which mightily 
rejoiced us ; but all the VefTePs Rigging and Malls 
were fluttered and torn in Pieces, and fomc Part of 
her Quarter wrung off, that fhe could not be of any 
Ufe to us if we could have got her upright. But 
we took out all our Provifion, and our Arms, with 
two Barrels of Gun- powder that was dry, the reft 
being damaged with Water and Sand that had got 
in. We had Arms enough, as having them that 
belonged to the three Sailors that were taken in the 
Pirate, which we fuppofed they had forgot; fo we 
were fix Men well armed, with each a Mufket, a 
Cafe of Piftols, and a Bayonet ; befides two Cut- 
laffes, if Need were. 
By that Time we had taken every Thing out, 
Day approached, and then we defigned altogether, 
well armed, to go and view the Country. John 
Roi'fe was very well recovered of his Fever, but a 
little weak, yet his Heart was as good as the beft 
of us. So we refolved, if we were fet upon by L>- 
dians, to defend ourfelves to the laft Drop of Blood, 
choofmg rather to die by their Hands in Fig jit, than 
to be tortured after the Manner as they inrlicT: upon 
all the Whites they get into their Hands. But tfiil 
we had fome Hopes that we were too far towards 
the Northward for them. 
When we had placed our Provifion and other 
NecefTaries lafe behind a Tuft of Trees that grew 
clofe 
134 Tfo Adventures of 
clofe by the Water- fide, we fixed our Arms, and 
ventured to walk up in the Country, which we 
did almofl every Way that Day, four or five Miles ; 
but could not difcover any living Creature, nor 
any Sign of Inhabitants, only in one Place the 
Grafs feemed to be lately trodden, but whether by 
Man or Beaft we could not difcover, fo being 
pretty well tired, we went back again to our 
Station, where we ate heartily, and at Night we 
laid ourfelves upon the Grafs, and fell afleep ; for 
we durft not lie upon the Sails we had got for that 
Purpofe, bccaufe they wfcre not dry, though fpread 
all Day long. 
I was awakened the next Morning by a Company 
of Lizards creeping over me, which is an Animal 
frightful enough to look at, but very harmlefs, 
and great Lovers of Mankind ; they fay, that thefe 
Creatures, if any Perfon lies afleep, and any vora- 
cious Beail, or the Allhator y which comes on Shore 
often, is approaching the Place where you lie, will 
crawl to you as fall as they can, and with their 
forked Tongues tickle you till you awake, that 
you may avoid by their timely Notice the coming 
Danger. I got up, being rouied by thefe Animals, 
and looked about me, but faw nothing but an odd 
Kind of a Snake about two Feet long, having a 
Head fomething like a Weafel, and Eyes fiery like 
a Cat's ; as foon as it fpied me it ran away, and 
my Dog after it ; but I believe put it in a terrible 
Fright, for it made a Noife fcmething like a 
Weafel, 
Capt. Richard Falconer, jjj 
Weafel, but louder, which awakened my Compa- 
nions. When I told Mr* Mufgra<ve what I had feen, 
he faid it was a fmall Serpent, but not very hurtful 
called the Guabimquinaze Serpent, from eating a little 
Creature of that Name, fometbing refembling a 
fmall Mole; and the India?is and Spaniards eat of 
them, and reckon them dainty Food. 
We now refolved for another Walk, to difcover 
what Inhabitants were our Neighbours, whether In- 
dians or Spaniard's ; if Indians we defigned to patch 
up our Boat, which had feveral Holes in it, and 
make off as faft as we could, and row Northward, 
till we came to fome Place inhabited by Spaniards* 
But if we found the latter, to beg Prote&ion, and 
fome Means to get to Jamaica; whereupon we ven- 
tured out with thefe Resolutions, We met with 
feveral fine large Cedar Trees, and one particularly: 
fo large,, that Mr. Mufgra*ve and I could butjuft 
fathom it with our Hands joined. 
We had not gone far before my Dog began to 
bark* when turning my Head on one Side, I 
beheld a Black approaching towards us, and being 
ftartled at the Sight, I cocked my Piece, and re- 
foived to fire at him ; but he called to me in Errglijb y 
and told me he did not come to do me any Harm, 
but was a poor diitreffed Evglijhman that wanted 
Food, and was almoft ftarved, having eat nothing 
but wild Fruit for four Days. Upon that I let him 
come near, where he was fcon known by Mr. Roujg 
to be William Plymouth, the Black that was 
Trumpeter co the Captain that commanded the 
1 36 7 he Adventures of 
Pirate Ship. Upon his knowing him, we fat down 
and gave him fome Provifmn, which we had 
brought with us, becaufe we deilgned to be out all 
Day. 
After he had refrefhed himfelf a little, we afked 
him how he came into this Ifland ? Why, anfwered 
he, we were cruifing about Cuba, in Hopes of fome 
Spanijh Prize, when a Storm arofe and drove us 
upon a Rock, where our Ship was beat to Pieces, 
and not above eighteen Men faved befides the Cap- 
tain. And did that wicked Wretch efcape the 
Shipwreck, faid I ? Yes, anfwered Plymouth, but to 
undergo a more violent Death. For, faid he, as 
foon as ever we landed wc wandered up in the 
Country to fee for fome Food, without any Weapons 
but a few CutlafTes, having loft our flrft Arms ; 
but however we ail got fomcthing or other to 
defend ourfelv^s on Shore, as long Clubs, which 
v/e got from the Trees we found in our Walks; 
our Captain refolved if he met with any Indians or 
Spaniards Huts, that he would murder all that he 
found in them, for Fear they mould make their 
Efcape, and bring more upon us. Thus he encou- 
raged his Men to follow him with their Clubs ; faid 
he, we will walk till we find fome beaten Path, 
and there lie hid till Night, when we may go on to 
fome Iioufcs, and come upon them undifcovered . 
by which Means we may get Provifion and other 
Arms : For the Indians of Cuba ufe Fire Arms as 
well as the Spaniards, and are full as dextrous in 
ufing them as an\ Europeans, Sec. After travelling 
about 
Capt. Richard Falconer. nj 
about ten Miles to the N. W. we difcovered a Path, 
upon which a Halt was commanded, and to retire 
into the Woods again till Night; which we did, 
and dined upon what Fruits we could get upon the 
Trees. 
About two Hours before Night a Dog fmelled us 
out, and running away from us, barked moil furi- 
oufiy ; upon that we were afraid of being difcovered, 
which Fear proved true ; for in half an Hour, or 
thereabouts, after the Dog left us, we were faluted 
with feveral Ajiows and Mufquet-Shot, that killed 
us three Men, and wounded me in the Foot, but it 
proved the Means of faving my Life : For as icon 
as our Men perceived what had happened, they ran 
as hard as they could to meet the Danger, as know- 
ing they could do no good till they came to 
Handy-Clows ; I, in endeavouring to follow 
them, found my Hurt, which prevented my 
keeping up with the reft ; but I could hear 
and fee them at it: There were about two 
hundred Indians fet upon our Men, and in about 
half an Hour killed them every one. I faw the 
Captain lay about him defperately, but at laft fell, 
being run through the Throat with a wooden Stake. 
As foon as ever they had conquered them, or rather 
murdered them, they fell to Gripping of them as 
faft as they could, and canied them off, together 
with their own Dead, which were many, for the 
Engtifo fold their Lives very deaily. 
After they were gone, which I found by their 
Screaming and Noilc at a Diitance, I ventured to 
Ileal 
The Adventures of 
fteal out from behind a Row of Bufhes, where I had 
placed myfelf to fee what had happened ; I went to 
the Place of Battle, where I found two of our Men 
that they had left, with all their Arras, and feme 
of their own ; fo I took up one of their be ft \'uf- 
quets, and a Cutlafs, and made farther into Wood, 
for Fear of being caught ; which I had certainly 
been, if 1 had ftaid a Quarter of an Hour longer, 
for 1 foon heard them come whooping, fcreaming, 
and hallooing back, to fetch the other two Bodies, 
and their Arms, as I conjectured, 
J walked as far as my hurt Foot would let me 
that Night, and out of the Danger of the Indians, 
as I thought, and then laid me down to ileep as 
well as I could, being very hangry, and fad ly tired, 
and flept pretty well till Morning, when I proceeded 
forward in my painful Journey, and dire&ed my 
Courfe N. E. thinking that was the beft Way to 
avoid the Indians, and probably to meet with fome 
Spaniards, whom I knew inhabited towards the 
North, the Havanna, the capital City of the whole 
Ifland, being feated there. I wandered for four 
Days, eating nothing but Fruit in the Woods ; but 
laying myfelf down about an Hour ago, to reft 
myfelf a little, I thought I heard the Tongues of 
Englijhmen, which to my great Joy proved true. I 
left my Mufquet behind the Bufhes, for Fear of 
alarming you ; but now, after returning God and 
you Thanks for this timely Nourifhment, 1*11 go 
and fetch it, which he did ; and we might eafily 
know it to be an Indian Piece, for they had rudely 
carved 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 759 
carved it all over with feveral Figures of Birds and 
Beafts. 
Now, /aid I to my Companions, you fee the 
Reward of Wickednefs. He was not furTered by 
Providence to go on long in his Crimes ; though 
fome that are inured tollls, yet they are overtaken ac 
laft, when their Crimes are full blown; for though 
Juitice has leaden Feet, yet thffrlwzys find ihe 
has iron Hands ; and we too often fee tha^he who 
kills his Adver/ary in a Duel, though he efcapes 
the Law, one Time or other meets the fame Fate 
himfelf. 
After poor Plymouth had refremed himfelf, we 
fet forward, and walked along till we came to a 
Road that feemed to be the main Road of the 
liland, by the Largenefs. Here we confulted 
what we mould do, whether we Ihouid go on, or 
return for more Provifion ; but we refolved to go a 
little Diftance from the Road, for Fear we fhonld 
meet with more of the Indians, and run the fame 
Fate with the Other Englijhmen* But Plymouth told 
us, we were a great Way from that Place where 
his Countrymen were killed ; (for Plymouth* though 
born in Guinea* would always call himfelf an En~ 
gUjhmatt) as being brought over very young,) fo 
we refolved one and all to venture. 
We fent up oar Prayers to the Almighty for our 
Safety, and went on with a Faith that we Ihouid 
come off with Succcfs ; but we had not gone far 
when we heard the Reports of feveral Mufquets, 
and fhouting in a barbarous manner, behind us. 
Looking 
140 The Advent v r c s of 
Looking that Way, we faw a Mulatto riding as fall 
as ever his Mule could carry him ; when he came 
up to us, he Hopped, and cried in Spanijh, Make 
halie, run, for the huh am are coming upon you, 
they have killed feveral Spaniards already, and they 
are righting with them. Mr. Mufcrave, who un- 
der ft 00 d Spamjb very well, interpreted what he laid 
to us; he afkq&feim how far they were off? He 
anfwerrid, juft by ; and hearing another Shout, 
put Spurs to his Mule, and left us in an Inftant. 
We found by the Shouting and the Firing, that thev 
wcuid be immediately upon us, fo we retired out 
of the Road to let them pafs, and laid down upon 
our Bellies that they might not difcover us. Imme- 
diately came by nbout twenty Spaniards on Horfe- 
back, purfued by near a hundred Indians.  Juft as 
they came by us one Spaniard dropped, and crept into a 
Bufli on the other Side of the Road; and prefently 
the Indians followed, fhouting in a horrid Manner, 
and overtook the Spaniards again, who being very 
fwift of Foot, out-run an ordinary Horfe ; and 
they had thrown away their Fire-Arms, to make 
them the lighter to run, as we fuppofed. The 
Spaniards knew they would foon overtake them, 
fo only can to charge their Piitols, and ltand till 
they came up; then difcharged them, to put them 
in Confufion, and run again, to prolong the Time, 
in Hopes of fome Aid. All this we underfcood by 
the Spaniard, that crept into the Bufh undifcovered 
by the Indians, by Reafon of the Horfes Feet, and 
the Duft together, he being the forcmoft in Flight. 
He 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 141 
He told us moreover that about three Leagues 
farther, there was a Fort belonging to the Spa- 
niards to flop the Indians, they ufmg to make In- 
roads before that Fort was built, even to the Gates 
of the City Hawanna* Upon this we eonfulted and 
refolved to follow upon the Edge of the F^oad, to 
fee how we could be aiijilin? ; we foon came even 
with them, for they were in a narrow Place, and 
the Spaniards kept them at Bay pretty well ; by- 
good Fortune there was a high Hedge made by- 
Trees all along as we went, which hindered us 
from being difcovered. Here we refolved to fire 
upon them all together, and then run further up, 
and if poflible get out into the Road and face them. 
Accordingly we agreed to fire four and three, and 
the fir 11: four to charge a^ain immediately. Mr. Muf- 
grave, Mr. Middleton, hlxAFhite, and myfelf, agreed 
to fire firft ; then Hood, Rvafe, and Plymouth ; which 
as foon as we had taken good Aim, we did, 
and, firing at their Backs, killed four downright, 
and wounded feveral, for I had ordered them to 
put two Bullets into each Piece, As foon as ever 
we had fired our Mufquets, we let fly one Pilfcol 
each, and then the other three fired their Guns. 
As foon as Plymouth had fired, he ran and charged 
our four Guns, (he having never a Piitol) and then 
we let fly our other Piftols. With thefe Difcharges 
we had killed at leaft fifteen Indians, and put the 
reft into fuch Frights that they began to run ; (for 
with the Dull and Buttle they made, they could 
hardly diftinguilh from whence the Fire came) 
neither 
14* The Adventures of 
neither did they flop till they met with the poor 
wounded Spaniard, who had crept out, hearing the 
Difchargeof our Pieces, (as we fuppofed) ; they fell 
upon the poor Fellow with Shouts and Outcries, and 
tore him to Pieces, never minding the Spaniards pur fa- 
ing them ; who cried Miraado! Miraculo! a Miracle! 
a Miracle ! By this Time we got within twenty 
Yards of the End of the Hedge, where we feven 
fired our Mufquets, and left them to Plymouth to 
charge ; then we ran in upon them with our Piftols, 
and discharged them clofc upon them. With this 
laft Fire we dropped them twelve Men, and they 
fcreamed out, and ran away as fad as they could. 
We did not think fit to follow them, for it was not 
to any Purpofe, for they were foon out of Sight, 
We charged our Guns and Piltols again, and the 
twelve Spaniards did the like, they having Nine in 
the la/l Conflict killed, and two defperately 
wounded. They gave us Thanks for our Relcue, 
and faid we were furely fent from Heaven to their 
Relief ; they let us know they were Tax-gatherers 
for the King of Spain, and were obliged to go in 
Numbers, and well armed, for Fear of thefe 
defperate Indians; who, about nine Years ago, 
fet upon them, and killed eighteen of them, 
and but two efcaped, but never met with any 
Moleftation from that Time till now; fo that 
this Time (thinking the Danger over) we lefiened 
our Number from fifty to thirty, which I fuppofe 
the Indians having Notice of, was the Occafion of 
their 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 143 
their fetting upon us. They faid it was to no Pur- 
pofe for to go back, for the reft of their Compa- 
nions that were killed, which being a Mile off, 
they had taken with them. 
We had not gone above half a League onward, 
but we heard dreadful Shoutings as before, and 
looking behind us, it being a ftrait Road, we could 
perceive a Cloud of Dull, and the Indians running 
full Speed toward us. Upon which we put down 
our two wounded men that were on Horfeback, 
and mounted upon the Spaniards fpare Horfes. 
Now we being nineteen Horfcmen, rcfolved to 
iland it : We divided into Ranks, four in a Rank, 
which made five Ranks; only there were but three 
in the laft Rank. So we refolved to keep directly 
one behind the other, and when the firft File had 
fired, to fall in the Rear, and charge again The 
Spaniards would make up the three fir ft Ranks, as 
they faid they could not in Honour expofe us to the 
firft Onfet, becaufe we ventured our Lives in coming 
to their Afiiftance. We had no Time to difpute, for 
now they were juft upon us, and to our Surprize had 
feverai Fire-Aj ms among them. As foon as they got 
within a hundred Paces of us they fired, but not 
above two of their Pieces went off, the reft were 
clogged with Dull in running, that very happily for 
us hindered their Difcharging. The Shot miffed 
us providentially, and we would not give them 
Time to charge again, but we moved forward and 
fired in upon them, and did great Execution ; when 
it came to our Turn to fire, we in the JHeat forgot 
our: 
144 The Adventures of 
our Orders, but after we had difcharged our Guns 
and Pifcols, we fell in with them with our Cutlafles, 
and being raifed above them by being on Horfe- 
back, did great Execution ; and that with the Spa- 
niards charging and firing again, put them to the 
Rout ; but now we followed them being on Horfe- 
back, and difperfed them, fo that it was impoffible 
for them to rally any more that Night. However 
we took four of them Prifoners, and tying their 
Hands behind them, fattened them to two of our 
foremoft Horfes, the reft following after, that they 
might not get loofe. 
We were met in the Road by twenty Spanijh 
Horfe, with each a Foot- Soldier behind them, .who 
were upon the full Gallop to our Afliftance, being 
alarmed by the Mulatto that rode by ; but I believe 
fome were glad they came too late. The Officer 
and the reft faluted us very courteoufly, when they 
heard how luckily we came to their Affiftance ; but 
fell a whipping the poor naked Indians fo barba- 
roufly, that though they deferved it, I could not 
bear to fee it done in cool Blood, and though the 
Blood followed every Lam, yet they never cried out* 
This is the chief Cauie of the Hatred of the Indians f 
when ever the Spaniards get any of them in their 
Power, they put them to all Manner of Torture; 
but if, on the contrary, they would ufe them ci- 
villy, and difcharge them now and then, I am fure 
they might live in perfect Friendfhip with them : 
For the Indians are good natured, loving, and affa- 
ble, till they are incenfed, and then they are im- 
placable, 
We 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 145 
We arrived at the Fort about Evening, and were 
very well entertained. The Officer did not doubt 
but to procure us a Ship to tranfport us to Jamaica, 
though he had Orders from Havannah to fecure aU 
Englijh Veflels, there being a War talked of between 
the Spanijh and French, and Englijh and Dutch. The 
next Day the Officer mightily bragged of being an 
old Spaniard, that is, bom in Spain, and of an an- 
cient Family ; and Mr. Mufgrave made us very 
merry upon the Road, in interpreting the Don's 
Speeches. We found, all along from the Fort, a 
great many Gentlemens Houfes pleafantly fituated, 
and the Country all along yielded delightful Prof- 
pects. 
We were well entertained at a Gentleman's Houfe 
at Dinner, with Provifions drefied after the Englijh 
Way, and all Manner of Sweetmeats and cool 
Wines. The Gentleman had a Vault or Cellar 
thirty Feet deep under Ground. He fpoke pretty 
good Englijh, and had , been a Fadlor feveral Years 
in London, and knew our Cuftoms and Manners very 
well, and preferred our Way of dreffing Victuals 
before their own. He had an Englijh Cook from a 
Tavern behind the Royal- Exchange, that he brought 
with him into Spain, and from thence to Cuba, 
where he had a. vafl Eftate left him. His Cook's 
Name was Hodges, a good underiTanding Fellow, 
and made very much of us, and would fain have 
had us to flay with his Matter longer. But as 
foon as we had dined, we were obliged to get on 
Horfeback, acd away for the Ha-vanna, which we 
reached about fix o'Clock in the Evening. We had 
H Rooms 
1 46 The Adventures of 
Rooms allotted us, and feveral Englifl? and Irifk Men 
came to fee us that lived there. 
Havanna is the capital City of the whole Ifland of 
Cuba, and has as great a Trade as any Place belong- 
ing to the Spaniards in the Weft-Indies. It has one of 
the fineft Harbours in the Univerfe, not for its 
Greatnefs, but its Security, yet able to contain five 
Hundred Ships of the greateft Burthen. The Mouth 
of the Harbour is commar ded by a Platform ; and a 
fquare Fort, fnftened together by a flrong Boom, or 
Iron Chain; that no Ship can enter. The mofl fhal- 
low Part of the whole Harbour, is eight Fathom 
Wc.ter, and all its Banks paved round with f at 
Stone, fo that a VefTel of a Thoufand Tun may lay 
her Side to it and unlade. Juft between the two 
Forts there Hands a round Watch Tower, where 
they difcover to the Town how many VeiTels are 
coming towards the Harbour, by putting out a Flag 
for every Ship. This Place is the beft fortified and 
garrifoned in all the Indies, to fecure the Plate Fleet, 
and all other Ships that meet here, to fet fail toge- 
ther for Spain, This City is very large, near as big 
as Brifxol in England, and tKe Houfes are hand- 
fomely built; but after the Spanijh Fatfiion. There 
are two handfome Churches, fine, and well 
built, with Spires, and an Organ in each, befides 
feveral Chapels ; and a Foundation laid for a third 
Church while we were there. This City, almoft as 
foon as it was built, was facked by a Trench Pirate 
in the Year r 5 36, who was driven thither by a 
Tempeft, and landing his Men well armed, took 
the City in Spite of all their Refinance, and burnt 
many 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 147 
many of the Houfes, they being mod part Wood ; 
and had confumed them all, had not the Spaniards 
redeemed the reft, by paying them a thoufand Du- 
cats, Upon the receiving the Money, they made 
out to Sea, and the fame Evening came into the Ha- 
<vanna three Ships from Spain, who hearing of what 
had chanced, prepared to follow them, taking feve- 
ral Soldiers on board them ; the Admiral, who fail- 
ed belt, got the firft Sight of the Frenchman ; but be- 
ing fearful to attack him before the other Ships came 
up, lay by. The Frenchman feeing that, boldly 
fet upon the firft Ship, and tcok her without 
fighting ; the fecond feeing that, tacked about, 
and ran afiiore, which was taken by the Ship's 
Boat ; the third alfo run the fame Fate, Fluftied with 
this Succefs, they returned to the Havannah the fe- 
cond Time, and exacled a thoufand Ducats more, or 
elfe they threatened to level the City with the 
Ground, which was paid them immediately. Then 
they took their laft Leave with this rich Booty, and 
failed for Rachel in France, where they fhared 
their Prizes. After this they built their Houfes 
with Stone, as they are now, which neverthelefs 
the Englijh took about twelve Years after. 
There are many fair Harbours befides the Havan- 
nab, in Cuba, as that of St. Jago City and Harbour, 
which is a handfome Place, feated on the South of 
the Ifland, and is alfo a Bifhop's See under the Arch- 
bilhoprick of St. Domingo, Three Leagues from St. 
Jago lie thofe famous Copper Mountains, called by 
the Spaniards, Sierra de Cobre. There's another Town 
and Harbour fituated on the EaCern Part of Cuba, 
H z called 
148 *fhe Adventures of 
called Baracoa, where they gather the beft Ebony of 
all the Indies. There are many other good ones, as 
St. Salvador, Trinedad, Puerto del Principe, which 
Las a Fountain near it, that fome Times of the Year 
produces liquid Pitch. 
Cuba was formerly divided into eight Provinces 
and Governments, and better peopled than any o- 
ther Mand in America, before the Spaniards invaded 
them ; but now there are but few Indians, which in- 
habit feveral Parts of the Ifland unmolefted by the 
Spaniards ; but the Natives can never forget their 
Barbarity, which they have by Tradition from Fa- 
ther to Son. Nay, I have been informed that they 
keep a folemn Feftival once a Year, which was the 
Time that the MafTacre of the Indians happened ; 
and if they can get any Spaniards, they facrifice them 
to fatisfy the Manes of their dead Anceftors. 
Hugh Linfcoten, the French Voyager, relates that a 
Caffick, or one of the Lords of a Province, caught a 
Spaniard at their firft Landing, and threw him into a 
River, to fee if he would drown, which he did, and 
that fatisfied him they were not immortal. Where- 
upon he encouraged his Men, and repulfed the Spa~ 
?iiards feveral Times with great Lofs ; but at laft run 
the fame Fate with the rell of the Natives. 'Tis re- 
ported that the Spaniards, firft and laft, had maflacred 
fixty thoufand Indians in the Ifland of Cuba. 
'La Otftts, a Biihop in NetvSpajn, that wrote the 
Hiftory of the Ind/es, tells us this Story of another 
Cajfuk, that was taken by the Spaniards in Cuba, 
and condemned to be burnt alive with green Wood, 
that his Torture might be the longer and more 
exquifite. 
Capt. Richard Falconer. *49 
exquifice. While he was tied to the Stake, before 
the Fire was lighted, the Fryar that was prefent 
preached to him the Truth of the Chriftian Religion, 
and that all who died in that Faith, and trulted in 
God that formed the Earth, and all the Creature* 
therein, ftiould immediately after their Purgation 
afcend into Heaven, the Refidence of our Creator, 
there to converfe with Angels, and fuch as died in 
that Faith ; but on the contrary, if they perfifted in 
Ignorance, and died in a contrary . Opinion, they 
ftiould defcend into Hell, and live in an Eternity of 
Torments. Upon this the Caffick afked him if there 
were *ny Spaniards in Heaven > And b<M*ng anfwered 
there were many; {hen, faid the Caffick, let me go 
to Hell, fori would rather converfe with thofe you 
call Dtt ils, than you Spaniards in Heaven ; for I am 
furc you are the worll of Devils, and take Delight 
in nothing but tormenting us. Though the Fryar's 
preaching was certainly true, yet Men of any Reafon 
mult conclude, that no Religion can be propagated by- 
Cruelty and the Sword, which was always the Spa* 
wards Method with the Indians, wherever they came; 
and all their Excufe was, that if they had not ufed 
them in that Manner, they'could never have made 
their Conquefts, for they were forced to lcfTert 
them, for fear their Numbers might overpower 
them ; fo that in fhort, as Dryden fays, ia his Con- 
quell of Mexico by the Spaniards, You threaten Peace, 
but yon invite a H r ar. 
I met there with a Prieil, that I am fure harboured 
nothing of Cruelty in his Bread, for he came to fee 
H 3 u* 
i jo The Adventures of 
us every Day, and in fuch a friendly Manner, that 
charmed us all. He was always lending us one 
good Thing or other, and would take us to divert 
us abroad. He underftood Laizn very well, and 
fome E?jglifb. On the Sunday he preached an excel- 
lent Sermon in Spanijh> as Mr. Mvfgraw informed 
us, whofe chief Heads ran upon us, and to excite 
Charity in the Auditors, to let us have what was 
neceflary in carrying us to Jamaica. The next Day 
he brought us to the Value of fifty Pounds in Spa- 
nijb Dollars, which were collected at the Church 
Doors for us. There was a fmall VefTel of about 
forty Ton upon the Stocks, that was bought of the 
Owners for us, and a Collection made in the Town 
for Money to pay for it. We told them of the Pro- 
vifion we had left on Shore, which by our Compu- 
tation could not be above twenty Leagues off ; but 
they told us it would be difficult to find it. One 
Day a Spaniard met us walking with Father Antonio % 
in one of the Cloiftcrs of the Convent, and repri- 
manded him for favouring Hereticks (as he called us) 
fo much. He thought none of us underftood Spa- 
nijby fo was more free in his Converfation. Said 
Father Antonio* We ought to ufe Charity even to 
Brute Beafts, and much more to our Fellow Crea- 
tures, who wear with us our Creator's Image ; I 
would not be thought to make a Schifm in our Re- 
ligion, which I am fure is the holieft and moll 
pure; but yet 1 cannot confent in my Thoughts, 
that all who are out of the Pale of our Church muft 
fuffer Damnation ; it would be horrid to think it, 
and 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 151 
and would take away from the Luftre of our Opi- 
nion, which fhines fo brightly. If they are in any 
Errors, concerning their Belief, God, in whofe 
Breaft it lies, can open their Eyes when he thinks 
fit, that they may fee thofe Errors. Then added 
the Spaniard, with the fame Reafon you may fay 
the Indians and Natives may ftili remain in Igno- 
rance, till Heaven fhall think fit to open their Eyes, 
as you fay ; and if fo, the Miffionary Fathers may 
fpare their Trouble, No, replied the Father, We 
are there appointed by Providence to bring them 
out of the Cloud that dims their Sight.- But of 
People that own Cbrift, and fer ye. the, fame God 
with us, who differ but in a few outward Forms 0/ 
Worfhip, it is very hard to believe that thofe in- 
truded in that Wor/hip, mull inevitably fink into 
Damnation. I caa't tell what the Spaniard's 
Thoughts were upon this Difcourfe,. but I am fure 
he , was m,ore charitable tJ^an before, : for- he .pulled 
out of his Purfe- a Moidore,. and gave Father Antonio 
for our Vfe> which it feems he had rcfufed to do, 
wlien he went about- collecting for us» After he 
was gone, he told us his Difcourfe pro and con, and 
wha^t he could not make out in Englijb^ t Mr* Muf- 
grave cleared} -O h us from the other's telling him in 
Spanijh what he meant. f . 
We were told our VeiTel was ready, and therefore 
might bfl, going when,. we pleafed.. It was. a very 
neat one as ever was built by the Spaniards, and 
carried between thirteen and fourteen Ton. 
H 4 We 
1 52 The ADVfeNTVftES of 
We had all Sorts of Provifion fent on Board for 
half a Year, or more, fo that vvc onlv ilaid for the 
Wind to rife, it being quite calm. 
While we ftaid there, the four unfortunate In- 
dian* were to be executed in the Midft of the Parade. 
They were firft to be dragged by four Horfes, na- 
Iced, alorig the great Street to the Parade, and then 
to be chained to a Poft, fixed for that Purpofe, and 
burnt to Death ; I muft confefs, when I faw with 
what barbarous Cruelty they defigncd to ufe them, 
I repented my being an Instrument in the taking of 
them. This Execution was ordered to be between 
feven and eight in the Evening, being then it was 
cooleft : All the Indian Slaves that ferved Spanijh 
Mafters in the Town, were ordered to go and be 
Spectators of the Tragedy, that they might fee 
what they muft expect, if they ever offered to rebel 
in the like Manner^ When the Time came, the 
whole Street was crowded with a vaft Number of 
People of all Conditions. But fuch a Sight 1 never 
defire to fee again ; each Indian was tied by the Feet 
to the Harnefs of the* Horfe,' and fo dragged from 
the Prifon to the Place of Execution upon the bare 
Stones naked, their Arms tied upon their Breafts, 
and fattened upon their Backs, that they might not 
lift them up to fave themfelves as they were dragged 
along the Stones ; but by that Time the poor Crea- 
tures Came to the Parade , the Skin of their Legs, 
Thighs, and Back, was almoft (tripped off, yet 
without the leaft Complaint ; as foon as they were 
tied fall to the Stake, they took from a Pot of li- 
quid 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 153 
quid Pitch, boiling hot, a Stick with fomething 
fattened to the End on't, and rubbed over their 
naked Bodies. One of them then, I obferved, ,be,- 
gan to faint, but was rated by another of his Fel- 
low-Sufferers in their own Language, which none 
underftood but Indians > and the Fellow feemed to 
bear it much better. Before the Fire was put to 
the Pile, a Fryar ftepped up to them, and in Spanifo 
fpoke to the Indian that was ready to faint before, 
who had been Servant in the Town, but run away 
from his Matter, and underttood Spanijb. The Fryar 
defired thzm, if they would be happy in the other 
World, to acknowledge thcmfelves Chrittians, and 
go out of the World in that Faith, Upon this the 
Indian anfwered, ' When I lived among you -(faid 
* he) and was taught to worfhip your God, you 
* told me he was an upright God, aud a jutt God 
* to them that ferved him faithfully, but an aveng- 
* ing Power to thofe that once offended him ; if 
' fo, how comes it to pafs that he has not puniflied 
4 you for all your Crimes ? You have taught^ me, 
* that Whoring and Adultery were Sins not to be 
€ pardoned, and yet you commit thofe Sins, as if 
* you were in no Fear of any Punilhment. Murder is 
4 one of your Commandments not to be forgiven, 
« when at the fame Time you'll hire a Bravo to kill 
* a Stranger that looks but wantonly on your 
6 Wives. In fhort, I know not any one Thing 
4 that I have heard preached to us poor Indians^ that 
4 you praftife yourfelves. Therefore if your Spanijb 
He. ' God 
1 54- *Tbe Adventures of 
* God be as you defcribed him to us, the Curfe roufl 
* fall upon you if we cannot believe in him, being 
* we are deterred by the Cruelties you inflift upon 
* us, in ferving him as you would have us, when 
4 we find your Actions and Words differ more than 
' our Complexions. You preach up Holinefs and 
* Righteoufnefs, but you prattife Debauchery and 
* Lewdnefs/ 
He faid more, which was to excite the Indians 
to rebel, but they put a Stop to it, by putting Fire 
to the Wood, which being compofed of feveral 
combuflible Matters, foou confumed the poor 
Wretches. 
When all was over, Father Antonio took us home 
to his Lodgings, to give us a fmall Collation for the 
laftTime, being the next Day we did all defign to 
lie on Board, in Expectation of the Wind's riling. 
We told him by Mr. Mujgra-ve, that we thought it 
a great Weaknefs in them to preach in that Manner 
to Indians in their Condition, and it would be apt 
to make others defpife their Religion ; laid Mr. Muf- 
grave, it is like courting a Woman to Love by 
Stripes (pardon the Comparifon) : Why, faid Fa- 
ther Antonio, I mull confefs it is not what any of our 
Fathers like, but it is what we are ordered to do, 
and therefore muft not be denied. Befides, at nrft, it 
was a Piece of barbarous Policy in the firft Conque- 
rors of the Indies, they would order the Miffionaries 
to preach to all Indian Criminals, but out of hear- 
ing of any Spe&ators; fo as foon as they were exe- 
cuted, they would declare to all the Indians that 
they 
Capt. Richard Falconer. k;S. 
they died Chriftians, and were happy. Mr. Muf- 
gravt afked him, What made them ufe them fo in- 
humanly, was it not enough that they fuffcrcd 
Death, but rnuft be tortured in that barbarous 
Manner? He replied, it was done to terrify the 
other Indians from any Violence. Mr. Mufgraw 
anfwered, That was certainly wrong, for 'as they 
are an implacable Sort of People, and have handed 
down to them from Father to Son, the firii Maflacre, 
though almoft two hundred Years ago, they mult 
needs remember thefe Cruelties of fo frefrTaDate, 
which revive in their Memories the former, if they 
had any Mind to forget them : He could not fay 
much to it, hefatd, but evaded the Difcourfe, by 
bidding us be merry, that is, innocently and inof- 
fenfively fo, for he did not allow of Diforders in 
any one ; fo we refrelhed ourielves, and took our 
Leaves of the good Father, who bleifcd and em- 
braced us, and faid he would pray to Heaven for 
our profperous Voyage. So on the next Day we 
paid our hearty Acknowledgments to all oar Bene- 
factors, and went on Board ; where we had not 
been a Quarter of an Hour, before an extraordinary 
Meifage came from the Governor for Plymouth, our 
Black, who went with them without any Hefitation, , 
and returned with a Prefent from the Governor, of 
ilveral Bottles of Arrack, Spanijb Wines, Fowls, Rice, 
and Brandy, with twenty Pieces of Spanijb Gold, as 
the Meffen^-er told us, in Recompense for the Lofs 
of one of our Companions; for the Governor had 
fent for Plymouth, to know if he would ferve him in 
H 6 Quality 
1 56 The Adventures of 
Quality of His Trumpeter, and he would fettle a 
Penfion upon him for LHe. Plymouth thought fit to 
accept of it, as having* no Mailer, nor knowing 
when he fhould have one : But he got Leave to come 
on Board to bid us farewel, which he did in a very 
affectionate Manner. I bid him have a Care to 
pleafe the Governor, and then he need not fear do- 
ing well ; fo we parted with P/ymoufh, with our 
hearty Thanks recommended to Father Antonio for 
all his Favours, Plymouth had a Trumpet given 
him by the Governor, as foon as he came on Shore, 
which he brought with him, and founded all the 
Way in the Boat, as he went back again to oblige 
us ; for really he founded extraordinary well, and 
had learned to play on feveral other Inftruments, 
havin* a tolerable Undemanding in Mufick. We 
were forry to part with Plymouth, as being a faithful 
honeft Fellow, yet glad he had got fo good a Maf- 
ter. The Wind rifing, we weighed Anchor, and 
left the Port with three Huzza's, and a Volley of 
fmall Arms, (we having no Cannon) and in two 
Days loft Sight of the Ifland of Cuba* 
This famous Ifland, Cuba, which was firft called 
Joanna, by Colusnbus the firft Difcoverer, afterwards 
Fernandina, then Alpha and Omega, as. being the 
firll and laft Ifland the Spaniards touched at: But 
afterwards was called Cuba, anc} Hill retains that 
Name. This is reckoned one of the four Iflands 
of the Barlovcnto* The others are Hiipaniola % Ja- 
maica, and Porto-Rico. The North Side of Cuba is 
fortified 
Capt. Richard Falconer, 157 
fortified with a vaft Number of fmall Iflands, 
called the Lmaier, which fome Geographers have 
taken for a Part of the main Land. The chief is 
Bahama, which forms the Gdph of Florida, the 
Pafiage that all Ships go through when they come 
out of the Weft-Indies into Europe. 
Cuba has on the North, Jucatan, a Province on 
the main Land, diilant about 50 Leagues; and on 
the South Jamaica, about 40 Leagues: In Length 
220, and in the broadeft Part about 56. The Soil 
in molt Parrs, that are inhabited by Spaniards, is 
fruitful, and much more healthy than Hifpaniola. 
The Tobacco is reckoned the beft in the Spanijb 
Weft-Indies. I have feen very large Vines there, 
which bear excellent Grapes, but not fit to make 
Wine ; many have tried, but it turns four in a few 
Davs. And for Birds, Beafis, and Fifhes, it 
comes op to, if not exceeds any of the other 
Illands. The Bird Flatningo is a Fowi fomething 
bigger than our ordinary Geefe, but Legs and 
Neck twice as long, and all over red, and generally 
go in a Body. At a Diflance they look like a 
Company of Soldiers marching. The Spaniards 
have a Proverb here, That the Time will come 
that Englijhmen will walk as free3y in their Streets, 
*as the Spaniards do now ; if it were fo, it would be 
of a prodigious Advantage to the EngUJb, being 
the Havanneib is a Strait that commands all the Ships 
that come out of the Indies for Europe, and I really 
think from what I have feen, that it would be in 
the Power of ten thoufand Men, with a Fleet pro- 
portionable, 
158 The Advent iTr e s of 
portionable, to overcome the whole Ifland in a 
little Time. Befides it is obferved, that there are 
more Prizes brought into the Havamwb> than any 
four Havens in the Indies. 
While we were at the Havannab, a Spaniard car- 
ried two ftrange Beafts about the Streets for a 
Show, that he brought from Brazil, the one was 
called At y with a Head fomething refembling that 
of a Man's, and covered with rough ihort grey 
Hair : Each Foot has three Claws clofe together, 
about a Finger long, very fliarp Teeth, with a 
fmooth high black Nofe, very fmall fleepy Eyes, 
and no Ears, with a Tail fmall above and broad at 
the Bottom, with Hair all over the Body of an 
Afh Colour, This Beaft is about the Size of a 
large Fox, but fo lazy a Creature, that when it 
gets up a Tree, it never comes down till it has 
devoured every Leaf, and when it has done, it 
will fit there twenty Days together without eating, 
and almoft ftarved before it will take the Pains to 
go down to feed. It cannot travel or creep in a 
whole Day not above a Quarter of a Mile. This 
that was mown to us, never would ftir till roufed 
with a Stick, and it would be afleep again in an 
Inftant. 
The other Creature was fomething like a Baboon, 
but confiderably larger, with a Face and long Beard, 
like an old Man's, and hairy like a Goat, all over 
the Body; his Ears bald, his Eyes black, large, 
and fparkling. He that ihowed it to us, called it a 
Cayon\ its Tail is about four or five Feet long, 
which 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 159 
which they twift round a Tree, and fo fling them* 
felves to the next They are very fierce and fubtile, 
and when wounded, will fet upon their Adverfary 
without any Fear; and if forced to climb the 
Trees, they carry their Mouth and Hands full of 
Scones to throw at Travellers as they pafs by ; and 
when wounded, they fet up a Shriek, that imme- 
diately brings all of their Kind, within Hearing, 
to their Succour, who flop the Wound with Leaves 
and Mofs, which will foon be healed. This that 
we faw war. brought up very young by the Perfcn 
that had him, and would play many comical 
Tricks ; as he was fhown to us, he urined in his 
Paw, and threw it in our Faces, before we were 
aware, and while 1 was wiping mine, he gave me 
fuch a Salute with his Tail, that made me ftand 
farther off, which feemed to pleafe him mightily, 
for he looked at me and chattered, as much as to 
fay, I have given it you. The Spaniard told us, 
they ufed to play at a certain Game with the Na- 
tives for Money, and would often win, and then 
go fpend what they had got, upon a Liquor that 
made them drunk, and as foon as they found them- 
felves fo, they would retire very decently, and take 
a Nap, by which they were very often caught. 
Jojlph de Acofta, that wrote the Hiflory of the 
Weft-Indies in Spamjb, tells us a Story of one of 
thefe Sort of Creatures going to a Tavern, with a 
Pot, and Money to pay for his Wine, yet would 
not part with his Money, till they had filled his 
Pot with the Wine ; b ut in the mean Time beat 
four 
160 ¥be Adventures of 
four or five Boys, that did their Endeavour to take 
it from him, and carried it fafe to them that lent 
him. 
Peter Martyr relates another Story of one of 
them, that feeing a Spaniard going to lire a Gun 
at him, fnatchcd up a little Child that was there, 
and held it before him as a Buckler, and would not 
let it go before the Spaniard was retired ; then he 
laid the Child gently down, and ran away, after 
having firft urined upon it. 
The Fellow that Ihowed them, fold them to the 
Governor of Hwvannah for two hundred Dollars, 
and would have gone wi'ch us to Jamaica or any 
where; but we durft not take him without an Order 
from the Governor, who does not fufFer any one to 
go out of the Ifland without a Pafs from him, 
which cofts a Dollar, and brings into his Purfe a 
great deal of Money in the Year, having no other 
Revenue from the King of Spahi % only lb much a 
Year for a Table, and a Palace ready furniihed 
with every Thing that is neoefiary, bolides Servants. 
Every Ship that comes in pays two Dollars, and at 
going out four more, fo that the Government of 
this Ifland exceeds in its Profit any other Govern- 
ment (except the Vice -Roy of Mexico) in the Spanijh 
Wcjl -Indies. 
The Weather continued favourable, fo that we 
arrived at Jamaica without meeting any thing re- 
markable in our Paflage * As foon as we had caft 
Anchor, I ordered the Boat to be made ready to 
carry 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 161 
carry me on Board my own Ship, which I faw ride 
there. But when I got up the Ship's Side, I found 
my Cloaths felling at the Maft, at, Who bids mere? 
Which is the Method, as foon as a Perfon is dead, 
or killed; the iirft Harbour they anchor in, the 
Cloaths of the Deceafed are brought upen Deck, 
and fold by Auftion,* the Money to be paid when 
they come to England, for it generally happens 
that Sailors have not any till they come Home 
again. 
They were at the lad Article, when I came up 
the Ship Side ; which was a Pair of black Woffted 
Stockings that coft I believe about four Shillings, 
which went at twelve and Six-pence, though they 
had been worn. As foon as I was feen by them, 
forrie cried out, a Ghoft ! a Ghoft ! and others ran 
away to fecure the Cloaths they had bought, fuf- 
petting that now I would have them again. When 
they were fatisfied Of my being alive, and were 
told my Story, they were all rejoiced at my good 
Fortune, but none would be prevailed upon to let 
me have my Cloaths again. So I took up the 
Slop-Book, and caft up what they were fold for, 
and found; that what coft me about twenty Pounds, 
were fold for four times the Money : When I was 
fatisfied in that, I called every Perfon, one by one, 
that had bought any of my Cloaths, and itruck a 
Bargain with them for ready Money, and bought 
them for about ten Pound ; but the ready Money 
pleafed them mightily. 
Captain 
i6z The Adventures of 
Captain JVafe being fick afhore, I went to pay 
him a Vifit, where he was mighty glad to fee me r 
as believing I had perifhed ; he told me that the 
Veflel hung Lights out for feveral Hours, that I 
might know where to fwim, and laid by as long as 
the Wind would permit, as the Crew acquainted 
him when they came into Harbour* The Captain 
told me, That he did not think he mould live 
long, therefore was mighty glad I was come to take 
Charge of the Ship, which had failed before, if he 
had been in a Condition to bear the Sea. From 
thence I went on Board my new Bark, and fettled 
my Affairs there with my Companions, who were 
mighty forry to think of parting "with me. Hood 
and Roufe defired they might be received on Board 
as Sailors, and go for England with us ; for Hood 
was an Englijhman, I mean, born in England, and 
Roufe had Friends there. Befides it was as eafy to 
go from England to Bermudas, as from Jamaica. So 
I fpoke to the Captain, who was very well pleafed 
to receive them, for he had loft five Men by the 
Diftemper of the Country. The poor Captain 
died in a Week after my coming, and left me Ex- 
ecutor for his Wife, who lived &t£r/Jlol. 
As foon as we had buried him, I went on Board 
with my two Men, and did defign to fail in three 
' .Days at fartheft, which I would have done before, 
but that I was hindered by wanting a Chapman for 
our Bark, being we had Shares to difpofe of ; when 
I came on Board, the Mafter told me he had no 
Occafion for the two Men to add to their Charge ; 
faid 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 163 
faid I, that is as I Ihall think fit, for the Power is 
in my Hands now; and who put that Power into 
your Hands ? (faid the Mailer). He that had Power 
fo to do (faid I) the Captain, whereupon I fheued 
him in Writing. He told me it did not iignify 
any thing, and that he would find no one of the 
Sailors would obey a Boy, uncapable to fteer a 
Veflel. Said J, 1 don't defire to have any Com- 
mand over you, but only to reprefent the Captain 
that is deceafed : We have no Want of any Repre- 
sentatives (replied the Mailer), and you fhall go in 
your own Station, or not at all. It would be a 
pretty Thing, added he, for my Mate to become 
my Captain, and as I was defign'd by the Captain 
,to have ik* Command of the V^flel before you 
came, fo I intend to keep it. Rut, faid I, this 
Paper, figned by' his own Hand, is but of two 
Days Date, and you cannot ihew any thing for the 
Command, is you pretend to: Therefore (faid I) 
I'll make my Complaint to the Governor, and he 
fhall right me. Ay, ay, do fo ! (faid he) Til Hand 
to any thing he ihall command. Whereupon Roufe* 
Hood> and myfelf went into the Boat agaiiv and 
rowed immediately on Shore ; but the Governor 
was fix Miles up in the Country, and it being 
pretty late, we defigned to wait for his coming 
Home, which we were told would be in the Morn- 
ing early. So I went on Board the Bark, and lay- 
all Night, the Ship, lying beyond the Keys two 
Leagues from the Harbour, in order to fail. The 
next Morning getting up with an Intent to wait 
upon 
1 64 72" Adventures 
upon the Governor, and looking towards the Place 
where the Ship lay over Night, found fhe was 
gone, and calling my Eyes tov/ards Sea, faw a 
Ship four or five Leagues diftant from us, which 
we fuppofed to be ours. I immediately went on 
Shore, and found the Govei nor juil come to Town, 
and made my Complaint. He told me there was 
no Remedy, but to fend immediately to Bkzvfe/ds 
Bay, where he fuppofed they would ftop to get 
Wood, which was ufual with our Ships that were 
bound for England: Whereupon there was a M-ef- 
fenger ordered for Blewfelds> which I accompanied, 
to give Iniku&ions to the Officer that commanded 
at the Fort, to feize the Mailer of the Ship, and 
order him before the Governor at JW Royal: Ss 
we got on Horfe-back, and reached it in three 
Days,, it being almoft a hundred Miles, When 
we came there, we found feveral Ships in the 
Harbour, but none that we wanted: So we waited 
a Week, but all to noPurpofe, for (he paffed the 
Bay, as miftrufting our Defign; upon this we were 
obliged to return with a heavy Heart, and tell 
the Governor of our ill Succefs, who pitied me, 
and told me he would fee me (hipped in the firft 
VefTel bound for England: So I went on Board my 
own Bark, where they were all glad to fee 1 me, 
though forry I was fo dilappointed. Now I was 
very glad that I had not difpofed of my Bark, for I 
thought now it might be of Ufe to me., We con- 
futed together, to know what was belt to do; at 
laft I made a Bargain with them, if they would 
venture 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 165 
venture with me in our Bark to England, I would 
give them not only my Share of her, but as much 
Money as came to the other two Shares, if they 
would be willing to part with them : Upon this 
we agreed, and with what Money I had, I began 
to lade my Veflel with Things to traffick with. I 
bought a good Quantity of Indigo, fome Cotton, 
Sugar, and Rum. In fliort, I laid out the beft 
Part of my Money ; and on June the ift, 1700, fet 
fail, and fleered our Courfe for England. 
Before I leave Jamaica, I think it will not be a- 
mifs to give fome Account cf the dreadful Earthquake 
that happened there in 1692. I am fure it is a true 
Account of it, for it was wrote by the Rettor of 
Port Royal's own Hand, who was upon the Place 
when the Accident happened. You fhall have it in 
his own Words. 
* From on board the Granado Merchant in 
Port Royal Harbour, June 22, 1692. 
* Dear Friend, 
c r DOUBT not but you will hear both from 
* A Garret's and Bris's Coffee-Houfe, of the 
€ great Calamity that hath befallen this Ifland by a 
< terrible Earthquake on the 7th Inftant- Which 
' have thrown down almoit all the Houfeo, Church- 
* es, Sugar Works, Mills, and Bridges, through 
« the whole Country; it tore the Rocks and Moun- 
* tains, and deftroyed fome whole Plantations, and 
' threw them into the Sea; but Port-Royal h&d much 
f the greater .Share in this terrible Judgment of 
« God. 
1 66 The Adventures ef 
* God. I will therefore be more particular in giving 
* you an Account of its Proceeding, that you may 
* know what my Danger was, and how unexpected 
' my Prefervation. On Twfday the 7 th of June I had 
' been at Church reading of Prayers, (which I did 
' every Day) fince I was Rector of Pori-Roya?, to 
* keep up fome Show of Religion amonglt a moil 
' ungodly, and debauched People. When Prayers 
' being ended, I went to a Place hard by the Church, 
* (where Merchants ufe to meet) where the Prefident 
* of the new Council, who acts in Chief till we have 
* a new Governor, came into my Company, and 
< enp-aped me to take a Glafs of Wormwood- Wine 
* with him, as a Whet before Dinner. He being 
* my very good Friend, I flaid with him ; upon 
1 which he lighted a Pipe of Tobacco, which he 
* W2S pretty long taking, and not being willing to 
« leave him before it was out, I was detained from 
1 going to one Captain Rudders' s where I was to dine ; 
* whofe Houfe upon the firft ConcufTion funk into 
* the Earth, then into the Sea, with his Wife and 
* Family, and fomc others that came to Dinner with 
€ him. But to return to the Prefident and his Pipe 
* of Tobacco ; before it was out, I found the Ground 
i rolling and moving underneath my Feet; upon 
« whichlfaid to him, Lord, Sir! What's this? He 
' replyed very compofedly, being a very grave Man, 
* it is an Earthquake, be not afraid, it will be foon 
* over ; but it did encreafe every Minute, and we 
* heard the Church and Tower fall, upon which we 
< ran to fave ourielves ; I quickly loft him, and 
' made 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 167 
* made towards Morgan's Forty which being a wide 
* open Place, 1 thought to be there more fecurefrom 
* the falling Houfes : but as I mide towards it, I faw 
* the Earth open and {"wallow up a Multitude of Peo- 
* pie, and the Sea mounting in upon us over the For- 
c tifications. I then laid afide all Hopes of efcaping, 
c and refolved to make towards my own Lodging, 
* and there to meet Death in as good a Pofturc as I 
* could, but I was forced to crofs and run through 
* two or three narrow Streets, the Houfes and Walls 
* fell on each Side of me, fome Bricks came rolling 
* over my Shoes, but none hurt me : When 1 came 
* to my Lodging I found all Things in the fame Or- 
' der I left them in, not a Picture (of which there 
c were feveral fair ones in my Chamber) being out 
< of its Place. I went to the Balcony to view the 
1 Street in which our Houfe flood, I faw never a 
« Houfe down, nor the Ground fo much as cracked. 
c The People feeing me there cried out to me to 
c come and pray with them. When I was come in- 
' to the Street every one laid hold on my Cloaths, 
* and embraced me, that with their Fear and Kind- 
* nefs I was almofl ftifled. I perfuaded them at la A 
4 to kneel down, and make a large Ring, which 
* they did : I prayed with them near an Hour ; when 
' I was almoft fpent with the Exercife", they brought 
* me a Chair; the Earth working all the while with 
* new Motions, and trembling like the rolling of the 
* Sea ; infomuch ' that fometimes whilll I was at 
' Prayer, 1 could hardly keep myfelf upon my Knees* 
' By that Time I had been half an Hour longer, 
fetting 
i68 The Adventures of 
* fetting before them their many and heinous Sins, 
* fome Merchants came to me, who defired me to 
* go aboard fome Ship in the Harbour and refrelh 
* myfelf j they told me they had gotten me a Boat to 
* carry me off. Coming to the Sea, which had en* 
* tirely fwallowed up the Wharf, with all thofe 
goodly Houfes on it, mod of them as fine as thofc 
* in Cheapfidc, and two entire Houfes beyond it, I 
< upon the Tops of fome Houfes that lay level with 
* the Water, got firft into a Canoe and then in a long 
« Boat which put me aboard a Ship, called the Smm 
* Merchant, where I found the Piefidcnt fafe, who 
* was overjoyed to fee me: 1 continued there that 
* Night, but could not fleep for the Returns of the 
* Earthquake almoft every Hour, which made all 
4 the Guns in the Ship to jar and rattle. The next 
* Day I went from Ship to Ship to vifit thofe that 
* were taken up in Boats bruifed and dying, and to 
* pray with them ; alfo to do the laft Office to them, 
1 in faying the Form of Prayer that is ufed at the 
* Burial of the Dead, which hath been my for row- 
f ful Employment ever fince I came aboard this Ship, 
* with Defign to come for England: we having no- 
1 thing but Shaking of the Earth, Thunder, Light- 
4 ning, and foul Weather ever fince. And the Peo« 
* pie being fodefperately wicked, it makes me afraid 
' to ftay in the Place; for that very Time this ter«* 
c rible Earthquake was, as foon as it was Night, a 
1 Crew of lewd Rogues, which they call Privateers, 
1 fell to breaking open Warehoufes, with Intent to 
* rob and rifle their Neighbours, whilft the Earth 
s trembled under them, and fome of the Houfes fell 
4 on, 
Capt. Richard Falconer. -5169 
* on them in the A6b, and thofe that remain (till in 
* the Place, are as impudent and drunken as ever. f 
* have been twice aftiore to pray with the bruifed and 
* dyingPerfons, and to chriften their Children, where 
* I met too many drunk and fwearing. I did not 
* fpare them, nor the Magiftrates who have fuffered 
* Wickednefs to grow to fo great a Height. I have, 
* I blefs God, to the beft of my Skill and Power, 
1 difcharged my Duty in that Place, which you 
' will hear from meft Perfons that come from hence; 
€ I have preached fo feafonable to them, and fo 
* plain, in the laft Sermon I preached in the 
* Church, by fetting before them what would be 
< the IfTue of their Impenitence, that they have 
* fince confefied it looked more like a Prophefy 
' than a Sermon. I had, I confefs, an Impulfe to 
' do it, and many Times I have preached in the 
' Pulpit, Things that I never meditated at Home, 
' and could not methought do otherwife. The 
< Day (when all this befell us) was clear, afford- 
1 ing i.ot any Sufpicion of the leaft Evil; but in 
* the Space of three Minutes, about half an Hour 
4 after Eleven in the Morning, Port-Royal, the 
c faireir Town of all the Englijh Plantations, the 
4 beft Empire and Mart of this Part of the World, 
* exceeding in its Riches, plentiful of all good 
* Things, was taken and Aattered to Pieces, funk 
* in, and covered for the greateft Part by the Sea, 
* and will in a fhortTime be wholly eaten up by it; 
* for fome of thofe Buildings that yet (land, and are 
* left, we every Day hear fall, and the Sea daily 
I ' encroaches 
lyo ^Ihe A ^VENTURES of 
4 
c encroaches upon the Town. We guefs, by the.Fal- 
* ling of the Houfes, and Opening of the Earth* 
€ and Inundation of the Waters, that there are kil- 
< led fifteen hundred Perfons, and many of good 
* Note, of whom are my good Friend Attorney- 
6 General Mufgra<vc, Martial Reeves, William Fur- 
<ner, Thomas Turner's Brother is loft; I have loft 
< the beft Living that ever I had or fhall have. I 
* came, as I told you, aboard this Ship, in order 
* to come Home ; but the People are-ib importunate 
* with me to Hay, I know not what to fay to them ; 
* I muft undergo great -Hardfhips if I flay here, the 
* Country being broken all to Pieces ; I muft now 
* live in a Hut, and eat Yams and Potatoes for 
* Bread, which I could never endure ; drink Rum 
4 Punch .and Water, which were never pleafing to 
* me. I have wrote as effectually as I could to my 
« Lord Bifliop of London to fend a younger Perfon, 
< who may better endure the Fatigue of it, than I 
can.: Now it would look very unnatural in me to 
< leave the People in their Diftrefs, and therefore 
* whatever I fuffer, I would not have fuch a Blame 
6 lie at my Door. I have acquainted my Lord of 
' London, That, by Reafon of the prefent Diftrefs, 
1 I am willing to continue a Year longer. They are 
* going to build a new Town near the Rock in Li- 
' guinea* the Garden of the Ifland* The Frtncb 
4 from Pctigauies did attack the lfland on the North 
' Side, but were all defeated and deftroyed, it be- 
6 ing near the Time of the Earthquake. 
June 
C apt, Richard Falcone*. 1 7 1 
June 28, 1 69^ 
« TJNYERfince that fatal. Day (the mofc terrible 
* H/ that ever I faw) i have lived on Board a 
* Ship, for the Shaking of the Earth returns every 
' now and then : Yefterday we had a very great one, 
* but it fecms lefs terrible Aboard than on Shore. 
'Vet I have ventured to For: Royal three Times 
* (fince its Defolation) among the mattered Houfes 
* to bury the Dead, and ehriiien their Children. 
* SkuJcy lafl I preached amongfl them in a Tent; 
* the Houfes that remain being fo mattered, that I 
' durfl not pi each in them. The People are over- 
* joyed when they fee me amongll them ; and wept 
* very bitterly when I preached co them. J hope by 
4 this terrible Judgment, God will make them re- 
* form themfelves, for there was not a more un- 
u godly People upon the Face of the Earth. It is a 
4 fad Sreht to fee fuch a fair Harbour covered with 
■* the dead Bodies of the People of all Conditions ; 
4 for our great and famous Burial-place, the Pal- 
* lifadoes, was deftroyed by the Earthquake, and 
< the Sea waftied the Carcafes of thofe that were 
* there buried, oat of their Graves. Their Tombs 
* being dafhed to Pieces by the Earthquake, of 
4 which there were hundreds in that Place. Many 
' rich Men are utterly ruined, whilli many, by 
* watching Opportunities, fcarching the funk 
« Houfes, even almoft whillt the Earthquake lafted 
* (while Terror and Amazement had feized on all 
I 2 4 the 
IJ2 The Adventures of 
* the confiderable Perfons) have gotten great Riches. 
* We have had an Account from feveral Places of 
4 the Ifland, of Mifchiefs done there by the Earth- 
* quake : From St. Anneh we hear, that above a 
* thoufand Acres of Woodland are warned into the 
4 Sea, carrying away whole Plantations in divers 
* Places, but none fnffored like Port Royal, where 
* Streets were fwallowed up by the Opening of the 
' Earth. The Houfes and Inhabitants went down 
4 together. Some of them were driven up again by the 
4 Sea, which arofe in the Breaches of the Houfes, and 
* wonderfully efcaped. Others were fwallowed up to 
* the Neck, the Earth fliut upon them, and fqueezed 
* them to Death. And in that Manner feveral are 
« left buried with their Heads above Ground, only 
* fome Heads the Dogs have eaten. They are co- 
* vered with Dull and Earth by the People, which 
* yet remain on the Place, to avoid the Stench. 
* Thus I have told you a long ard fad Story, and 
« God knows what worfe may happen yet. The 
* People tell me they hear great Bellowing and 
4 Noifes in the Mountains, which makes fome very 
* apprehenfive of an Eruption of Fire ; if fo, I fear 
* it will be more dehru&ive than the Earthquake. I 
4 know not how to ftay, and yet I cannot tell how, 
* at fuch a Juncture, to quit my Station. 5 
Tours 9 &c. 
I believe 
Capt. Richard Falconer* 173 
I believe this was the mod terrible Earthquake 
that has ever happened /ince the Creation of the 
World, and did more Damage. They tell a Story 
of a wicked Fellow, that in the Time of the Earth- 
quake ravimed a Merchant's Daughter, and after 
murdered her, that he might not be difcovered ; but 
a Black, that happened to be in another Room, 
and hearing what had happened, ran away to the 
Ship where her Father was, to give him Notice, 
that he might come and apprehend him. But when 
he came and found his Daughter murdered, and the 
Villain gone, he was almofl diftra&ed, and the 
Houfe tumbling with the Earthquake, he periflied 
in the Ruins bemoaning his Daughter. The execra- 
ble Wretch was foon overtaken with divine Ven- 
geance ; for going to make his Efcape, a large 
Stone from one of the falling Houfes dropped on his 
Back and broke it, where he was taken up in fuch 
Mifery, that he prayed for fome one to knock him 
on the Head to put him out of his Torture. The 
Pain was fo violent, that it took away his Senfes, 
and in the Height of his Raving, difcovered him- 
felf to be the Author of the horrid Faft mentioned; 
but he died without Repentance, curling every body. 
Another Story that was told me, was, That a 
Gentlewoman had come out of the Country to lie 
in there, being flic would be better accommodated, 
and was brought to Bed but two Days before. The 
Hulband was gone out ; and at the hri\ Shock of the 
Houfe all her Servants left her, with the Infant with 
her, which with the Violence of the Shock, was 
* 3 overturned 
J74 Tfo Advent vns of 
overturned in the Cradle : With this Accident, the 
Gentlewoman in a Fright rofc out of her Bed, 
though in a weak Condition, and took up her 
Child, and fueling the Houfe totter, ran down 
Stairs in her Shift, with her Infant in her Arms, 
where fhe was met by her Huibami, who took her 
in his Arms to carry her away, juft as the Houfe fell 
upon them all, where they were drawn out, but 
the Child was dead, and the Mother died in Half 
an Hour, the Hulband mightily bruifed, with much 
Pain lingered out to the next Day, and then expired, 
and were all three buried together in one Grave. 
One Abraham Matthews, an Inhabitant of Port* 
Royal, that was alive when I was there, told me of 
a remarkable Providence that happened to him, as 
he was packing up fevcral Things to carry on 
Board fome Veliei that was in the Harbour, for the 
more Security. He had no fooner come out 
of the Houfe where he lodged, but it fell down and 
fmothercd feveral People within. Juft as he got to 
the Water-fide, the Boat was going off, and as he 
put one Foot into the Boat, the Boat-man pumcd 
him out again, and told him he mult ftay till he 
came back, being the Boat was full. The Boat, in 
turning the Point by the Fort, was over- whelmed 
by a Point of the Shore, which fell upon it, and all 
that were in it perifticd. This was the fecond Deli- 
verance. When he faw what had happened, he re- 
tired to the Church, which was open, to return God 
Thanks, and beg his farther Protection ; or if 
Death happened, he could not choofe a better Place 
to 
Capt. Richard Falconer. i?S 
tD die in. While he was at Prayers, he faw one of 
the Buccaneers* or Thieves, floating away his Bundle, 
wlvch he im mediately followed, feized, and took 
it from him : As foon as he was out of the Church, 
that fell to the Ground. When he had got the Bun- 
dle, he kneeled upon the Earth to tie it (after, the 
adjacent Houfe funk down alfo, and unoihcred the 
Ftilow, with feveral others C at were in it. Going 
a little far: her, he met foi*. of his Acquaintance, 
who weie getting a Canoe re.idy to convey them- 
felves on Board a Ship in the Harbour, where he 
fafely arrived, and gave God Thanks for his many 
and happy Deliverances. 
We put in at Eletujields Bny, for the Conveniency 
of Wood and Water, and when we were provided, 
fleered our Courfe onward for England, But as we 
came within ten Leagues of the Ha*vanna> a Spanijb 
Man of War of forty Guns came up with us, who 
commanded us to ftrike our Sails, which we did 
immediately, and coming on Board us, were fur- 
prized to find us all Engltjkmen, not expeding other 
than Spaniards from the building of our VefTcL 
Whereupon they made us all Prifoners, and fent 
fifteen Men on Board us to carry the Veflbl into the 
Havanna. Telling them how we came by the V ef- 
fel did not lignify any Thing, for they faid we were 
Pirates, and had feized it.  And our Pafs which we 
had from the Governor of Havanna, not being to 
be found, made Things appear but with an indif- 
ferent Face ; we were afraid we ihould find many 
Difficulties in getting our Liberty, efpecially if they 
I 4 went 
i;6 y& Adventures ^ 
went to their Station, which was St. Jago. Bat it 
happened better than we expe&ed, for (he made 
d-'rcftly to the Port of the Ho.^anna y where we knew 
every Thing would be placed in a true Light again. 
When we were anchored, and the People could 
come on Board us, we were foon known, and the 
Captain going to the Governor, was foon informed 
of the Matter ; fo we were releafed immediately, 
and had a Vifit made us from Father Antonio, and 
honed Plymouth, who were mightily rejoiced to fee 
us. 
We were detained two Days, before we could 
get away. And then we fet Sail with a bri flc Gale, 
iirft faluting the Town with our four Guns, and 
four Patteraroes, which I had forgot to mention our 
buying at Port Royal. 
In two I>ays after our fird Sailing we made Cap« 
Florida, and entered the Gulph that bears the fame 
Name, and pafled it without Danger. But here a 
fudden Calm overtook us, as frequently happens 
when you are pad the Gulph ; and the Current fet 
ftrong to Weftward, occafioned, as we fuppofed, 
by the Opening of the Land upon that Coaft. The 
Calm lading for four Days, we were infenfibly 
carried within half a League of the Shore, but a 
little Breeze rifing from Land, helped us faithtr 
out again ; But dill our Danger more encreafed, 
for we foon perceived three large Canoes making 
towards us, full of Indians armed. We had not 
much Time to confult what to do, for they gained 
upon us every Moment. Now Death, or fomething 
worfe 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 177 
worfe than Death, glared us in the Face, and mofl 
of us thought this the laft Day we had to live. 
Come, Friends, (faid I) if we mult, die, let us- die 
brave like Englijhmen* To die is juft as common as 
to live, only Life is Choice ; but Death we ftill 
purfue, and every Step we take fhortens our 
Journey. If then we follow Death, why mould we 
fear it ? Or if we mould fear, what would that 
avail? fioce Fearing cannot put back the fated 
Hour. Then let us, like thofe that would diipofe 
of fomewhat, do it to the beft Advantage. We 
charged our four Guns with double and round, and 
our Patteraroes with Mufket- balls : The reft of our 
Arms we got in Readinefs, and refolved to die fight- 
ing, and not fuffer ourfelves to be taken, to be 
miferably butchered, as all the Indians of Florida do, 
when they get any Whites in their Power. We 
refolved to fire our fix Muflcets upon them as foon 
as they came within Reach ; fo we took oar Aim, 
two at each C*?70*, and fired upon them, which did 
them fome Damage, for they flopped upon it, 
which made us make the beft of our Way ; but they 
foon purfued us with loud and rude Shouts, By this 
Time we had charged our Mufkets -gain, and fired 
as before at the fame Diftance ; but whatever Damage 
we did them, they came on as fait as they could 
but not before we had charged our Pieces the third 
Time, which we -fired as before, but did more 
Execution, as being nearer to us; and now we 
charged them the fourth Time, and laid them 
along upon the Deck for a farther Occaiion ; for 
1 S they 
178 The Adventures of 
they being fo nigh, that our great Guns would 
reach them with our double and round, which we 
fired, one at a time ; the firfl we fired at was the 
largeft Came, which put them in fuch Confufion, 
that they fell foul of one another, and being in a 
Huddle together, we fired the other three, that 
made a mighty Havock among them. We now- 
thought of a Vi&ory, inftead of being made Slaves, 
and bore up to them, that we might make our Pat- 
teraroes of Ufe to us, which we fired upon them 
with Partridge (or Mufket) Shot, that anfwered our 
End ; for now they began to turn Tail, which we 
feeing, fired our Mufkcts the fourth Time, which 
killed them two Indians ; and charging our great 
Guns with fingle Balls, of 3 Pound Weight, (or 
3 Pounders, as they call them at Sea) and firing at 
their Boats (or Canoes) we funk one of them; but 
the Men fwam to the other Canoes, and taking 
hold of the Sides, with their Weight turned it over. 
Mr. Mit/grave, and the rerl of our Men, advifed to 
make up to them, and in this Confufion kill them 
all. But I was fatisfied with the Difappointment 
they had met with, and as it was not in their 
Power to hurt us farther, refolved to make the belt 
of our Way ; but looking towards the Shore, favv 
eight more of their Canoes making up to us. This 
put us upon making all the Sail we could, and the 
Sea-breeze being now pretty itrong, we made good 
Way. We thought the Canoes would ftay when they 
came up with the other three, but they made after 
us along with thofe Indians that they had taken up. 
We 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 179 
We had charged our great Guns with great Shot, 
and fired at them, but miffed them; we chaiged 
them the fecond Time, and one Shot, by good 
Fortune, took the firft Canoe, and overfet her, 
which put them into more Confufion than before; 
but ftill live of them purfued us, which were met 
with by fome of our Mufket Balls, that gave two 
of them their Quietus eft ; and firing our great Guns 
once more, funk one of their Canoes ; but the 
Men foon got into the other, and followed us ftilL 
Seeing this, we refolved to make one ftrong Effort, 
and make the beft of our Way: lo we backed our 
main Sail, and laid by for them, and brought our 
four Guns to one Side, and our four Pateraroes to 
bear accordingly, we charged our Mufkets once 
more, and laid them in Readinefs, with two Half- 
pikes, and our Cutlafies ; and now we refolved not 
to fire till every Gun might do Execution. We 
ftaid till they came within two Ships Length of ui>, 
and then we fired upon them as fa ft as ever we 
could, which proved effectual, for we killed them 
at leaft twenty. Upon which, they fet up dreadful 
uncommon Noifes, and rowed back as faft as ever 
they could ; we gave them our farewell Mulket- 
fhots, and made the bell of our Way. By a mode- 
rate Computation, we killed them at leail 50 /w- 
JiaitSf without their once firing at us; neither could 
we conceive _how they intended to afi'ault us, or 
whether they had any f ire-Arms, for we faw none* 
After we had brought our Veflel to rights again, 
>ve afTembled ourielves to Prayers, and returned 
I 6 our 
] 8o The Adventur.es of 
our fincere Thanks to the Defender of the weak, 
and Giver of all good Things, for our happy Deli- 
verance. We faw the Canoes paddling towards 
Shore, and were met by fevcral others, with a 
Defign, as we fuppofed, to affift them ; but we 
were now too far for them, and there was nothing 
more to be feared ; fo we failed on with a profpe- 
jous Gale, and met with nothing worth Note, till 
Thurfday, July the 15th, we discovered Land, 
which amazed us all, for we did not think of 
falling in with any Shore till we faw England. We 
went to confult our Charts, and faw we were near 
Newfoundland^ and finding that we fleered directly 
into St. John's Harbour, which is the Capital of 
the Ifland, I mean of that Part which belongs to 
the Englijh. The Harbour is large, fair, ftronj*, 
and commodious, commanded by fcveral good 
Forts, and a ftrong Bomb that fhuts it up. The 
Town confifts of about 800 Houfcs, but after the 
Manner of the Houfcs in England, 
Newfoundland, or Terra Nova, was difcovered by 
Sebejlian Cabot, for King Henry the Vllth of England. 
This Ifland is feated in fifty-two of Northern Lati- 
tude, and divided from the Continent by an Arm of 
the Sea, about 20 Leagues over. It is larger than 
Ireland ; the Climate is much the fame as in England, 
very wholefome, has feveral commodious Harbours. 
The Englljh poflefs one Fart, and the French the 
other : but the Englljb are more populous. This 
Ifland is of great Benefit to the Engltjh, as well as 
other Nations, from the vail Quantities of Fifth that 
aae 
Capt, Richard Falconer. iSl* 
are caught upon the Banks of Newfoundland. This 
is a very large Bank of Sand, which extends a 
hundred and twenty Leagues to the Weft, near the 
Continent, and about twenty Leagues broad in the 
middle, and fliarpens to each End. It is reckoned 
the moll extraordinary Thing found in the Sea of 
that Kind; for Ships may anchor, though twenty 
or thirty Leagues from Land. The Fruits are the 
fame as with us in Enghnd, and the Soil fo very rich, 
that it will bear Peafe, Beans, fcjfc. without Till acre, 
which are as good as any in England. The Beaiis 
the fame, only the Bear, which is found there. In 
fhdrt, Nmvjlwidland refembles England in every 
Thing fo much, that if a Man could be carried 
from thence in his Sleep, he would only think he 
was ilrayed fomewhere out of his Knowledge. 
There is only this to be faid, that there is not fo 
many Inhabitants, fo there is more Plenty of every 
Thing for human Life. Their chief Trade is Fill),' 
but they fend great Quantities of Mu(k, Sables, 
and other Furs. There is not one Indian to be 
found upon the whole Ifland, but what are brought 
from other Countries, and ufed as Servants ; though 
it is reported, about twenty Years ago, towards the 
North-well Parts, the French met with feme Indians, 
that ufed to help them to cure their Fifli, and make 
their Oil. They defcribe them a civil Sort of 
People, but no Knowledge of a fuperior Deitv 
and when attempted to be taught, they would 
anfwer, We are well contented with our own God, 
neither do we defire any other ; Why Ihould we 
oiler 
itz The Adventures of 
offer to change? We think our Forefathers wifer 
than we are, and they worfliipped the fame with 
us : Therefore, as we think of going to the fame 
Place where they are, we muft worfhip the fame 
Power. You have your God, and we have ours ; 
every Nation muft have a God according tc r.heir 
own Language. Should we pray to your God in 
our Indian Language, how fhould we be underfloou ? 
Or fhould you pray to ours, what would it avail 
you, feeing he would not know what you faid to 
him. Now we have not one God only, but man}* ; 
as one for Fifhing, one for Fowling, and another 
for Hufbandry ; and when we are about any of thefe 
particular BufineiTes, we pray to that God; for it 
would be too much for one to mind them ail. 
Would it not feem ridiculous for one of us, if wc 
wanted Succefs in Hunting, to pray to him that 
tikes Care of Fifhing? Or you that wear Cloaths, 
would you go to a Fifherman to bid him cloathe 
you ? You tell us, there are a vail Number of Wor- 
fhippers of your God in all Countries; then what 
need vou any more? We will ferve you as well and 
as faithfully as if we had but one God, and pray to 
our Gods to give you Succefs in whatever you un- 
dertake. If you fifli, we'll pray co that God; if 
you go to fell Timber, we'll pray to that; and fo 
on, to whatever you employ yourfelves in. When 
you are out of their Dominions, you mult pray for 
yourfelves to your own Cod. Jn lhoit, there is 
neither fair Means nor foul, will ever bring thefe 
poor Creatures to the Knowledge of the true God. 
If 
Capt. Richard Falconer," i8j 
If you are angry with them, they will comply with 
you, and fay, Well, well, we will do as you would 
have us ; but never think of it afterwards : If you 
reafon calmly with them, then they anfwer you as 
above. 
After being here two Days, we fet fail, and made 
our Courfe for England, July 25, 1700. We met 
with no extraordinary Accident in our PafTage, till 
we difcovered the Land's End, Auguft the 21ft. How 
rejoiced I was to fee my native Country, let them 
judge that have been in the fame Condition as I have 
been; and I may with Truth fay, that the Trans- 
ports felt in firft feeing the white Cliffs of the I/land 
that gave me Birth, exceeded the Joy I received when 
I was delivered from the mod imminent Danger, 
Here we confulted, whether it were better for us to 
go to Londo?:, or to Briftol\ but every one allowed 
London to be the bell: Mart for our Goods; fo we 
made for the Thames, and the Weather being fair, 
and abrifk Gale, we anchored over-againft Shadixcll 
Dock. Now all that we had to do was to get a Chap- 
man for our Goods, I applied myfelf to a Merchant 
upon 'Change, who foon {truck a Bargain, and, with 
the Confent of my Companions, fold the Lading, 
Bottom and all, for nine hundred and twenty 
Pounds, reckoning the Lading feven hundred 
Pounds, which was my own, and two hundred and 
twenty for the VefTel, and every Thing befides. 
They were all contented with their Dividend, but 
ftill refolved to go with me to Brifiol, to fee af- 
ter my Affairs there. So we fet out on Foot, in«r 
tending 
i S4 TJ?e Adventures of 
tending to walk it, and be a little merry upon the 
Road, for we expefted more JDiverfion by walking 
it lcifurely, than going in any other Manner. I had 
turned all my Money into Bank Bills, which amoun- 
ted to 800A with my Money that I had for my 
Goods, and fewed them in the Waiflband of my 
Breeches, not that there could be any Danger, be- 
ing fo many in Company. We took the Salijbury 
Road, though fomething out of our Way, I being 
refolved to carry my Friends to Brut on, the Place of 
my Birth. Coming through Bafwgftcke, a Sailor 
met us, begging Charity for God's Sake. I gave 
him Sixpence, which he returned me many Thanks 
for; I afked him how it came to pafs, that a lufty 
Sailor as he was did not go to Sea? (efpecialiy now 
War being talked of between the Englijh and French) 
he anfwered, he was going to London for that Intent, 
but was obliged to be beholden to , good Men to af- 
fift him in his Journey. Why, (purfued I) have you 
no Friends? your Cloaths are good, you don't feem 
to have begged long. No, anfwered he, this is my 
firft Day ; I have made an End of the little Money I 
had laft Night. Have you been long from Sea, 
(faid 1)? But a Week, anfwered he. I had the 
Misfortune to be caft away in Sight of Harbour. 
From whence came you, (afked 1) ? Said he, We 
came from Jamaica, and were bound for Brijlol; 
but a violent Storm overtook us within fix Leagues 
of the Mouth of the River Severn, and drove our Ship 
upon fome Rocks in the Mouth of the i- y, and all 
the Men perilhed but myfelf. From Jamaica, (faid 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 185 
1), pray what Ship ? The Albion Frigate, replyed he. 
Who was your Captain, added I? The Captain di- 
ed at Jamaica, but the Mailer fupplied his Place, one 
Jacob Bingky. Did you ever hear of one FaLcner? 
Yes, he was the Mate, fuppofed to be left in a Voy- 
age he made to the Bay of Campechy, but coming 
fafe into Harbour afterwards, the Captain before his 
Death gave him the Command of our Ship ; but the 
Matter not approving of fuch a young Man to have 
the Power over him, fet Sail without him. This 1 
learned on Board afterwards ; for I and another Sail- 
or were hired for the Voyage that Afternoon, before 
the Morning we fet Sail. We had but an indifferent 
Paflage the whole Voyage, which was made up with 
nothing but Storms and Calms, that caufed much 
Uneafinefs, and our Provifion received Damage by 
the Salt-water, which drove us to the laft Extremity; 
and when we were raifed in our Hopes of fetting out 
Feet upon our native Country, we were devoured by 
the tempeftuous Waves. I myfelf was taken up for 
dead upon the Shore by a Fifherman. Have you 
any Friends (faid I) at London? None, (replied he) 
every Place to me is Home, a Sailor is never out of 
his Way. If fo, (faid I) return with us to BriftcU 
where we are bound, and Til promife you, if I can- 
not get you a Ship, I will give you wherewithal to 
carry you to Londvi without begging. We eafxly a- 
greed upon the Matter, and honelt Tarr went on 
with us. I afoed him why he did not endeavour to 
get a Ship aKBr.jlol? he anfwered, He would rather 
chufe to go in a Man of War than a Merchant-man, 
fmce 
i S6 The Adventures of 
fince War was approaching, and be heard there was 
a Fleet fitting out for the ff:;?f> "\<; audiffo, (faid 
he) there may be fome Hopus of getting fomt thing 
there, either of Jack 'Ipanhird or Jack Frenchman. 
Wcrcame to Btutoi, and took Lodgings Ir. the Mag- 
£vc~I;m, where I vifited all my Acquaintance; and 
from thence we went in the fame Manner to Briftol,. 
where the firft Thing was to enquire after my poor 
Father; but I was informed by Capt. Ptutucy, that 
he thought he was certainly dead; though he had 
feen him but once fince I had been abroad, and that 
was in the January before, when he came privately 
to him, and told him he was fettled in a fmall Vil- 
lage near Hereford, and went by the Name of Flaw- 
kins. What convinces me he is dead is, that about 
two Months ago, he fent me a Letter, which Til 
Ihow you. He went up Stairs and fetched it, which 
contained thefe Words ; 
S I R, 
WHEN I bad fettled mvfelf in my little Tenement. 
I began to think of turning Farmer, that I might 
have fome Employment to pafs away the tedious Hours of my 
voluntary Banijhment ; but going the other Day to view a 
hollow Place, where we had our Marl to marl our Ground, 
the Earth on a fudden fell upon me, and I was fear a taken 
out alive, my Back broke, and bruifed all over in a piteous 
Manner. This is the fir J} Day of Reft or Eafe that I have 
had from my intolerable Pain. It is allowed., and I am 
very well fatisfied, that 1 cannot furvive it Pray be kind 
to my dear Dick, if he ever lives to come home, if not, 
what 
Capt. Richard Falconer. itj 
what I have dipofied in your Hands, let it remain with 
you for your own life, Jirxe my Daughter is provided for. 
If I Jhould, againjl the Expectation of every Body, recovery 
you Jball hear from me very foon ; if siot, believe that I am 
returned to Earthy from whence I came* I hope I need not 
caution you once mere to be kind to my poor Boy, if he Jhould 
return, and be a Father to him ; comfort him amidjl his 
slffliclion, and reftore to him what I left with ycu 9 with 
a dying Parentis Blcjfmg, that he may be as happy, as his 
wretched Father was m/frable ; which is the hearty Def re 
of your Friend and Servant % 
Falconer, 
Grief fo overcame me for a Time, that I was not 
able to ipcak; to be robbed of a Father, and 
a Father I loved fo dearly, was a cutting Stroke; 
and I was conftrained to make Ufe of all my young 
Philofophy to fupport it. My Father had left the 
Writing of his Eftate with Captain Puhncy y he hav- 
ing only mortgaged it before for five hundred 
Pounds to a Friend, to prevent its being feized on. 
by the Crown which was redeemed by the Cap- 
tain, by my Father's Appointment, when he came- 
to fee him laft. I paid him his five hundred 
Pounds, and would have given him Intereft for it, 
but he would not accept of it, but advifed me to 
part with it, without I defigned to fettle in England* 
which I thought was the belt Way, whether I (laid 
in England or not. The Captain undertook the 
Matter, and fold it for four thoufand Pounds* But 
whilft he was bufy about it, I got Mr. Mufgrave* 
who 
i88 The Adventures of 
who was always my Bofom Friend, to go to 
Hereford^ and if it were poflible, to find out where 
my dear Father was buried, and to fee how Matters 
flood there. Accordingly we hired a Couple of 
Horfes, and fat out : when we arrived at Hereford, 
we found it not a little difficult, but at laft, through 
the Means of one Mr. Hall, Organift of the Cathe- 
dral Church, we had Sight of the Place, which was 
about half a Mile from the City. Mr. Hall came 
by the Knowledge of it by the Means of an honeft 
Clergyman, that my Father had contracted a 
Friendfhip with, before that unhappy Accident be- 
fel him, that deprived him of his Life* He brought 
us to his Houfe, where the Gentleman was 
laid up with a Fit of the Gout. As foon as we 
were private, I let him know who I was, upon whicli 
he tenderly embraced me, and was mightily joyed 
to fee the Son of his late Friend. Said he, I mould 
have been at Briftol ere now, but that the Gout 
prevented me. Your Father was a Perfon I had but 
a lhort Acquaintance with, yet that little Time dif- 
covered him to be a Man of Integrity, Honefty, and 
Honour. When he was upon his Death-bed, he 
told me his real Name and Circumftances, and what 
Misfortunes had brought him to this Part; he told 
me alfo, that he had a Son at Sea, and begged of me 
to difpofe of his little Fortune he had here, and fee it 
put in to the hands of Captain Pultmy at Brijlch which I 
had done, but was prevented, as I faid before, by 
this fudden Fit of the Gout. I have taken Care of all 
your Father's Effects, and the little Farm I have 
bought 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 189 
Bought myfelf, it being for my Turn. Upon that he 
fent his Maid for a little Box, which he unlocked, and 
told me out twohundred Guineas. This is what your 
Fatherleftinready Money behindhim ; hisFarm, &c. 
I rate at two hundred and fifty Pounds more; there 
are the Writings, and there is the Money: by the 
Writings I faw it coft my Father but two hundred 
Pounds, As for his Apparel, and other little Ne- 
cefiaries, I gave them, by his Order, to a Maid 
Servant, and a Man that he hired ; and for his 
Goods, there are but few, nor have we made any 
Eftimate of them; but if you'll have them ap- * 
praifed, I will give fomething more than what, 
they are valued at, being I would willingly have 
them along with the Houfe ; Said I, neither 
fliall they be parted ; and if you pleafe to accept 
of them, be they what they will, you fhall be 
heartily welcome. He refufed them obftinately, 
but 1 prevailed with him to take them with much 
ado. He alfo gave me a Ring, which I prized 
mightily, becaufe it had been my Father's from his 
Infancy, given him by my Grandfather- When he 
had fettled every Thing, I went to fee the Place 
where my Father's Bones were laid, which filled me 
with fuch awful Sorrow, that I could not refrain from * 
weeping, in Spite of my Refolution to the contra- 
ry. I would have erected a Tomb or Monument 
for him, but it was his laft Requeft, that he might 
be buried as obfeurely, as he deiigned to live there. 
After parting with my Father's Grave with a 
Load of Sorrow, we took Leave of my Friend the 
Parfon, and Mr. Ha//, and rode for Brijlol again , 
but 
] 90 The Adventures of 
but were overtaken about fix Miles from Hertford? 
by three Gentlemen of the Pad, that had got fome 
Notice of the Booty rhey fhould gain if they could 
rob us ; for I was fo inadveitent as to put all my 
Money into my Bags, which I wore before me at 
my Saddle. They paiTed us firft, but looking wim- 
fully upon us, gave -us fome Sufpicion of what they 
were. Mr. Mujgr&jve advifed me to ride back again, 
and Hay till we had more Company; but I told 
him they would foon overtake us, and, feeing us 
fearful, would make them more refolute ; fo I ra- 
ther chofe to face them, for we obferved they were 
returning to meet us. We refolved to be before- 
hand with them, and we drew out our Piftols ready, 
and if they offered to come too near us, to begin 
with them. As Toon as they came within twenty 
Yards of us, I called to them, and afked them 
what they wanted ; if it was our Mcney, they 
fhould firU take our Lives. They anfwered, they 
had no i'uch Intention. Then what is your Rcafon 
of paffing us firft, and then meeting us again ? 
They anfwered, one of their Companions in alight- 
ing to eafe himfelf below the Hill> had dropped 
his Watch, and they were returning to find it if 
they could. Why then pafs by in the Name of 
God, (faid 1), and accordingly they did ; but we 
were cautious of letting them come too near us. As 
foon as they were pail us, we fet Spurs to our 
Horfes, and got over the Heath before we looked 
behind us; but riding leifurely through the Vil- 
lage, we faw them coming after a full Gallop, 
Wow we icpented we had not flayed in the Village, 
but 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 19 r 
iut we rcfolved, as before, to encounter them if 
they affaulted us. They foon overtook us, and 
coming even with us, told us their Companion had 
found his Watch, which he pulled out and Ihowed 
us. They faid they could not blame us in taking 
them for Highwaymen ; but they affured us they 
were Travellers, as we were, and were going to 
JVorccJkr. We did not make any Words with them, 
but rode along with them, indeed, becaufe we 
could not help it. They rode with us for about a 
Mile, and then the Road going narrow, one of 
them pietending to go foremofl, feized hold of my 
Bridle ; with the Surprize, my Horfe, being a very 
good one, rofe up an End ; and h? difcharging his 
Pillol, the Ball grazed upon my Cioak-bag, and 
did not do any farther Damage. Upon this I fired 
one of my Piflols, but miffed him; but I threw it 
at htm with all my Force, which hit him on the 
Head fo full, that he daggered a little, and fell 
from his Horfe. The other difcharged a Pocket* 
Pillol at me, and wounded me flightly in the left 
Shoulder; but going to difcharge another, I fet 
Spurs to my Horfe, and had the good Fortune to 
fnatch it from him ; but in the Buftle between us it 
went off, and fhot the other Highwayman's Horfe in 
the Head, which fo enraged him, that he ran away 
with him in Spite of all he could do to flop him. 
Mr. Mil/grave^ who engaged with him, followed 
him, but confidering he had left me with two, re- 
turned again, and in very good Time; for the 
other Fellow that I bad knocked down with my 
Piilol 
vgz The Adventures of 
Piftol, had got up again, and had juft caught his 
Horfe that was grazing under the Hedge. His 
other Companion that I had taken the Piftol from, 
had drawn a broad cutting Sword, and was laying 
at me. J, by good Fortune, had before me a great 
Coat for Fear of Rain, and the Ball of his Piftol had 
bioke the Strap, fo that I wrapped it round my left 
Arm, and received his Blow, which did me no 
Damage, and in the mean Time thruft my Sword 
iuto his Side up to the Hilt, which neverthelefs 
did not kill him- But he called to his Companion, 
Come, Hany, let's make off, for by God I believe 
I am killed. Accordingly they fled as fafl as ever 
they could back again, the Way we came, with my 
Sword in his Bread ; for when he received the 
Wound, he turned fo fhort with his Horfe, that 
wrung the Hilt out or my Hand. Mr. Mufgra<ve 
was for following them, but I found fome Pain in 
my Shoulder, and it began to grow ftifT, being cold, 
and chofe to go on; but in our riding and talking 
of the late Accident, we loft our Road, and had 
taken that which led to Ghucefter ; and riding on, 
we met the third Highwayman, whofe Horfe had 
run away with him, who was coming back, as we 
fuppofed, to fee how Things went. As foon as he 
faw us, he turned his Horfe, and rode away as 
hard as he could, and we rode as faft after him, it 
being, as we thought, our Road. We followed 
him through feveral Villages, and called to the 
People to Hop him, bat to no Purpofe ; at laft his 
Horfe Humbled, which gave us Time to come 
pretty 
Capt. Richard Falconer, 193 
pretty near him ; when he found he could notefcape 
us, he turned about, and difckarged a Piftol at us» 
I had one Piftol that I had not fired yet, which I 
drew from the Hoofing, and let fly at him, and 
wounded him in the Neck. He fled as faft as he 
could, and ourHorfes beginning to tire, he got out 
of our Sight. We aflced feveral People we met, whether 
they had feen any fuch Perfon, and they told us he 
was gone into Gloucejler Town before them. We 
followed, and got into Gloiuejhr immediately, and 
were told fuch a Man was feen to ride through the 
Town ; fo we purfued him no farther, our Horfes 
being very much tired ; but they fen t a Hue-and- 
cry after him, but to no Purpofe, for they returned 
no wifer than they went out. We flayed at Glou- 
after two Days to have my Wound dreffed, and them 
rode to BriJloU where all our Friends waited impa- 
tiently for us, becaufe we had exceeded our Timo 
three Days. After having fettled my Money in the 
Hands of People that the Captain appointed to im- 
prove it for me, I refolved to make a Trip to Ire- 
land, to fee my Sifter, who was married very well 
to a Merchant there. But hearing of the grand 
Fleet making Preparation for fome Expedition, put 
us all agog, and my natural Genius for Travel, 
made me once more refolve to be gadding. I opened 
my Mind to Captain Puhney, who advifed me to the 
contrary ; but 1 told him I was fo much concerned 
for my Father's Death, (as indeed I was) that I 
fhould fooner wear it off at Sea, than on Shore, be- 
caufe here every Objeft that I faw put mc in Mind of 
& him. 
r 
Adventures of 
him. He was very well fatisfied with my Reafcns 
at laft ; but, faid he, I would not have you go in 
any Poft, but as a Volunteer, that you may not be 
confined to flay longer than you Ihould delire* I 
thought this the beft Way, therefore refolved for 
hondon with all my Companions, and got us a Ship* 
I had Letters of Recommendation to Secretary Bur* 
cbety and feveral Gentlemen that had the Manage- 
ment of the Navy, We arrived at London, February 
the 8lh, 1701. Mr. Mufgr-awe and I entered on 
Board the Breda, Captain Jog Commander, becaufe 
we were informed Admiral Be?ibo<w would hoift his 
Flag in that Ship. Mr. Mufgraue, having formerly 
had fome Acquaintance with the Admiral, waited 
on him, and had a Warrant for a Quaiter-mafter 
given him. The reft of our Companions entered be- 
fore the Mall, that is, common Sailors, in the fame 
Ship. Hood was foon made C> ok's Mate, and the 
reft of them got forae little Office, that raifed them 
fomething above the common Sailors, though they 
entered as fuch, and all by the Means of Mr. Muf- 
grave, who acquainted the Admiral with their For- 
tunes. When we had fent all our Things on Board, 
and not knowing when they would fail, Mr. Muf- 
gra<ve~and I got Leave to go to Pcrtjhwuth by Land * 
where we arrived on Saturday, March the 3d, and 
flayed there till the Eughjh and Dutch Fleet arrived. 
A Squadron was ordered out to cruife, of which our 
Ship was one, but an unlucky Accident hindered, 
jny going with her, (but Mr. Mufgra<ve was forced 
to go againft his Inclinations, and leave me behind 
him 5) 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 195* 
him ;) which was as follows : One Evening, com- 
ing from feeing a Play at the Bull-Head, a Gentle- 
man coming out with a Lady, the Crowd by Chance 
joftled me againft the Lady, which this Gentleman, 
Mr. Martin (Nephew to Johnny Gib/on, Governor 
of the Place) took as an Affront put upon him, be. 
ing he had the Care of the Lady ; but J begged her 
Pardon, and told her it was an Accident I could 
not help ; but he being in aftrange PafTion, called 
me feveral ungenteel Names, as Rogue, Rafcal, and 
fuch like, and (truck me over the Head with his 
Cane. Though I did not much mind his Words, I 
did not care to take his Blows without a Return, 
which I did with Intereft, and we were foon parted. 
But an Hour after, being at the aforefaid Bull* 
Head at Supper, the Drawer came up and told us, 
there was a Gentlemen below defired to fpeak one 
Word with Mr. Fal&$h'. There was one Mr. Lang- 
ley > Lieutenant to the Wind/or Man of War, that I 
had made an Acquaintance with at the Play, who 
promifed to come and fup with us, and I took the 
Meflage to come from him,, but was iurprized to 
find it the Gentleman that I had the Bufcle with. 
HeVanted to drink a Glafs of Wine with me, he 
faid, and led me into a Room. When we were 
there, he told me he came for Satisfaction for die 
Affront I put upon him about an Hour ago ; there- 
fore draw, added he, or I'll £un you through. I 
endeavoured to pacify him with good Words, yet 
all to no Purpofe ; he made fo many Thrufts at nie f 
that I was in Danger of my Life ; but at laft I di£ 
K, 2 armed' 
196 The Adventures of 
armed him, but not without a little Wound in my 
Arm. As foon as I gave him his Sword again, he 
puflied at me with all the Malice imaginable; and 
hearing the People from all Parts of the Houfe, 
coming to fee what was the Matter, he clapped his 
Back againft the Door, to keep them out, which 
they on the other Side broke open, and giving him 
a Pufh, his Bread ran againft the Point of my 
Sword, which appeared at his Back, and he fell 
down without any Sign of Life. The People com- 
ing in, I was immediately fecured, and carried to 
Prifon, till they knew whether he would live or die. 
I was mightily concerned, not that any Danger was 
to be feared, but that it would be a Hindrance to 
my Voyage. The Gentleman continued in a vio- 
lent Fever a great while, and his Life was defpaired 
of; but at lalt, after a tedious lllnefs, recovered, 
but continued weak. One Day he came to vifu me 
in a Chair, where I was cortlined, and told me he 
was very forry for what had happened, and that 
to-day I mould be at Liberty ; and accordingly an 
Order came in the Afternoon fox my Freedom, 
without paying any Fees. But to my great Grief 
the Fleet was failed, and Jyenbcw's Squadron de- 
fined for the Indies. But Mr. Martin begged me 
to be patient, and he would procure me a Paflage 
in a Storelhip, that would fail in a Week at fartheft 
for Jamaica ; and he was as good as his Word ; for 
the next Day he carried me to Captain Young* Com- 
mander of the Tyger Store- fhip, and entered me im- 
mediately* Thea my Heart began to be at Reft, 
and 
Capt. Richard Faicoxer, 197 
and 1 gave him Thanks ; and for the Time we 
ftayed there, Mr. Martin and I were very intimate, 
and he expreffed himfelf fo genteelly about our for- 
mer Encounter, that he gained my Efteem. 
Paffion, indeed, is certainly a Madnefs ; and 
therefore what was done in that Heat ought to be 
forgot, if the Perfons themfelves repent of it. But 
how humane would it be, if in the Midft of that 
Fire of Paffion which blazes out, they could fpriirkle 
the cool Water of Reafon, and quench it ? For no-' 
thing more deforms the Mind or Body than Paffion, 
and 'tis then we lofe our human Form, and are 
metamorphofed into Beafts. How many great and 
good Men have done fuch Things in a Paffion, that 
they have repented of all their Lives after; there- 
fore Paffion may well be termed a pilfering Devil, 
that fteals away our Senfes, and prompts us to d# 
Aftions unbecoming the Form we bear. 
We fet Sail from Spithead, May the 18th, 170;, 
and our Captain gave us Hopes of overtaking th# 
FJeet, by Reafon, he faid, one Ship could better 
make Way than a whole Fleet, becaufe they wer# 
obliged to wait for one another. We met with no- 
thing extraordinary but a Storm, that drove us al- 
mod upon the Iiland of Trladtira y which being fo 
nigh, our Captain refolved to anchor at, and ac- 
cordingly we did, in the Bay of the City of Funxal* 
the Capital of the Place. Captain Young and \ 
went on Shore to view the Town. 
Fun^aU the Capital of this Ifland, is a large hand, 
fome City, with one Cathedral and four other 
K 3 Churches, 
199 
The Adventures *f 
Churches, all neatly built; two Cloifters, one for 
the Men, and the other for the Women. The City 
contains 1600 Houfes. There is alfo computed to 
be upon this Ifland 100,000 Inhabitants. I bought 
a Portuguefe Book here, that gives a better Account 
of the lirft Difcovery of this Ifland, than any I have 
fecn extant, which Mr. Mufgraw tranflated for me 
into Englijh* I have feen it in French fince, but not 
truly tranflated, becaufe there was fomething left 
out concerning King Edward the Third, that con- 
quered France. And as the Honour belongs to the 
Englifb, as the firft Inhabitants, I lhall here give it 
you faithfully tranflated. It being but Ihort, I 
hope it will not be found tedious ; for in all my 
Voyages I avoid Prolixity, as being oifenfive to all 
Readers, and the Places I defcribe are generally 
fuch as are not frequented by the Englifb> it being 
jny Fortune to be carried there. 
THI 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 199 
2 iO« % 
f -a- a- -a- -a- * J 
% 3r£ ^ « 3HC ? 
THE 
HISTORY 
O F T H E 
Discovery of the Ifland of 
MADEIRA. 
Written originally in Portuguefe by Don Francifco de 
Alcafarado, tranjlated into Englilh by W. 
Mufgrave, Native of Jamaica. 
FQSOBOBP? HEN England was fettled in a Iaft- 
ht)& in g Peace, after the Turmoils and 
)§£ W Hazard of a dangerous War, King 
<^$£ Edward the Third, who conquered 
France f and fixed his Royal Standard 
in the City of Paris ; he who had felt the In- 
conveniences of War, knew how to encourage th* 
Pleafures of Peace ; and London, the Metropolitan 
Qity of the Kingdom, became the Seat of Mirth 
and Jollity. All Thoughts of War were banifhed ; 
K z the 
aoo The Adventures o, 
the Enfigns now were furled, and S*vords were 
wore for Ornament, not Ufe. Among the reft that 
embellifhed the Court, was one Lionel Machin, the 
youngeft Brother of a noble Family, and confe- 
quently not over-rich ; yet a Gentleman (which 
often happens in younger Brothers) that was reck- 
oned the only Ornament of the Root from whence 
he fprung. This Gentleman fell defperately in 
Love with a Lady, beautiful to Perfection, and tlve 
only Toaft of her Time. But there was a vaft Dif- 
parity in their Fortunes ; for fhe was the only 
Daughter to a Nobleman, whofe Riches exceeded 
raoft of his Rank, and confequently courted by 
thofe that could make her a Jointure, equal to the 
Fortune her Father would give her. But never- 
thelefs the Force of Love is fuch, that it never mindi 
Intereft nor Duty; and the young Lady, whofe Name 
was Arabella, was fo much taken with the winning 
Behaviour of Lionel, that fhe placed her entire Af- 
fection upon him, who was indeed, bating his 
(lender Means, the moft deferving of her. But the 
Parents of Arabella hearing of the Amity that was 
between them, complained to King Edward, and 
begged that he would inter pofe his Royal Authority. 
The King ufed many Perfuafions to Lionel to with- 
draw his Affections, but it was like bidding the 
Sun ltand Hill, or the Wind, or Rain to ceafe ; for 
their Affections were fo ftrongly united, that 
nothing could ever part them. The Father having 
provided a fit Match for his Daughter, intreated 
the King to fecuie Lionel till the Marriage was* 
folemnized, 
Capt. Ri c h,a rd Falconer. 201 
folemni zed, who granted his Requeft, and clapt Lionel 
in Prifon under Pretence of fome treafonable Prac- 
tices. When immediately the Marriage Rites were per- 
formed, and Jrabella was conftrained to give her 
Hand where it was not in her Power to give her 
Heart ; and Parents are to blame to force their 
Children to marry againft their Inclinations, for 
from thence fpring fuch Diforders in Families that 
are not in their Power to compofe. As foon as the 
Ceremony was over, the Hufband carried his Lady 
to a Palace, feated upon the River Severn* near 
Brifiol: When done, Lionel was releafed out of 
Prifon, but with a heavy Heart, for the Lofs ofchis 
dear Jrabella. But Hill his Love encreafed from the 
Difficulties he found to obtain his Defire, and 
knowing it impoflible to live without her, thought 
of a Stratagem that gave him Hopes of conquering 
all Difficulties. He fummoned about thirty young 
Gentlemen, all refolute, bold, and fit for any Un- 
dertaking. When he had got them all together . 
he made this Ihort Oration to them : 
Mofi here are njy Relations? or what is a nearer 7ye> 
my bofom Friends : You all know the Indignity I havt 
Juffered y by Arabella'/ forced Marriage ; therefore I re- 
quire you all to afiifi me in whatever I Jhall undertakt 
( without tainting your Honour) to be revenged for tht . 
Affront put upon me. 
To this Requeft they all agreed to ferve him with 
their Lives and Fortunes, Whereupon it waa re- 
vived to part and take feveral Ways to Brifiol: 
K 5 Wh#* 
2oc The Adventuxbi of 
When they all arrived at their Place of Rendezvous, 
they confulted together, and refolved to feize any 
Ship in the River, that they found was fit for their 
Turn. Lionel thought nothing difficult when Love 
was to be the Reward ; but now he wanted fome 
Means to let Arabella know their Defign : But at 
laft it was agreed, that one of their Company 
fiiould enter into the Service of the Hufband, which 
fell out as they could wifti, and a proper Perfon 
was hired to be Groom, where he had the Care of a 
line fpotted Horfe, that ufed to carry the Lady 
abroad, to vifit her Neighbours : The Wind 
proving fair, Notice was given that the Project was 
to be put in Execution ; the pretended Groom, to 
favour the Buiinefs, had omitted giving Arabella* 
Horfe any Water, when Arabella had Notice 
of the Hour, fhe ordered her fpotted Horfe 
to be faddled under Pretence of taking the 
Air, attended with her Groom and two more of her 
Domefticks. When they came near the Cape of 
Land, where Lionel and his Companions waited for 
her, the Horfe, by the beating of the Waves againft 
the Shore, heard and fmelt the Water, and made 
down to it to drink, where Lionel immediately laid 
hold of the Lady, (who feemed to be mightily 
frightened) and put her in their Boat and made off. 
Now the Day that they had i'eized the Lady, was 
2llo pitched on to feize the Ship they had a Defign 
upon ; which was eafily done, as their Crew were 
moll of them ^fhore. They cut her Cables, and 
made erf to Sea with all the Sail they could bear, 
*nd ioca got out of Sigh^ and directed their Courfe 
for 
Capt. Richard F a ' l coner. 203 
for France, but a Storm met them and drove them 
quite contrary. Lionel's Friends now began to re- 
pent of their Undertaking, and Lionel was mightily 
concerned for the Danger of her he loved more 
dear than Life ; who though mightily difordered 
with the Sea, yet feemed contented in having the 
Object of her Defire with her. Thirty Days they 
were the Sport of the Waves, every Day expe££ing 
Death ; bat one Morning they difcovered Land, 
high, craggy, and very woody, which filled them 
with Joy, more efpecially Lionel, for now he hoped 
a reiting Place for his dear Arabella. None in the 
Ship could gcefs what Land it could be, for they 
knew it was not inhabited, becaufe Birds of all 
Sorts were fo tame, that they would fuffer them- 
felves to be taken with the Hand. The Place they 
chofe for their Habitations was a fine Grove of 
Laurel-Trees that were very delightful, as was alfo 
very Part of the Country they had rambled over* 
Finding they were to itay there a great while, they 
got out of their Ship feveral NeceiTaries, and lived 
very plenfant for about thirteen Days, defigning tfc 
commit themfelves in a Day or two to the Mercy 
of the Waves, for though the Ifland was delightful 
to live in, yet it feemed tirefome to thofe that 
wanted many Things they enjoyed in their own 
Country. 
The Night before they defigned to embark, a 
violent Storm arofe, and drove the Ship from the 
Ifland with about fixteen Men that were preparing 
all Things for foiling the next Day. Thefe were 
K. 6 toft 
204 The Adventures of 
toft by the Winds and Sea for many Days, but at 
laft, to their great Joy, difcovered Land, where 
they ran their Ship on Shore, for ftie was fo leaky 
Ihe could hardly fwim. But their Joy for being 
faved from the watry Element, foon changed to 
Sorrow, when they found themfelves taken by the 
Moors, they being landed on the Coaft of Jfrkk. 
Their new Matters (after hard Ufage) arrived at the 
City of Morocco, with their Purchafe, where they 
fold them in the Market like Cows, or Oxen ; but 
all declaring they were Men of Rank, they were 
imprifoned, in Hopes of large Ranfoms. 
When Lionel and Arabella, and the reft that were 
left on Shore, difcovered the next Morning their 
fatal Difafter, Grief feized them with fuchaForce, 
that fome of them loft their Senfes, running fran- 
tick up and down the Woods, and raving, killed 
themfelves. Poor Arabella's Grief funk inward, 
and preyed upon her Life with fuch Violence, that 
Death appeared to her Refcue : She never upbraided 
Lionel with her Misfortunes, but clofed her Eyes 
with a true Repentance of her Failings, 
Lionel was like a diftra&ed Man, laid himfelf 
down at her Feet, and could not be removed till 
Death gave him his Reieafe. His Companions bu* 
ried them together in one Grave, and at the Foot 
ereded a Croft, to fhew thefe that were interred 
there, died under the Banner of Chrift : Upon the 
Bark of the Tree, they cut in Letters the whole 
Story of their Misfortunes. The reft that remained 
upon the Ifland, propofed to themfelves of ven- 
turing 
Capt, Richard Falconer. 205 
turing into their Boat (which by good Fortune 
was left on Shore) and fteer their Courfe to the 
nigheft main Land, where they happily arrived 
without Danger, but ran the fame Fate with their 
other Companions that were thrown on the fame 
Coaft in the Ship, that they all thought was caft 
away. All the Comfort they received in their 
Misfortunes, was, that they were committed to the 
fame Prifon, that their Companions were in. They 
were over-joyed to find thofe alive that were 
thought dead, but mourned to think of meeting in 
fuch a melancholy Place. In the fame Prifon was 
one Jua-n de Morales, a noted Pilot, and an excellent 
Navigator ; this Man was mightily pleafed with 
the Tales of thefe Englijh Gentlemen, and fo often 
begged them to repeat their Adventures, that he 
had every Mark of the Jfland exaft, and perfectly 
faw it in Imagination. In the Year 1416, Don 
Sancbo, Son to Ferdinand King of Arragon, died in 
Cajlile, and left confiderable Sums of Money to 
redeem Spanijh Prifoners that were Captive in Bar- 
bary ; among the reft was Juan de Morales; and at 
the fame Time the Englijb Gentlemen got their 
Ranfom, and fafely arrived in their own Country, 
with a Pardon for their Offence from the King of 
England, and the Hufband of Arabella. Morales, 
and all the Ship's Crew, were taken by the Portu- 
guefe, who met with them cruifing in thofe Seas, 
but all, excepting Morales, had their Liberty given 
them, who was detained for his Knowledge in the 
Matbematicks, 
206 Adventures of 
Mathematicks, and Promifes were made him of 
great Recompence, if he would ferve King John 
of Portugal in his Difcoveries. 
As foon as they were arrived at Lifbon, Morahs 
was prefented to the King, by Don Hemy the Infant, 
who was a great Encourager of new Difcoveries, 
where he opened the whole Story of Lionel and Ara- 
bella*. Which was fo generally received, that a Fleet 
was ordered immediately for this new Voyage, and 
June the 2d, 1420, fet out to Sea well armed. They 
defigned firft for Porto SanBo, as being nigh the 
Mand, as Morales conjectured, the Englijh abandon- 
ed. 
When they arrived there, the Inhabitants advifed 
them not to go any farther in their Difcoveries to- 
wards the N. E. being there was a black Cloud which 
would terminate their Navigation, becaufe there was 
not any one that ever attempted it, but loft their 
Lives for their Prefumption, and were never heard 
©f more. Notwithftanding Gonfales the Admiral, 
and Morales the Pilot, were well aflured that very 
Cloud was the Ifland they wanted to find, they were 
the more convinced in it, by Reafon the Cloud con- 
tinued of the fame Colour through every Change of 
the Moon. But. the reft of the Ship's Crew were 
of the contrary Opinion, and mutinied again ft Mo- 
rales, telling him that he being a Ca/rilian, (and con- 
sequently their Enemy) did it to difgrace them; and 
that it was a prefumptuous Thing to pretend to 
learch into the Secrets of Providence. 
Notwithftanding 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 207 
Notwithftanding their Grumblings, they fet fail 
from Porto SanSio, and made forward for their Dif* 
covery; but the nearer they approached this Cloud, 
the more frightful it grew, which caufed a terrible 
Fear in all the Sailors, intreating Gonfales to return, 
and not to be the Death of fo many innocent Peo 
pie. But ftill they held their Courfe for all theii 
Clamours; yet Gonfales, to encourage the Sailors, 
a/lured them it mutt.be firm Land, and to diflipate 
their Fears made them this following Oration : 
Whypould 1 be more hardy than you, but that I am 
confirmed it is as I tell you ? If there fhould be any Danger ; 
have I any Means to extricate myj elf more than yourf elves P 
Is not my Life as precious to me, as any of yours, my Com* 
p anions ? A Fool Hardinefs does net become us, it is true ; 
but a firm Courage is what all Men fhould be endued vjith* 
Every Perfon here has ventured his Life for his King in 
Battle before now, without half the Recompenfe or Honour 
that will be rained by this Expedition, if we fuccced, as 
we certainly Jha/l, if we arm ourfelves with Rcfolution to 
overcome all Difficulties : Banijh your Fears, and call your 
Reafon to your Aid, and let us proceed in the Name, and for 
the Honour of God, and our King. 
They proceeded cheerfully, animated by this O- 
ration, and in a little Time entered the Cloud, or 
fettled Fog; but the Tide driving the VeiTel too far 
North, they put out their Boats to tow their Ship 
in the midft of the Cloud ; but the farther they row* 
ed, the Cloud fecmcd to decreafe, and prefently af- 
ter they discovered Land to their great Joy, being 
it was what but few of them expetted ; The firit 
Cape 
208 The Adventures of 
Cape they difcovered, was called by Gonfales, Cape 
St. Lawrence, which they doubled, and faw a fine and 
fertile Country full of fair and lofty Trees, that 
made the Profpeft delightful. Sailing on, they dif- 
covered a large Bay, which Morales judged to be the 
Place where the Englijh were thrown ; but it being 
late, Gonfales ordered to let fall the Anchors, not 
caring to land till they had the whole Day before 
- them. The next Morning they landed, and found 
it to be the fame Place where Lionel Machin and Ara* 
bella were buried. 
When they had given Account to the Admiral of 
the State of Things, he landed and took PoiTeflion 
of thelfland for his Matter, John the firft, King of 
Portugal They ere&ed an Altar upon the Tomb of 
the two Lovers, laid Mafr, and returned God 
Thanks for their happy Succefs. 
Gonfales termed the Ifland MjJcra from the Quan- 
tity of its Wood (which in the Pcrtuguefe Language 
fignifies Woody) that was found all over the Ifland, 
but no human Inhabitants. 
After they had fearched well on Shore, Boats were 
ordered to row round the Ifland, being it was dan- 
gerous for their Ship, by Reafon of many Rocks 
and Shallows that lay in the Water. So fteering Weil, 
they difcovered four fine fmall Rivers running into 
the Sea, the Water being extremely clear. G&nfales 
ordered fome to be bottled to prefent to the King of 
Portugal his Matter at his Return. 
Going farther, feveral Soldiers were landed in a 
Valley, which was watered by a fine River, and a 
nobis 
Capt. Richard Falconer. zcg 
noble Grove of Trees that made a perfect Harbour, 
where GonfaUs erected a large Crofs. 
Sailing on, they came to a Point of Land that raa 
a great Way into the Sea, which was inhabited by 
fuch a Number of great different Birds, that the 
Men were afraid of being devoured by them. This 
Place was named Punta des Gra!hos> from the large 
Number of Birds. 
Going forward, they difcovered a Valley covered 
with fine large Cedar-Trees ; next to that they found 
another large one, where was a great Lake or Pond, 
from whence they could perceive the Bay they fet 
out from. In fearching the Country, they difcove- 
red a large Plain, which overlooked the reft of the 
lfland, free from Trees, but covered over with a 
beautiful Fennel, called by the Portuguefe FumbalL 
Upon this Plain they built a City, and called it Fun- 
ihdll t from the Quantity of Fennel that was found 
there, which was formerly a Bifhop's See, but is ftill 
the chief Place for Temporal Affairs. 
From this Plain run three Rivers into the Sea, 
which form an lfland, and landlock the Haven, fe« 
cure from Storms and Tempefts. 
GonfaUs ftill fent out more Men for Difcoveries ia 
the lfland, where they found a white Rock, called 
by the Portuguefe Praya Fortncja> or the fair Rock ; 
below which was a fierce Torrent of Water, fo clear, 
that obliged them all to obferve it. Two refolute 
Soldiers pulled off their Cloaths, and attempted to 
fwim acrofs the Stream", but were hurried away with 
the Current in fuch an impetuous Manner, that they 
had 
210 The Adventures of 
had perifhed if they had not been timely fuccoured 
by their Companions by Ropes, which they threw 
in, and pulled them up againft the Violence of the 
Stream, This Torrent they named Soceorides. 
The moft remarkable Thing they found in their 
Voyage, was a great Number of Sea- Wolves, which 
rufhed out of a Cave into the Water when they ap- 
proached them, Gonfales gathered all Sorts of Plants, 
Roots, Flowers and Minerals, together with all 
Sorts of Birds, and a large Parcel of the Earth, and 
embarked for Portugal, where he hMy arrived stuguft 
the id, the fame Year 1420, where he was received 
with all the Favour imaginable. 
In May 1421, Gonfales was made Governor of the 
whole Ifland, with an additional Title of County and 
in the fame Month fet Sail with his Wife and two 
Daughters, and many more, for the inhabiting the 
fame, where he happily arrived, and laid the Fou ni- 
dation for the prefent Capital ofFunchalh or Funzal\ 
but to honour Lionel Machin, who was there interred, 
he called the Place Porto Mackino, and over the 
Grave he creeled a noble Church. Some Writer* 
relate that Gonfales fet the Woods on Fire, that con- 
tinued burning for feven Years, which made Wood 
fcarce in that Ifland ; but there is fuch Plenty of all 
Sorts, that I look upon that Story but as a Fable. 
The Ifland daily increafed in its Inhabitants, till it 
came to the now flourifliing State it remains in. 
Madera is fituated in thirty Degrees and thirty one 
Minutes. In Circumference about forty Leagues, 
twelve in Length, about two broad. The Air fo 
temperate. 
Capt- Richard Falconer. 211 
temperate, that neither Heat nor Cold is trouble- 
fbme, and the Soil fo fertile, that it yields more 
Corn for the Bignefs of the Place than any other If- 
land as large again. The Grafs lhoots up fo high, 
that they are obliged to burn it, and in the Allies 
they plant Sugar-Canes, which in fix Months Time 
produce Sugar. The Inhabitants are more civilized 
than any of the Canary Iflands. 
After we had made an End of our Affairs, we fet 
Sail from thence, and direcled our Courfe for Tern* 
riff, one of the Canary Iflands, or the In/ula Fortu- 
nataf of Ptolemy, where we fafely arrived. This 
Ifland lies in twenty-feven Degrees, and thirty 
Minutes ; about fourteen Leagues in Length. Santa 
Cruz, the Place where we anchored, is the chief 
Harbour. It is an Ifland very well inhabited, con- 
taining three Cities, or large Town*, befides « 
great Number ^>f Villages. But what it's famed 
moll for is the Pike, or high Mountain, that rears 
its Head above the Clouds, and feems to fcale even 
Heaven itfelf. I have feen many People that have 
told me they have been at the Top of this Moun- 
tain : But none give fo good a Defcription of it 
(and even the whole Ifland) as the Right Reveren 
Dr. Sprat in his Hijicry of the Royal Society ; which : 
as follows : 
' Having furnifhed ourfelves with a Guide, 
' vants and Horfes, to carry our Wine and Prov 
Wton, we fet forth for Oratava, a Port-Town i. 
< the Ifland of Teneriff, fituated on the North -fidv\ 
* ttf 0 Miles diftant from the main Sea, and travelled 
« frofl£ 
212 The Adventures of 
* from twelve at Night till eight in the Mornings 
* by which Time we got to the Top of the firfl: 
* Mountain, towards the Pico de Terrain: There-, 
' under a very large and confpicuous Pine-tree, we 
4 took our Breakfaft, dined and refrefhed ourfelves 
* till two in the Afternoon : Then we patted 
* through many fandy Ways, over many lofty 
* Mountains, but naked and bare, and not covered 
* with any Pine-Trees, as our firli Night's Paffage 
* was. This expofed us to exceflive Heat, till we 
4 arrived at the Foot of the Pico, where we found 
4 many huge Stones, which feemed to have fallen 
* from fome upper Part : About fzx in the Evening 
* we [began to afcend the Pico, but we were fcarce 
* advanced a Mile, and the Way being no more 
' pa/Table for Horfes, we left them with our Ser- 
\ vants. In the Afcent of one Mile, fome of our 
1 Company grew very faint and fick, difordered by 
'Fluxes, Vomitings, and agueifh Diftempers, our 
* Horfe's Hairs (landing upright like BriUles ; and 
1 calling for fome of our Wine, carried in fmall 
Barrels on a Horfe, we found it fo wonderfully 
f cold, that we could not drink it till we had made 
1 a Fire to warm it, notwithftandirrg the Air was 
very calm and moderate. But when the Sun was 
fet, it began to blow with fuch Violence, and 
grew fo cold, that taking upour Lodging among 
the hollow Rocks, we were neceflitated to keep 
great Fires in the Mouths of them all Night, 
About four in the Morning we hegan to mount 
again ; and being comfr another Mile up, one of 
- * our 
« 
Capt. Richard Falcower. zij 
1 our Company failed, and was not able to pro- 
' ceed any farther. Here began the black Rocks, 
* The reft of us purfued our Journey till we came t<f 
* the Sugar- Loaf, where we began to travel again 
* in a white Sand, being fitted with Shoes, whofe 
* fingle Soles are made a Finger broader than the 
* upper Leather to encounter this difficult Paflage # 
4 Having afcended as far as the black Rocks* which 
4 lay all flat like a plain Floor, we climbed within 
( a Mile of the very Top of the Pico, and at laft we 
* gained the Summit, where we found no fuch 
4 Smoke as appeared a little below, but a continual 
* Perfpiration of a hot and fulphurous Vapour, that 
' made our Faces extremely fore. All this Way we 
* found no confiderable Alteration of the Air, and 
f very little Wind, but on the Top it was fo impe- 
* tuous, that we had much ado to Hand againlt it, 
* whillt we drank the King's Health, and fired each 
' of us a Piece. Here alfo we took our Dinner, 
4 but found that our ftrong Waters had loft their 
< Virtue, and wete almolt infipid, while our Wine 
* was more fpirituous and bri/k than before. The 
* Top on which we flood being not above a Yard 
« broad, is the Brink of a Pit, called the Caldera, 
4 which we judged to be a Muflcet-lhot over, and 
* near fourfcore Yards deep, in Form of a Cone, 
« hollow within like a Kettle, and covered with 
* fmall Ioofe Stones, mixed with Sulphur and Sand, 
* from among whichi!Tued divers Spiracles of Smoke 
* and Heat ; which being ftirred with any Thing^ 
4 puffs and makes a Noife, and fo offenfive, that we 
4 were 
2 *4 ^ Adventures of 
4 were almoft fuffocated with the fudden Emana* 
* tion of Vapours, upon the removing one of thefe 
* Stones, which were fo hot as not eafily to be 
* handled. We descended not above four or five 
* Yards into the Caldcra y becaufe of the Slipperi- 
* nefs under Foot, and the Difficulty ; but fome 
* have adventured to the Bottom. Other Matter* 
* cbfervable, we difcovered none, befides a clear 
4 Sort of Sulphur which lay like Salt upon the 
4 Stones. From this renowned Pico we could fee 
* the Grand Canaries, 14 Leagues diftant; Pafma 
* 18 ; and Gomera 7 ; which Interval of Sea feemed' 
* not much wider than the Thames about London. We 
% difcerned alfo the Hcrro, being diftant about 20 
* Leagues, and fo to the utmoft Limits of the Sea 
4 much farther. As foon as the Sun appeared, the 
4 Shadow of the Pico feemed to cover not only the 
4 whole Iiland, and the Grand Canaries, but the Sea, 
c to the very Horizon, where the Top of the Sugar- 
4 Loaf or Pico vifibly appeared to turn up, and caft 
* its Shade into the Air itfelf, at which we [were 
* much furprized ; but the Sun was not far afcend- 
* ed, when the Clouds began to rife fo faft, as that 
4 they intercepted our Profpett both of the Sea, and 
■ 4 the whole lfland, except the Tops only of the 
'fubjacent Mountains, wliich feemed to pierce them 
4 through. Whether thefe Clouds do ever furmount 
* the Pico, we can't fay, but to fuch as are far be- 
* low they feem fometimes to hang above it, or 
4 . rather wrap themfelves about it, as conftantly 
* * 5 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 215 
as the Weft Winds blow ; this they call the Cap, 
and is the infallible Prognoflick of enfuing Storms* 
One of our Company who made this Journey 
again two Years after* arriving at the Top of the 
Pico before Day, and creeping under a great Stone 
to /hroud himfelf from the cold Air, after a little 
^ Time found himfelf all wet, and perceived it to 
* come from a perpetual Trickling of Water 
* from the Rocks above him. Many excellent and 
4 exuberant Springs we found iffuing from the Tops 
4 of mo ft of the other Mountains, gufhing out in 
* great Spouts almoft as far as the huge Pine-Tree 
4 which we mentioned before. Having itaid a-while 
4 at the Top, we all defcended the fandy Way, till 
* we came to the Foot of the Sugar-Loaf, which be* 
* ing Itecp, even almoft to a Perpendicular, vvefooa 
* palled ; and here we met with a Cave about te* 
* Yards deep, and fifteen broad, being in Shape like 
* an Oven, or Cupola, having a Hole at the Top* 
* near eight Yards over. This we defcended by a 
* Rope that our Servants held faft at the Top, 
4 while with the other End (being fattened about 
4 our Middles) we fwung ourfelves, till being over 
' a Bank of Snow, we ilid down, lighting upon it; 
* we were forced to fvving thus in our Defcent, be- 
4 caufe in the Midft of the Bottom of this Cave, 
* oppofite to the Aperture at the Top, is a round 
4 Pit of Water, like a Well, the Surface whereof is 
4 about a Yard lower, but as wide as the Mouth at 
4 Top, and about fix Fathom deep. We fuppofed 
4 this 
3*6 The Adventures of 
* this Water not a Spring, but diflblved Snow 
* blown in, or Water trickling through the Rocks. 
* About the Sides of the Grot for fome Height there 
* is Ice and Icicles hanging down to the Snow, But 
* being quickly weary of this exceffive cold Place, 
c and drawn up again, we continued our Defcent 
* from the Mountains, by the fame PafTage we went 
4 up the Day before, and fo about five in the Evea- 
€ ing arrived at Oratava, from whence we fet forth ; 
* our Faces were fo red and fore, that to cool them, 
* we were forced to wafh and bath them in Whites 
* of Eggs. The whole Height of the Pico in Per- 
( pendicular is vulgarly efteemed to be two Miles 
* and a half; no Trees, Herbs, nor Shrubs did we 
« rind in all the PafTage, but Pines ; and among the 
« whiter Sands, a Kind of Broom, being a bufhy 
* Plant ; and on that Side where we lay all Night, 
* a Kind of Coa/on, which had Stems eight Feet 
* high, and the Trunk near a Foot thick, every 
* Stem growing in four Squares, and emerging 
* from the Ground like Tufts of Rumes ; upon the 
* Edges of thefe Stems grow very fmall red Buttons, 
« or Berries, which being fqucezed, produce a poi- 
4 fonous Milk j which falling upon any Part of a 
« Horfe, or other Beaft, fetches off all the Hair 
* from the Skin immediately ; of the withered 
* Sticks of this Vegetable we made our Fire all 
< Night. This Plant is alfo unive rfally fpread 
* over the Ifland, and is perhaps a Kind of Euf>hor*> 
€ Of 
Opt. Richard Falconer. 217 
9 Of the Ifland Teneriff itfelf, this Account was 
* given by a judicious and ingenious Man who 
* lived twenty Years in it, as a Rhyfician and 
' Merchant : His Opinion is, that the whole Ifland 
* being a Soil mightily impregnated with Brimftone, 
€ did in former Times take Fire, and blow up all, 
4 or near all, at tne fame Time ; and that many 
' Mountains of huge Stone, calcined and burnt, 
4 which appear all over this Ifland, efpecially in 
* the South-Weft Part of it, were call up, and raifed 
4 out of the Bowels of the Earth, at the Time of 
* that general Conflagration ; and that the greateft 
* Quantity of this Sulphur lying about the Center of 
€ the Ifland, raifed up the Pica to that Height at 
* which it is now feen ; and he fays, that any one 
* upon the Place, that fhall carefully note the Situ- 
4 ation and Manner of thoie calcined Rocks, how 
4 they lie, will eafily be of that Mind ; for they lie 
* (fays he) three or four Miles alrnoft round the 
* Bottom of the Pico, and in fuch Order one above 
' another, alrnoft to the Sugar-Leaf , as it is called, 
4 as if the whole Ground f welling and rifing up 
* together, by the Afcenfion of the Brimftone, the 
* Torrents and Rivers of it did, with a fudden 
* Eruption, roll and tumble them down from the 
* reft of the Rocks, efpecially (as is faid before) to 
* the South-Weft, for on that Side from the very 
* Top of the Pico, alrnoft to the Sea-Coaft, lie huge 
'Heaps of thefe burnt Rocks one under another; 
4 and there (till remain the very Tra&s of the 
1 Brimftone Rivers, as they run over this Quarter of 
L * the 
2 1 S The Adventures ef 
€ the Mand, which has fo wafted the Ground 
4 beyond Recovery, that nothing can be made to 
4 grow there but Broom: But on the North Side 
* of the Pico few or none of thefe Stones ap- ' 
x peared ; and hence he concludes, that the 
4 Volcano difcharged itfelf chiefly on the South* 
* Weft Side. He adds farther, That at the 
4 fame Time Mines of feveral Metals were blown 
* up., fome of thofe calcined Rocks refembling 
4 Iron Ore, fome Silver, and others Copper; par- 
4 ticularly on the South- Weft Parts, called Axuleoh y 
4 being very high Mountains, where never any En- 
4 glijhman but himfclf (that ever he heard of) was. 
x There are vaft Quantities of a loofe bluifh Earth, 
* mixt with blue Stones, which have a yellow Ruft 
* upon them, like that of Copper, or Vitriol; as 
* alfo many fmall Springs of Vitriol Water, where 
4 he fuppofes a Copper Mine ; and he was told by 
* a Bell-founder of Oratava, that he got out of two 
4 Horfe Loads of this Earth, as much Gold as made 
* two large Rings : And a Portuguezc who had been 
* in the Weft-Indies told him, that his Opinion was, 
* there were as good Mines of Gold and Silver 
* there, as the bed in the Weft-Indies. Thereabouts 
* alfo arc Nitrous Waters, and Stones covered over 
* with a deep Saifi on-coloured Ruft, rafting of 
* Iron ; and farther, he mentions one of his 
* Friends, which of two Lumps of Eaith or Ore, 
€ brought from the Top of this Side of the Moun- 
4 tain, made two Silver Spoons. All this he con- 
* firmed by the laft Inftance of the /Vw-Ifland, ig 
* Leagues from the Tencrffi where, about 12 Years 
4 fmce, 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 219 
c fince, a Volcano was fixed, the Violence thereof 
* made an Earthquake in this Mand, fo great, that 
* he and others ran out of their Houfes, fearing they 
* would have fallen upon their Heads ; they heard 
' the Noife of the Torrent of flaming Brimflone, 
' like Thunder, and faw the Fires as plain by 
* Night, for fix Weeks together, as a burning 
' Torch, and fo much Sand and Afhes, brought 
' from thence by the Wind and Clouds, fell upon 
* his Hat, as would fill the Sandbox of his Ink- 
' horn. 
* In fome Places of this Ifland grows a crooked 
* Shrub called Legnan, which they bring to England 
1 as a fweet Wood. There are like wife Apricots* 
1 Peach-trees, and others, which bear twice a Year ; 
f alfo Pear-trees as pregnant, Almonds with a ten- 
' der Shell ; Palms, Plantains, Oranges and Lemons, 
* efpecially the Paegnadaes, which have fmall ones 
* within them, from whence they are fo denomi- 
1 nated. Alfo they have Sugar-Canes, and a little 
' Cotton, Cdloquintida, &c. The Rofes blow at 
' Chrifimas ; there are good Carnations, and very 
* large, but no Tulips will grow or thrive there; 
1 Samphire cloaths the Rocks in Abundance, and a 
' kind of Clover the Ground. Another Grafs 
1 grows near the Sea, which is of a broader Leaf, fo 
1 lufcious and rank, that it will kill a Horfe that 
' eats of it, but no other Bealt. Eighty Ears of 
( Wheat have been found to fpring from one Root, 
' but grows not very high ; the Corn of this is 
« tranfparent, like the pureft yellow Amber, and 
L 2 one 
220 The Adventures of 
* one Bulhel has brought forth an hundred in a fea- 
* fonable Year. 
4 The Canary Birds which they bring to us in 
* England^ breed in the Baranco** or Gills, which the 
4 Water has fretted away in the Mountains, being 
4 Places very cold. There are alfo Quails, Par- 
4 tridges larger than ours, and exceeding beautiful 
large Wood Pidgeons, Turtles at Spring, Crows, and 
fometimes the Falcons come flying over from the 
Coaft of Barbary. 
* Bees are carried into the Mountains, where they 
profper exceedingly, and there they have wild 
Goats which climb to the very Top of the Pico 
fometimes ; alfo Hogs, and Multitudes of 
Coneys. 
4 Of Fifh, they have the Cherna, a very large and 
excellent Filh, better tailed than any we have in 
England; the Mera, Dolphins, Lobjlers without 
great Claws, Mufcles, Pcriwincles, and the Clacas, 
which is nbfolutely the very beft Shell-Fim in the 
World ; they grow in the Rocks, five or fix 
under one great Shell, through the Top-Holes 
whereof they peep out with their Nibs, from 
whence (the Shells being broken open a little 
more with a Stone) they draw them ; there is 
alfo another Sort oi Fifii like an Ed, which hath 
fix or feven Tails of a Span long, united to one 
Head and Body, which is alfo as fhort ; befides, 
there they have Turtles, and CabriaVs which are 
better than our Trout s. Thelfland is full of Springs 
of frefh Water, tailing like Milk ; which in lak* 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 221 
4 girna, where the Water is not fo clear andlympid, 
4 they cleanfe by percolating it through a Kind of 
* fpungy Stone, cut in Form of a Bafon. The 
* Vines which afford thofe excellent Wines grow 
4 all about the Jfland within a Mile of the Sea; 
4 fuch as are planted farther up are not fo much 
4 elteemed, nor will they thrive in any of the other 
* Iflands. Concerning the Guancbic?% or ancient 
4 Inhabitants he gave this full Account: The 3d of 
4 September y about 12 Years fince, he took his 
* Journey from Guimar, a Town for the moft Part 
4 inhabited by fuch as derive themfelves from 
* the antient Guancbio's y in the Company of 
4 fome of them, to view their Caves, and the 
* Corps buried in them : (a Favour they fel- 
* dom or never permit to any, having the Corps 
4 of their /.nceiiors in great Veneration, and like* 
4 wife being extremely againft any Moleftation of 
4 the Dead) but he had done feveral eleemofynary 
4 Cures among them, for they are very poor (yet 
4 the pooreft think themfelves too good to marry 
4 with the bell Spaniard) which endeared him to 
4 them exceedingly ; otherwife it is Death for any 
* Stranger to vifit thefe Caves and Bodies. The 
4 Corps are fewed up in Goats Skins, with 
1 Thongs of the fame, with very great Curiofity, 
' particularly in the incomparable Exattnefs and 
' Evennefs of the Seams ; and the Skins are made 
1 very clofe and At to the Corps, which are for the 
4 molt Part entire, the Eyes clofed, Hair on their 
L 3 4 Heads, 
222 7'he Adventures of 
4 Heads, Ears, Nofe, Teeth, Lips and Beard, ail 
* perfea, only difcoloured and a little lhrivelled, 
4 likewife the Pudenda of both Sexes. He faw 
* about three or four Hundred in feveral Caves, 
* fome of them ftanding, others lying upon Beds of 
* Wood, fo hardened by an Art they had (which 
* the Spaniards call Curay> to cure a Piece of Wood) 
* that no Iron can pierce or hurt it. Thefe Bodies 
* are very light, as if made of Straw, and in fome 
* broken Bodies he obferved the Nerves and Ten- 
* dons, and alfo the Spring of the Veins and Ar- 
* teries very diAin&ly. By the Relation of the 
* moft ancient of this Ifland, they had a particular 
* Tribe that had this Art only among themfelves, 
* and kept as a Thing facred, and not to be com- 
* municated to the Vulgar; thefe mixt not them- 
* felves with the reft of the Inhabitants, nor mar- 
* ried out of their own Tribe, and were alfo their 
* Priefts and Miniiters of Religion. But when the 
* Spaniards conquered the Place, moft of them were 
* deftroyed, and the Art periGied with them, only 
* they held fome Traditions yet of a few Ingredi- 
* ents that were ufed in this Bufinefs ; they took 
* Butter (fome fay they mixed Bear's-greafe with it) 
* which they kept for that Purpofe in the Skins ; 
* wherein they boiled certain Herbs, firft a Kind of 
' wild Lavendar, which grows there in great 
' Quantities upon the Rocks ; fecondly, an Herb 
* called Lara, of a very gummy and glutinous Con- 
« fiftence, which now grows there under the Tops 
< of 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 223 
* of the Mountains ; thirdly, a kind of Cyclamen* 
* or Sow-bread \ fourthly, wild Sage, which grows 
* plentifully upon this Ifland ; thefe with others, 
* bruifed and boiled up with Butter, rendered it a 
* perfeft Balfam ; this prepared, they firfl unbowei 
* the Corps (and in the poorer Sort, to fave 
* Charges, took out the Brains behind) : after the 
4 Body was thus ordered, they had in Readinefs a 
4 Lixivium made of the Bark of Pine-trees, where- 
* with they warned the Body, drying it in the Sun 
' in Summer, and in the Winter in a Stove, this re- 
' peating very often ; afterwards they began their 
* Unttion, both without and within, drying it as 
* before; this they continued till the Balfam had 
9 penetrated into the whole Habit, and the Mufcles 
* in all Parts appeared through the contracted Skin, 
c and the Body become exceeding light ; then they 
4 fewed them up in Goats Skins, as was before 
* mentioned- The Ancients /ay, that they have 
* above twenty Caves of their Kirigs and great Per- 
* fonages, with their whole Families, yet unknown 
* to any but themfelves, and which they will never 
* difcover. Laftly he fays, that Bodies are found in the 
* Caves of the grand Canaries in Sacks, quite con- 
* fumed, and not as thefe in Teneriff. Antiently 
* when they had no Knowledge of Iron, they made 
* their Lances of Wood, hardened as before men- 
* tioqed. They have earthen Pots fo hard that they 
f cannot be broken. Of theie fome are found in 
1 the Caves, and old Bavances, and ufed by the 
« poorer People that find them to boil Meat in. 
L 4 « Their 
224 The Adventures of 
€ Their Food is Barley parched, and then gronnd 
< with little Stone Mills, and mingled ith Milk 
« and Honey, which they always carry with them 
* in Goats-fkins at their Backs : To this Day they 
* drink no Wine, nor care for Flefh ; they are very 
' ingenious, lean, tall, acYive, and full of Courage, 
c for they leap from Rock to Rock, from a pro- 
* digious Height, till they come to the Bottom, 
4 fometimes making ten Fathoms deep at one Leap, 
* in this Manner : Firft they tertiate their Lances, 
1 which are about the Bignefs of a half Pike, and 
* aim with the Point at any Piece of a Rock, upon 
< which they intend to light, fometimes not half a 
4 Foot broad ; in leaping off they clap their Feet 
* clofe to the Lance, and fo carry their Bodies in 
* the Air; the Point of their Lance comes firft to 
* the Place, which breaks the Force of their Fall ; 
* then they Hide gently down by the Staff, and 
* pitch with their Feet on the very Place they firft 
* defigned, and fo from Rock to Rock, till they 
* come to the Bottom ; but their Novices fometimes 
* break their Necks in the learning. He told alfo 
* (and the fame was very ferioufly confirmed by a 
* Spaniard, and another Canary Merchant there in 
* the Company) that they whiftle fo loud, as to be 
* heard five Miles off, and that to be in the fame 
* Room with them when they whiftle were enough 
* to endanger the breaking the Tympanum of the 
* Ear; and added, that he being in Company of 
1 one that whiftled his loudeft, could not hear per- 
' feftly in 15 Days after; he affirms alfo, that they 
* throw 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 22$ 
4 throw Stones with a Force almoft as great as that 
* of a Bullet; and now ufe Stones in all their 
< Fights as they did antienrly. 
This Account was given to that Ingenious and 
Reverend Divine, Dr. Sprat, Bimop of Rochefter, 
by fome EngUJh Merchants, who had the Curiofity 
to afcend the Pico, one of the higheft Mountains in 
the World; neither could I find him out in any 
Thing, but in the Height; he allows it to be but 
two Miles and a half ; but all the Inhabitants agree 
to make it a full League high. 
Capt. Young and I attempted to afcend it; but 
there was fuch a thick Fog, that we were perfuaded 
to the contrary ; we went up about a Quarter of a 
Mile, but were lb wet with the Fog, that we had not 
a dry Thread about us. 
When we had fatisfied our Curiofities as far as we 
could, we fet fail from Tenerijf and made our Courfe 
for the Weft Indies. We met a Dutch Ship from Ba- 
tumi a that was drove by ill Weather fevera! Degrees 
out of her due Courfe ; we fpared them what Necef- 
faries we could, being they were in great Want, and 
took our Leaves of them. The fame Evening a 
Storm overtook us, and drove us out of our Courfe, 
but in the Night it turned flark calm. The next 
Morning we difcovered a Galley with Turkijh Colours 
out, rowing up to us with all their Strength \ we 
were all furprifed and amazed, and could hardly 
give Credit to our Eyes, as no one on Board us ever 
heard of a Turkijh Galley fo far from their own 
Coaft ; but it feems we were nigher Africk than we 
fuppofed> as it proved afterwards. Our Captain 
L 5 told 
226 Tie Adventures of 
told us we had nothing to do but fight it to the laft y 
for if we were taken, we might be Slaves all our 
Lives long. I advifed our Captain to put out our 
Boat, and tow our Ship from them : For, faid I, if 
a Wind does not rife in the mean Time, that we 
may efcape them, we fhall gain more Time to put 
ourfelves in Readinefs to receive them, when they 
come up with us. This Advice was approved of, 
and the Boat was got out immediately with fix Men 
to row, and I obliged myfelf to go along with her 
to fteer her right, that they might row with all their 
Strength. We rowed Co tightly for an Hour, that 
we made pretty good Way with our Ship ; but for 
all our Endeavours, we found that in about another 
Hour they would get up with us ; but we defigncd 
to row, till they were within a Quarter of a Mile of 
us, and then go into the Ship again. In the mean 
Time our Men on Board had prepaied every Thing, 
and were in good Order to receive them. We had 
fixteen Guns, and forty Men, and Ammunition 
enough. We were preparing to come on Board, 
when we found they were almoft up with us, but our 
Captain advifed me not, and ordered us to have 
Arms in the Boat, with fome Hand-Granado's ; and 
as foon as we fliould fee them engaged, to go to the 
contrary Side of the Enemy, and lire upon them, 
and by that Means we mould amufe them, that they 
would not venture to board us. Immediately it was 
agreed, and two more Men, together with our 
Arms, were put into us. The Galley came up with 
us in an Inllant and hailed us in EngUJb> and bid 
us 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 227 
us flrike our Colours immediately, or it fhould be 
worfe for us, but were anfwered by us with our Can- 
non, inftead of our Voices, and we went to it. 
Now to obey my Orders, I loofed my Tow-Rope, 
rowed to get on the other Side of the Galley, but 
was mightily furprized to find their Boat out, and 
about the Number of twenty Turks getting into her; 
our Men in the Boat advifed immediately, to return, 
tut I told them it was too late, for it would be 
worfe for us if we did : Nay, our Captain called us 
to come on Board, but I thought they would do us 
more Injury in getting up the Ship's Side, than if 
we flood them boldly, which we refolved to do ; 
There were nine of us, and we had Arms enough; 
fo before they could fire at us, we discharged our 
Mufkets at them, and laid ourfelves under the Gun- 
nel of our Boat to charge again : When we were 
prepared, I ordered them not to ftir till the Turks 
had fired ; and as foon as they had done fo, to fee 
Fire to the Fuzee of their Hand-Gravado's, and throw 
them in upon them ; as foon as we heard the Turks 
fire, which did us no Damage, we fet fire to cur 
Hand-Granado\ as agreed upon, and threw them in 
upon them: but they fufpefting fomething, itfeems, 
ordered but half their Number to fire firft, and the 
other half fired upon us fo unluckily, when we rofe 
to difcharge our Granada's, that they killed three of 
my Men out-right, wounded another dangerouily, 
and myfelf in the left Arm. It is true our Grana- 
da's killed them four, and wounded feveral; but 
ftill their Number doubled ours, and now they pre- 
L 6 pared 
228 The Adventures of 
pared to board us. My four Companions and my- 
felf fired upon them with our Pieces, but could not 
prevent them boarding us ; yet we clubbed our 
Mu/kets on both Sides, and fHl to work; but a 
Turk coming behind me while I was engaging with 
another, ftruck the Cock of his Piftol into my 
Skull, and I dropped down for dead; but when I 
came to myfclf, which was not in feveral Hours, as 
I was told, I found myfelf on Eoard the Galley. 
They had ordered aSurgeon to drefs my Wounds, 
which were three; one in my left Arm, that in my 
Skull, and another upon the Side of my Throar, 
which I did not feel in the receiving. I was ordered 
to be taken particular Care of ; for as 1 was not in 
a Sailor's Habit, they thought I was fomething 
above the reft, and therefore hoped to get a confi- 
derable Sum for my Ranfom. The Surgeon that 
drefled me was an Englijb Renegado, whofe Name 
was Matthew. The Captain was an Etrljlxnan too, 
born ztDeptforJ, but the vileft Wretch fure that ever 
breathed. There were feveral other En?l>fb Rene- 
gadoes on Board, moft of them profligate Wretches. 
I underftood from my Surgeon, that the two Vef- 
fels parted after a defperate Engagement, and the 
Turks had about fifty Men killed and wounded : 
Three of my Companions were Prifoners likewife ; 
the fourth being killed in the laft Conflift, and the 
other expired in the Boat with his Wounds. When 
I began to mend, I walked upon Deck, and looked 
about mc a little ; the other three (being well) had 
renounced their Saviour Jefus Chrift ; he who died 
for 
Capt. Richard Falcoker, 229 
for their Sins, and took upon him the State of Man, 
that he might redeem us miferable Sinners from the 
Curfe of the Serpent, What mufl be their Punifh- 
ment, who for a little Eafe in this World, forego 
their Portion of eternal Life? If the Tortures of 
Hell have their Degrees, the laft and greateft muft 
be their Lot. The Captain of the Galley ordered 
me one Day to be brought before him on the Deck, 
where he told me, If I did not in a Twelvemonth 
procure him to the Value of eight hundred Pounds 
for my Ranfom, I fhould be chained to the Oar, 
and be a Slave all my Life ; (it feems one of the 
three that was taken with me, had told him of my 
Abilities, and that I was pefleflfed of a plentiful 
Fortune.) I anfwered, I would fend to England y 
and do my Endeavour to get that Sum; but I told 
him it was more than I was worth, and there was 
no Hopes of fo much Money for my Ranfom, un- 
lefs my Friends would out of Charity contribute 
towards it. 1 added, I believed I could raife a hun- 
dred and fifty, or two hundred Pounds : But he 
ftuck to his Text, and told me, He would bate me 
nothing of that; and when the Time was expired 
that he had fixed, if the Money did not come, I 
fhould never have my Liberty. I told him, I would 
do my Endeavour to procure it for him when we 
came into Port, and had Liberty to write to my 
Friends in England. 
The Captain did defign to cruize a Month longer, 
that he might take fome Prize to make him Amends 
for his lalt Difappointment. He never importuned 
me 
230 The Adventures of 
me to forfake my Religion ; beiog, if I had been as 
vile as the ethers, he would not have had any Hopes 
of my Money to redeem me. We coafted off the 
Shore of Afrkk a Fortnight or three Weeks, but met 
with no Prize; which enraged the Captain very 
much. One Day the Surgecn drefling the Wound 
in my Head, flipt into my Hand a Letter, which 
he bid me read^cautioufly, and give him an Anfwer 
the next Day. I had not an Opportunity for feve- 
ral Hours to read the Contents ; at hit I counter- 
feited a fudden Weaknefs, and retired to my Cab- 
bin, which was in the Place we call the Forecajlle. 
When I laid myfelf down, and found no one was 
near me, I opened my Letter, and read the Con- 
tents to this Effect : 
« 
We whefe Names are fubferihed to this have refolved 
upon a Stratagem for our Liberty , there is fe-ven of us, 
E n gl i fl 1 , be /ides you rjelf ; and i he G ally - Si a z'cs are 
twenty in Number* who ka-ve Notice of the Project. 
One of the Englifh, that has the Keys of the Galley* 
Slaves Chains , is alfo one of our Number. 0:<r Projccl 
mujl be put fpcedily in Execution, being they will go into 
Harbour in ten Days, and then it will be impcj/ible to 
ejfeclit. We will procure Arms, and gi<ve you further 
Notice of the Hour. We mujl not feem to convcrfe toge- 
ther^ neither mujl you take it ill if you find we give you 
ill Language now and then, it being only to infinuaU 
ov.rfd'vcs into the good Efieem of the Turks. When we 
have redeemed the Slaves, we Jhall be twenty-eight in 
Number, which will be a fujficient Strength to cope with 
the 
0 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 231 
the Turks, they beir.g bat forty-one in all. IVe will 
convey Arms into your Cabbin by the Means of Mr* 
Matthews, a,:d we doubt not but we Jhall iff eel our 
Liberty under God* 
Signed, 
Ralph Swaliwood, G:cge Jenkins, 
George Kirky li'illiam A fit on, 
Richard Sloan, Edward Wilkins. 
Anthony Matthews. 
After I had read it, I prayed to God to aid us in 
our Deiign. The next Day Mr. Matthews came to 
drefs me as before ; I gave him to underiland that I had 
read, and confidered the Letter, and told him my 
Opinion was to execute it as fail as ever we could, 
for Fear of any Accident that might happen : For, 
faid I, it is not impoilible but we may meet with 
one of their own Galleys, and then we ihall find it 
to be a fruitlefs Undertaking. Said he, wemuil wait 
a convenient Time ; for if we ihould fail, we muft 
expect the worit of Torments. He went from me 
upon this, being feme of the Turks came to look 
upon my Wound. The Captain a Seed him how my 
Hurts fared? Ah! Damn him, faid he, the Chri- 
ftian Dog will do well enough I warrant him : So 
much the better, anfwered the Captain, for I am 
informed he is worth a great deal of Money, and I 
fhall fet his Ranfom at a higher Rate than what I 
firA determined. All this Difcourfe I heard, being 
upon Deck, talking with my three Companions that 
were 
232 7be Adventures of 
were taken with me, who treated me with ill Lan- 
guage, and called me Chriftian Fool, that would not 
turn Mahometan, when I might have all the Liberty 
I defired. One of them carried the Jell fo far, that 
he gave me two or three good Strokes with his 
Hand; but the Captain feeing them (laughing) Let 
the Fool alone, 'tis not worth your while to foul 
your Fingers about him. I faid fo much to them, 
concerning Mahomet their falfe Prophet, that if the 
Turks had underilood me, I might have run the 
Danger of being murdered. But generally the Re- 
negadoes, (that is, thofe that forfake the Chrittian 
Faith, and turn Turks) have fo little of any Reli- 
gion in them, that they laugh at thofe that have 
any at all. At Night Mr. Matthews told me in 
French very low, that the next Morning early was 
defigned for their Fnterprize, being it was fonie 
Fait -day with them, that they ufually at four 
o'Clock in the Morning rife, and walh themfelves 
all over, and pray to their Prophet for fome Time; 
and this being to be done below, they thought then 
would be the right Time. Accordingly all that 
Night thcy.fpent fecretly in preparing every thing. 
He that commanded the Slaves (which was Jenkins) 
found Fault with them for fomething, and ihaftifed 
them as ufual, but took the Opportunity to unlock 
them all, and ordered them to lie Hill as if their 
Chains were fait, till they hsd Command to do 
otherwife. Every Thing fucceeded to onr Wi flies, 
for the Turks got up to their Devotion kroner than 
we expc&ed, even before it was L: Ju ; and hud- 
dling 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 233 
dling down together, we clapt down the Hatches, 
and fecured the belt Part of them. The Captain, 
with two Engtijhmen, and one Frenchman, were 
feized in the Cabbin, and bound Hands and Feet; 
and this without any Noife. About eight others 
that had not got up as early as the reft, our G alley- 
Slaves feized ; and before we could prevent them, 
had killed them all, and begged they might ferve 
the Captain and the whole Crew in the fame Kind. 
The Buftle the Slaves made in killing the eight 
Turks, rouzed the others below from their Prayers ; 
and when they found they were {hut down, they 
made a Noife, and knocking to be let out, which 
we did ; but firft we loaded a great Gun with Muf- 
ket-fhot, and turned the Muzzle towards the Scut- 
tle. Then as they came up, we bound them ; but 
being but few Englijh* we could not hinder the 
Slaves from killing feveral of thefe too. At laft wc 
bound them all, being twenty-five, there being kil- 
led by the Slaves fixteen, and, afterwards, by the 
Confent and Agreement of all, we chained twenty 
cf them to the Oar in the Room of thofe we had 
releafed ; but they began to be very ftubborn at firft, 
but we put the Slaves to them, and they foon made 
them work, by giving them the fame Ufage as they 
generally ufed to receive from them. 
When we had fecured them, we returned God 
Thanks for our happy Succefs, and then confulted 
which Way we mould fleer. We Englijb agreed to 
go for Englaud) but the Slaves we redeemed, being 
moftly Spaniards and Portugxteze y were for going to 
2 ^4 * 9"^* Adventures of 
Spain ; in ftiort there was no agreeing, for they be- 
ing the greater Number, they pretended to have 
the Commard over us, never cenfidering it was to 
us they chiefly owed their Liberty. I mult confefs I 
was very much difTatisfied at their Ingratitude, but 
could not find any Means to help ourfelves. Mr. 
Matthews (poke to them in Spanijh, and laid before 
them the Benefit it would be for them to go for Eng- 
land \ but it was like preaching to fo many Beafts, 
for they regarded him not, but refolved to follow 
their firft Defign of directing their Courfe for Spain, 
When we found there was no Remedy, we defired 
them to touch at Lijhon in Portugal, and fet us aftiore 
there ; which they confented to with much Intreaty. 
If we had been of an equal Number, we would 
have endeavoured to have forced them with us for 
.England, that they might have repeated their Ingra- 
titude. 
They would not let any of us have the Command 
of the Vdlel, but one Velafqiies a Spaniard was 
chofen Captain, who immediately turned out Mr. 
Matthews, that we had given the Captain's Cabin 
te, and took Poffeffion of it himfelf. This fet us all 
a murmuring, and we confulted to contrive fome 
Way to be even with 'em ; but they were fo watch- 
ful and always upon their Guard, that it was to no 
Purpofe to plot any thing. They ufed to put Cen- 
tinels upon us every Time we went to reft. One 
Night we were awakened out of our Sleep by Or- 
ders from our new Captain Velafqucs ; when we were 
upon Deck, he told us there was a Ship difcovered 
to 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 235 
to Windward of us. Now my Reafon of fending 
for you, faid the Captain,' is, we defign to attack 
her, and make a Prize of her, let her be of what 
Nation ihe will, excepting Spanijb. When Mr. Mat- 
thews had told us in Englijh what he faid, my In- 
dignation rofe that 1 could hardly forbear ruihing 
upon him, and tearing his Throat out; but at laft my 
Reafon conquered my Paffion, and I became calm. 
I bid Mr. Matthews let him know he could not ex- 
peft us to fight, if they were Englijh, our Country- 
men ; But he fworewe fliould fight, or be killed, if 
they were our own Fathers. I bid Mr. Matthews 
teil him, as for my own Part, I would not fight a 
Stroke, let it be what Nation it would ; and for his 
threatening to kill us, I did not know but it would 
be better to die, than to aiTcciate with fuch an un- 
grateful Crew as they were. The Ship now inftead 
of keeping her Courfe, as fiie did at firft, made all 
the Sail (he could, and bore down upon us, which 
they did not mind in our difputing. The Captain 
then began to change his Tone, and thought it the 
wife ft Way to fleer away before the Wind, and en- 
deavoui to get from 'em. Whereupon he crowded 
away, and belaboured the poor Turks with his Baf- 
tinado to row with all their Strength, that I pitied 
them. Looking towards the Ship that purfued us, 
we could perceive Englijh Colours out, which re- 
joiced us Englijh mightily. We now confulted how 
we mould tlop the Galley ; for with failing and row- 
ing we went faller than they. At latt I refolved to 
take a Piltol and ihoot him through the Head, let 
the 
236 The Adventures of 
the Confequence be what it would. So I laid hold 
of one of the Piftols unperceive'd, (they having pre- 
pared their Arms for the Engagement) went up to 
Felafques, and took him by the Throat with my 
left Hand, and holding the Piftol to his Bread with 
my Right, I threatened to moot him dead if he or 
his Men offered to dir. Several of his Companions 
, were running to his Aflifcance, but were flopped 
by Mr. Matthews, telling them if they offered to ftir, 
their Captain was a dead Man. This Buttle caufed 
the Turks to lie upon their Oars, and in the mean 
Tim.- Mr. Sloan brought the Galley to the Wind, 
and lay by, and the Ship got up with us in an In* 
ftant, and without hailing us, poured in a Broad- 
fide upon us, which killed us two of the Turks, and 
five of our Spaniards^ among which was that un- 
grateful Mender Vela/ques f and the Wind of one of 
the Shot threw me down upon Deck without any 
further Hurt ; we had no Colours up at all but the 
Vane upon the Top-mad Head, which (hewed us to 
be a Turkijh Veffel ; I fent up George Kirk to take 
down that, which prevented their firing again ; 
upon this they hailed us : But after we told them we 
were Englijh, they fent immediately two Boats well 
armed on Board us, and when we had fatisfied them 
how it was with us, we feized upon our vile Spa- 
niards, and Portuguefe, and bound them ; we faw it 
was an Englijh Man of War, and upon an Enquiry 
found it was the Ruby, Captain Walton Commander, 
bound after the Fleet for the Weft Indies. They had 
met with Captain Young and his Crew fleering their 
Courfe 
Capt. Richard Falconer* 237 
Courfe for England, being they were fo difabled 
with the Engagement they had with the Galley of 
the Turks that we were in, they duril not hold on 
their Way for the Weft Indies, So the Stores were 
moil of them put on Board the Ruby, and the reft 
were to follow as foon as they could mip them in 
another VefleL Now there were two Men, that 
were Pafiengers in Captain Young's Ship, put on 
Board the Ruby to purfue their Voyage, and they 
feeing the Galley, knew her to be the fame that en- 
gaged with Captain Young in the Tyger, and that 
was the Reafon rhey fired upon us without hailing, 
as is ufual in thofe Cafes. 
I was very glad of an Opportunity to purfue my 
Voyage ; I made my Addrefs to Captain Walton^ 
who very friendly received me ; while we were con- 
fulting what we mould do about our Prifoners, the 
Galley feemed to lie deeper in the Water, and go- - 
ing to examine her, found a Shot had pierced her 
between Wind and Water, but it was impoflible to 
come to it to ftop it ; fo we took what we could out 
of her, and going to unlock the Galley-Slaves 
Chains, the Key, was not to be found, and the Gal- 
ley was finking every Minute, and before we could 
break the Chains lhe funk downright with the 
whole twenty poor unfortunate Turks, and all the 
Spaniards, who being tied, could not help them- 
felves, neither had we Time to give them any Af- 
fiftance. I muft confefs I was very much concerned 
to feeib many poor unfortunate Creatures meet with 
Death 
238 The Adventures of 
Death, when it was in our Power ten Minutes be- 
fore to have faved them. Captain Walton was really 
grieved at it, and fhowed a Temper full of Huma- 
nity. We had juft brought on Board the Captain, 
and two more E?tglift?nen y with. the Frenchmen, Re- 
negadoes. The Captain was fo fullen that he would 
not eat or drink, but intended (as we fuppofed) to 
ftane himfelf to death. Captain Walton ufed all 
gentle Means poffible to bring him into Temper, 
but to no Purpofe, for he would not fo much as give 
any Anfvver to what was afced him ; and in about a 
Week or eight Days after we took him on Board, he 
was found dead in his Hammock : One of the Eng- 
liftmen told us he had po Honed himfelf, for he al- 
ways faid if he was ever taken by the Englift he 
would make away with himfelf, to prevent the Pu- 
nifliment he fhould undergo. The other four Eng- 
lijh?nen that were inftrumental in our Deliverance, 
were all Mahometans in Appearance, as I faid before, 
that is, they foifook their Chriitianity in outward 
Shew, but were really ChrilUans in their Hearts, as 
werelikewife my three Companions that were taken 
in the Boat with me, but as they told me they only 
did it to have fome Opportunity of getting their 
Liberty, and the Words that were ufed, though it 
was in a Speech they did not underrtand perfe&ly, 
flideked them in their Utterance, and they all hoped 
their Peace was made with God for their Crimes, 
with aiincere Penitence from the Moment they had 
committed it. 
Mr. 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 235 
Mr. Matthews the Surgeon, George Jenkins, William 
jf/hton, and Ralph Smallwooa r , were taken in a Ship 
called the Two Brothers of Brijlol, bound for Scent* 
de roon, after an obftinate Fight, where all were 
killed, excepting the abovementioned four, who 
were taken and fold for Slaves, and continued fb 
for fome Years ; but feizing on a Boat with the four 
Frenchmen that did defign to venture for their 
Liberty with them, they put to Sea, and rather 
chofe to truft in the Waves, and an open Boat, 
than ftay there to be Slaves forever. But Hornet 
the Renegado, whofe Chriftian Name was Lewis 
Gordon, having Notice of their Flight, followed 
them with . a fwift Galley, and got Sight of them ; 
Mr, Matthews (who relates the Story in this Manner) 
and his Companions feeing it impoflible to make 
their Efcape, thought of a Stratagem for four of 
them to get the Good-will of the Renegado Hamet; 
which was this: Seeing no Likelihood of getting 
clear off, the four Englijh propofed to the French to 
caft Lots, and that fliould decide which four ftiould 
be bound, and the other four fhould immediately 
jow back, as if they had no Defign of running 
away, and make out their Story as well as they 
could ; accordingly we drew, and the Lots fell 
upon the four frenchmen. Immediately we bound 
them, and rowed back, and were foon met by the 
Galley, where we made our Tale good, by telling 
the Turksy that going a Filhing with the four 
Frenchmen, they would have compelled us by Force 
toJhave rowed with them in their Boat Ui S^m'st; 
bat 
240 The Adventures of 
but we being not willing, fell to grappling with 
them, and overcame them by main Force, tied 
them, and were bringing them back. The French* 
men kept true to their Promife, and never contra- 
cted us in our Story. Hamet upon this became 
very mil to us, and put us in Truft : He made me 
immediately Surgeon to the Galley, Mr. Jenkins 
Mafter of the Slaves, and our two other Companions 
had fome little Office that pleafed them. We went 
feveral Voyages with him, and took many Veflels, 
but never met with any Englijh Ship before the 
7\ger that we had the defperate Engagement with. 
The four Frenchmen were made Slaves to row in 
another Galley, which was taken about two Months 
ago by a Spanijh Man of War, and by that Means 
got their Liberty. 
The other two Englijh?nen y and Frenchman, that 
were taken in the Cabin, confeffed that they had 
been guilty of many Crimes, but more efpecially in 
denying their Saviour, but they now felt in their 
Hearts and Minds a yearning to Repentance, and 
begged that Captain Walton would forgive them, 
and not take their Recantation for a Fallhood, be- 
caufe they were in fome Danger, but a true Light 
of the divine Brightness. Captain Walton freely 
forgave them, and having a Chaplain in the Ship, 
we rechriftened them ; and the Fellows feemed ever 
afterwards to have a true Senfe of their happy 
Condition. Captain Walton and myfelf were God- 
fathers for them all. Therefore it behoved us to 
fee, that they were now inftru&ed in their Faith ; 
though 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 241 
though thefe were of fufficient Years to know their 
Duty without Sureties for them. We have many 
People that undergo that Office, but never confider 
what their Duty is, and, in fhort, make it nothing 
but an outward Ceremony, when if they thought 
of it, as they ought to do, they would find it of the 
utmoft Concern; for the true Office of Sureties, or 
Godfathers, &c. is to train up the young Plant, 
till it is capable of bearing Fruit itfelf of good 
Works. But many now a-days do as the Turtles 
do by their Eggs, lay them, cover them with Sand, 
and never more regard them. 
We came into our old Courfe again, and purfued 
it with Succefs- when we were got into the Lati- 
tude of the Tropick, we ducked our Men as before; 
but there was a great Mutiny of the Sailors: The 
Captain had three Dogs on Board, and they would 
have them ducked as well as themfelves, unlefs he 
would pay the ufual Rate ; which being promifed 
them, they were compofed again, and the Sailors 
and Dogs were reconciled without going together 
by the Ears. 
We overtook an EngUJh VefTel that had fufFered 
much by an Engagement with a Spanifi Pyrate ; fhe 
had loft all her Mafts, but had raifed a Jury-Main- 
Mafl, yet could make but little way, by Reafon of 
her Leaks* Our Captain fent a Boat on Board, and 
gave them all the Affiftance he could ; but finding 
it was but two Days fince the Engagement, we had 
fome Hopes of coming up with her, for we learnt 
from the other Ship Ihe was mightily difabled as 
M well 
24 2 ^ A'DVENf IfRES 
well as themfelves. So we Crowded alt the Sail 
we could ; and though it was in the Night, we 
made the befl: of our way. The Veflel we left, 
faluted us with five Guns to take their Leave, 
which we anfwered with three; and in a quarter of 
an Hour afterwards heard feveral Guns fired now 
and then, as if fome Veflel was in Diftrefs, and in 
an Hour more difcovered a Light, which we made 
direftly towards, and coming up with it, found it 
to be the Spanifi Veflel that had engaged with the 
other EngUJb Ship two Days before ; the Light that 
they made was only a large Lanthorn fixed on their 
Main Top- Mart -Head, that we might the fboner 
perceive them. We immediately hailed them, and 
commanded them to furrender : They readily 
obeyed and begged our Ailiftance, which they had 
creat Need of; for the Water gained upon them 
every Moment, and in an Hour's time the Ship 
funk, but we preferved all the Men, being in 
Number 23. having loll in the Engagement with 
the Englijh Ship 27, and received feveral Shot 
between Wind and Wa-tcr, which they did not 
perceive till they difcovered two Feet Water in the 
Hold, and found no Hopes of being fav^d from the 
mercilefs Enemy the Sea, if we had not fortunately 
for them come timely to their Aihfrance. But to 
a ]by their Joy for their Deliverance from Death, 
they were made Prifoners, and being Pyrates (as wc 
fuppofed) for there was no War declared between 
the two Nations ; -and therefore tbey might very 
probably 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 243 
probably think they were to be punifhed with 
Death when they came on (hore. 
The Ship funk fo fall, that we could fave nothing 
but the Men, which took us up about four Hours, 
and then we purfued our Courfe, and about four in 
the Evening made the Ifland ifor&w&tt ; where we 
fet our Spanijh Prifoners on ihore. Captain Walton 
gave the Governor an Account of what had hap- 
pened, and left it to his Difcretion to do with them 
as he thought fit. 
On June the twenty-third we fet fail for Domi- 
ni co f where we arrived without any Accident. Here 
I went on fhore along with feveral of our Men to 
get Wood and Water for our Ship. The Natives 
feemed very civil- and came on Board us in their 
Canoes, 
Thefe Indians are m oft of them tall, lulty Men, 
well featured and well limbed, but poor Brains, for 
an ordinary Glafs of Rum will make them drunk: 
They mightily like this Liquor, and will call for 
it as foon as ever they come on Board you: They 
wear no Cloaths, but a little Skirt about theirWaill ; 
but moft of them have Pieces of Brafs it* the Form of 
a Three-quarter Moon in their Nofe amLEars* I 
gave one of thefe Indians a Pair of Breeches, and he 
made an Eflay to pot them on in this Manner. He 
firft put his two Arms into the Thighs of the 
Breeches, and defired one of his Companions to 
button the Waiftband about his, Neck 5 but when 
we fhewed him the right Way, and he had put them 
on, he walked as if he had formerly worn Irons, 
M z and 
2 4+ 'The Adventures of 
and was fo uneafy with them that he palled them 
off, and made Signs to have Tome Linnen in Ex- 
change : In Return I gave him a long Cravat, and 
tied it properly about his Neck r But to fee how the 
Fellow ftrutted/one would have taken him for one 
of the Captains of the Trained Bands ready to 
inarch. 
I rambled with thefe Indians feveral Miles up in 
the Country, and faw their Huts, that were digged 
about three Feet deep in the Earth, and then raffed 
about fix Feet high above the Surface, and covered 
with Barks of Trees, and fomecimes divided into 
Apartments by a Couple of long Poles, and Fathers, 
Sons and Daughters, lie promifcuoufly together. 
The Day before we failed, (after we had provid- 
ed ourfelves with Wood and Water) J went up to 
the Indian Huts to exchange a Trifle or two for one 
of their Bows and Arrows ; and leturning towards 
the Ship, by myfelf, loft my way; and though I 
directed my Courfe (as I thought right) I came to 
that Part of the Shore where was no Ship to be found  
but endeavouring to go more Weft along the <SVrW, 
my Way was intercepted by fome high pointed Rocks, 
which I made feveral fruitless EfTays to pafs : I then 
endeavoured to make a Compafs within Land to get 
by the Rocks ; which I did, but could not find the 
Bay where the Ship rode, I was now in a deep Per- 
plexity, and though very much tired, yet refblved 
to look for the Track that would carry me back to 
fom-e of the ; Huts, Where I might get an Indian to , 
.direct me; but there were fo many various ones,' that 
I knew 
Capr # Richard Falconer. 245 
1 knew not which to chufe. At laft I pitched upon 
one that brought me to feveral of them, but not 
thofe from whence I came: I fearched them, but 
could find no Indians in them. I from thence walk- 
ed a little farther, but was furprized with a Sight 
that (hocked me with Horror. Near the Skirt of a 
thick Wood I found one of our Men killed, with art 
Arrow in his Throat ; and by the Pofture he lay in, 
I found it was done when he was eafing Nature. 
The Object fo overcame me, that I thought not on 
my own unhappy Condition, till 1 was awakened 
from my Stupidity by a Noife and Gabbling I heard 
in the Wood on my Right. This put me into a 
terrible Fright, which made me run as far from the 
Noife as I could; fori made no doubt, that if they 
caught me, I mould run the fame Fate with the 
poor unfortunate Fellow, who perhaps might lofe 
his Life by his feeking^me. W'hen I had got a con- 
fiderable Dirtance, I entered the Wood, and ven- 
tared to look out, where I could perceive (though 
it was almoft dark) what they were doing. 
They cut off the poor Fellow's Head, and tore 
out his Bowels in a mod inhuman Manner. Let any 
One judge what my Condi tioiifnuft be; Fm fure my 
Thoughts were fo confuted, that I might juftly fay 
1 never thought at all. I obferved when they had 
done, they carried him between Eight of them upon 
four Staves, and went towards their Tents. When 
they were gone, and I had Leifure for Refleftion, 
every Thought was a Dagger to me; but yet wh6n 
my Senfes were compofed, I put my Truft in God 
M 3 that 
246 The Adventures of 
that he would deliver me from this Danger, as well 
as feveral other immediate ones, which through his 
Mercy I had overcome. 
J crept farther into the Wood to reft my Limbs, 
but^ny Thoughts kept me waking all Night. When 
Day approached I went itill farther into the Wood, 
not only to avoid thofe barbarous Indians, but to fee 
if, when on the .other Side, I could find fome Path 
that vvould-lead me to the Bay where our Ship rode; 
but before I could get out cf it 1 heard a Cannon 
difcharged, that both rejoiced and grieved me ; it 
joyed me to know that the Ship could not be far orT, 
and grieved .me to think that it was certainly the 
. Signal for the Boat to come on Board, and perhaps 
they might be that Moment under fail. I ran with 
. all -the Haft<e I could ; but with a Mind mixed with 
flopc and Eear. J got out of the Wood at laft, and 
I dir-e&ed my -Cowfe to that Part as I thought the 
JvlQifeof the Qun came from, but.cauld find no Path ; 
yet ,at 3 aft £ gat to the Top of j/l Rock from whence 
I could befool^ die Sqi,£fi<sl witfc great G f ief &w aur 
§hip under Sail not -half a League from the Shore. 
I immediately palled off my Shirt, and hung it on a 
Stick I bad broke to fupport me in my Walking ; 
but my Signal did not do me any good, for they faw 
nothing of it. My Pefpair began to be predomi- 
nant ever my Reafon, and I had often refolved to 
throw myfelf down from the Rock to end my Mife- 
ry ; but flill rny Conscience would give me £ fee ret 
Check ; and at laft J refolved with myfelf to fubmit 
to whatever Ihould befall me, with a tliprough Re- 
iignation 
Capt. Richard FaicoweRi 247 
Agnation to the Will of Heaven. As foon as the 
Ship was out of Sight, I went down from the Rock 
(not having Power to ilir before) and endeavoured 
to Sn<i fune Food, but was prevented by a hideous 
Noife 1 heard, , which drove me to Shelter in the 
Wood again; but the farther I weat, the plainer I 
heard the Noife, fo that I knew not what to do, for 
at laft it encreafed on every -Side ; fo that coming to 
a thick Parcel of Shrubs I laid myfelf down, and 
couched fo clofe, that it was irnpoflible for them to 
fee me, unlets they came into the very middle of it. 
I had thrown my Bow and Arrows away, as being 
of no Ufe to me; but I had my Sword, which, how- 
ever, I did not defign to ufe. -The Noife came fo 
nigh me, that I could hear, the Tread of their Feet, 
and the Boughs ruftle about me; but at laft it went 
iofenfibly away, fo that I heard no more of them for 
fome Time. 
When I found all was flill, I began to get up and 
look about me, where I faw them in the Plain en- 
gaged with feveral other Indian's, whpnrl thought 
I knew, though at a good Diftance, I faw feveral 
of them fall upon the Ground. At laft thole Indians 
that went hallooing through the Wood feemed to 
me. to have the worftofit, and were drove by the 
other Party quick back again; but did not purfue 
them any farther, o,nly let fly, the; r Arrows at them ; 
and one of them came among the Shrubs where I 
lay, which ftartled me, for I was afraid they would 
come to look for their Arrows, and fo find me. 
After the Hurlyburly was over, I refolved to go out 
M 4 of 
H% The Adventures of 
of the Wood, and follow thofe IndUins that were 
Vanquishers, with this Hope, That they, might "Be 
of a milder Nature, -itid not fo barbarous as the ci- 
thers who run through' the Wood; who to my think, 
ing had more ftern Looks than thofe Indians I had 
feen upon that Part of the I/land where we ufed to 
land to get Wood and Water. So as l faid, I got 
up, and dire&ed my Courfe'dut of the Wood after 
the 'Indians, but fodrT difeovered two Indian Men, 
and four Women coming towards rhe, (wnich I fup- 
pofe had hid them felves d tiring the late Conflict:) 
It was.to no Purpofe for me ,to fly, for they had got 
Sight of me; or if I had, they would have foon fen t 
one of their winged MefTengers after me ; fo I chofe 
boldly to meet triem. When we were come within 
forty Paces of each other, one of the Indians was 26- 
to 
ing to fhoot at me, but was with-held by one of the 
Women: As foon as ever I came clofe to them, they 
looked upon me with ftrange Geftures, and diftor- 
ted Countenances : I put my Hand to my Head and 
Breaff, which is the Token of Submiftion with the 
Indians; and they let me know by Sfgns that I muft 
go with them, which I did not deny ; for if I had, 
I knew I fhould be forced; fo I went willingly e- 
nough. When we had got through the Wood, one 
of the Indian Men would have my Coat and Waift- 
coat off, which I durft not refufe : The Coat he put 
upon his Companion, and the Waiftcoat on himfejf, 
and ftrutted ftrangely. I gave my Handkerchief 
3nd Neckcloth to the Woman that hindered the In- 
dian from ihooting at me, who received it with a 
great 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 249 
great deal of Joy, and feemed mightily pleafed with 
me. When we arrived at their Huts, there came 
out at leaft a hundred frightful-looking Indians, who 
came about me, and had a great deal of Talk with 
thofe that brought me with them ; but the two Indi- 
ans were forced to part with their Cloaths they had 
taken from me, to two of the oldeft Indians, who 
immediately put them on, and feemed mighty proud 
of themfelves. They gave me fome Rice, and ano- 
ther Sort of Vi&uals boiled ; but what it was com- 
pofed of, I could never learn, neither did I eat any 
of the fame all the while I was among them. When 
Night came, I was fent into a Hut by myk\f } and 
the Door (hut upon me, I had a Piece of Mat to lie 
on, but nothing to cover me. Now I had Leifure 
to refledt upon my Misfortunes, which I could not 
do before, by Reafon of the Fears I was in. I thought 
my Condition was now worfe than ever it was, for I 
really believed they defigned to make a Sacrifice of 
me, for I thought to myfelf they were Cannibals, or 
Men-Eaters. I pafled the Night with a thoufand 
Anxieties and Inquietudes; but nevertbelefs my 
Senfes were fo tired, that I flept whether I would 
or no; and in the Morning was awakened by four 
of the eldeft Indians that came to vifit me, who made 
Signs to me to follow them, which I did without 
any Hefitation; when I was out in the midli of 
the plain Place- before the Doors of their Huts, 
they brought before me feveral of their Women, 
and gave me to know by Signs that I fliould take 
one of them to be my Mate, or Bed-fellow, or fuf- 
M 5 fcr 
2 jo The Adventures of 
fcr Death* \ muft confefs I was mightily mocked, 
but not giving myfelf much Time to weigh, or think 
of the Matter, I pitched upon her that I had given 
my Neckcloth and Handkerchief to, and immedi- 
ately all the reft were difmiffed ; and my Bride and 
I (for it was even fo) were condu&ed to a Hut, 
where there were feveral old Indians waiting for me 
to compleat the Ceremony. When my Bride and I 
came beforp them, we were 
then both our Feet vyerp warned with Water; After 
that they brought us a Piece of their Indian Cake, 
of Bread, of which I was ordered to break off a 
Piece, and give to my Bride. She then came and 
laid her Head on my Breaft; and then, kneeling, 
put my right Foot upon her Neck; when that was 
done, fhe rofe and went out, but immediately re- 
turned, and brought me fome £lcfli broiled on the 
Coals, which fhe tore into Morfcls, and put in my 
Mouth, and ftood before me all the while I eat. I muft 
confefs I was fo hungry, that I h*4 * very good 
Appetite tp my Vi&uals, for I had not eat any Flefli 
for four Days: But I had r,o great Stomach to my 
Bride, although a young wpll-fcatured Woman, 
yet her Complexion di4 apt pleafe me. When I 
had done eating, my Bride Wfl I wer-e puf intq a 
Hut, and tout clqfe withput any Light; but the 
old Proverb, Joan's as good as my Lady in the Dark^ 
had like tq have proved np Prpverh with *ve- In. 
the Morning we were awaked with a rude I^pife 
round our Tent, which ftartled me atfirft; hut I, 
found afterwards it was a fort of Efithalamiuw. 
When 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 25 r 
When they had made their frightful Noife for 
fome Time, they entered promifcuouJfly Men and 
Women. The Men came and took hold of me, and 
the Women of my new Spofcfe, led us out with 
Shouts, unpleafing Noifes, and antick Geftures ; 
They continued it till we came to a River, and 
then we parted ; the Men with me, ;and the Women 
with my Wife. They put me into the River, and 
warned me all over, and I fuppofe the Women did 
as much by my tawny Ri'b. After they had given 
Notice by their Shouts, that they had made an End 
of fcouring me, they put on 'my Shirt and Draw- 
ers again, and led me to the Bank where my Spou'fe 
waited for me with her She-attendants, and we re- 
turned with the fame Noife as we came out. When 
we came to the Huts, the old Indians met us; the 
old Men took me, and the old Women my Wife, 
and gave us an Entertainment feparately, which 
lafted two Hours, according to my Computation ; 
when they had made an End, they fetched us out- 
er our different Tents, and feated us on a Bank 
and*- then danced, and played fuch mad, rude, 
Monkey Gambols, that put me in mind of the mad 
Feafts of the Baahii in Virgil, for they would tear 
their Faces with their Nails, arid fcratch one ano- 
ther fo violently, that one would have thought they 
had been fo many Bcthln?iitcs y and yet all in Mirth; 
for they would laugh luch Horfe-laughs whenever 
any one of them was hurt, they quite ltunned me. 
When this Sport was over, the young Indiam of 
both Sexes took my Bride and I into one of their 
M 6 Huts, 
252 . ' ■ Tif Adventures of 
Huts, and gave us an Entertainment of Fifh broiled 
upqn the Coals,' and a pleafant Liquor, in a Gala~ 
baft, that was exceeding ftrong, which foon got into 
Hioft of their Noddles ; and as faft as they grew a 
little tipfy, they reeled out one by ope, and laid 
themfelves before the Door of the Hut, and went 
to fle^p. My good Wife, among the reft, got her 
Dofe too; but was fo monftroufly loving withal, 
that I could not tell what to do with her. When 
Night came, .we retired to our. Reft as beforehand 
were waked next Morning by another Kind of Noife 
that was made, with rude Knocking at our Door, 
or rather Baflcet, for it was nothing clfe, and five 
or fix ofcthe old Indians came in with Hatchets, and 
other Inflruments, to enable us to get Food for our- 
felves, as I underftood. My Wife took me out by 
the Arm, and carried me into the Wood with our 
Bows and Arrows, and by her Signs gave me to un- 
deiftar.d that me would bring me where I fhould 
kill fome Creature. At laft we came :o the Foot of 
a Hill, which we afcended with fome Difficulty; 
b.ut when we had gained the Summit, we. discovered 
vaft Numbers, or Herds of Goats. My Spoufe 
lhot, and killed one the firftTime; but I was fuch 
a Bungler at it, that I never could do any Execu- 
tion. But my Spoufe was very dexterous, 1 as all the 
Indians are in the Ifland of Dominica. My Wife 
Jeemed to have a great Love fqr me, and would al- 
ways make much of me, her Way. When we had 
fkinncd our Goat, we took out our Implements, 
and made a Five to broil, fome of it. When it >v<is 
seady, 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 253 
ready, I gave my Creator Thanks for providing for 
us poor infignificant Mortals ; and looking towards 
Heaven, the Refiderjce of him th,at formed us all, 
my Wife fixed her Eyes upon me, and then looked 
upwards too, with a Kind of Concern. After we 
had done, I returned Thanks again in the fame 
Manner as before, and my Wife did the fame ; 
that is, fhe flared upwards again as if £he had a 
Mind to fee fomething as fhe thought I looked at : 
And when fhe found fhe could not fee any Thing, 
fhe came to me, and put her Arms tenderly about 
my Neck, and with a Sort of begging Tone, fecm- 
cd to afk me, by Signs and Words, which I could 
not underiland, what I meant by looking upwards. 
I was really grieved to know that I could not make 
her underiland, for I could not learn any of their 
Speech, but here and there a common Word ; nei- 
ther did 1 ever perceive they had any Manner of 
Worfliip to any Thing; otherwife, if I could have 
made her comprehend what I meant, I might have 
found it no hard Matter to have converted her from 
their abominable Heathenifm ; -fop fhe was of a 
mighty mild Nature, very loving and courteous, 
and nothing like the reft of the favage Crew, who 
were prone to all Manner of Wickednefs\ Her 
Voice too, differed from theirs, for moll: of the 
Indians pronounced their Words in their Throat, as 
in.decd.you coulcLnot well fpeak them without a^gu^- 
tural Sound; yetflie, whatever .was theMeaningof it, 
fpoke her Words a different Way from the reft, and 
had a pleafing Manner. I realjy began to love her, 
and 
254 Adventures of 
and only wifhed {he had been my Wife in the ufual 
Forms : She could pronounce any Word in EngUJb 
that I would fay to her, but I could never get her 
to repeat whole Sentences; and all (he did was like 
a Parrot. After we had done our Hunting-work, 
I was for going over the Hill to view the Country, 
and walked up and down a good Way; but I ob- 
ferved my Wife was very uneafy, but efpecially 
when I got to the Brow of the Hill. On the other 
Side, which was about half a League over, I made 
an Effay to go down ; (he laid hold of my Arm, and 
pulled me back with all her Force, and with many 
fupplicating Actions fecmed to beg of me not to 
go ; and when fhe found I was offering at it again, 
fhe fcreamed out fo difmally, that it affrighted me 
from making any more Attempts. 1 endeavoured 
to know what (he meant, but could gather nothing 
from her Words or Actions, that could let me into 
any Thing : But lhe would often handle her Bow 
and An-ows, and with menacing Actions let me 
know there was fome Danger. As we went home- 
ward, this odd Accident' Fan very much in my 
Head, and I was mighty defirous to find out the 
Meaning of it, and every Time I wentto hunt there 
with my Wife, I wanted fadly to get down the Hill 
on the OLher Side. This Hill was of a vaft Lengthy 
and extended from Eaft to South-weft, almoft acrofs 
the lfland. I did 'not krioW how to contriveit, bat 
after hunting I made believe I was very much tired, 
and laid myfelf down' In order to fleep ; and my 
Wife, with' her ufual good Humour, accompanied 
me, 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 255 
me, and in a very little Time I found fhe was in a 
found Sleep. I immediately arofe, and ftole away 
foftly upon my intended Journey, I got away from 
my Wife without her awaking, and came to the 
Brow of the Hill, which I furveyed, and found no 
Difficulty in the defcending. When I had got to 
the Bottom of the Hill, I was mightily pleafed with 
the Evennefs of the Ground, and the Profpecl: round 
me, which I could compare to nothing but the Vale 
of Elham in U^ycefierjbire^ bating the Houfes and 
Towns in it. I had walked up and down the Vale 
for near an Hour, and was preparing to go back 
the fame \\ ay I came, when looking back to take 
my lait Survey, I faw a Smoke at a Diiiance, and 
it ran in my Mind it was the very Place that our 
Men ufed to go to, from on Board, to truck with 
the Inhabitants. The Thought took up fome of 
my Time ; and I believe, if it had not been for a 
tender Regard for my Wife, I had certainly directed 
my Courfe to the Smoke I faw there. But I mud 
confefs, I could not think of leaving her behind me ; 
but .Curiofity put it into my Head to go a little 
nearer the Smoke I had difcovered. But juft as I 
was moving that Way, I heard a dreadful, fcreain- 
ing behind me, and turning about, I faw my Wife 
upon the Brow of the Hill, making. the moil pitiful 
Lamentation imaginable. The tender Regard I 
now began to have for my Wife made me make all 
the Hafte I could to her Relief, as thinking fome 
Mifch^nce might have befel her. When I came to 
the Bottom of the Hill, I fow femal of the Indians 
of 
zr6 The Adventures of 
of our Neighbourhood waiting for me above, and 
fome were coming down. As foon as I had got to 
the Top of the Hill, 1 was immediately feized by 
the Indians above, and dragged along as if I had 
been the greateft Criminal imaginable, and my 
poor Wife hanging upon my Arm all drowned in 
Tears* 1 could not imagine what was the Mattel, 
and what could be the Reafon of their ufing me in 
that Manner. I found it muft be fomething ex- 
traordinary by the Grief of my Wife, whofe Sorrow 
increafed the further I went towards our Huts ; but 
ere we could get there, it rained and thundered fo 
violently, that we were all well wafhcd before we 
came to our Journey's End : When we weie within 
Ken of our Huts, the whole Tribe came near us, 
fome flopping and dancing, as mightily rejoiced ; 
others with the Face of Concern, and hanging their 
Heads in Sign of Sorrow, and mightily lamented 
over my Wife. After the old Indians had confulted 
fome Time, they tied me to a withered Tree that 
flood at the Mouth of the Huts; then I began to 
unde'riland what they meant, for I could perceive 
they were bringing Boughs of green Wood, in or- 
der to bum me, . This Sight made my Courage fail 
me, and.it was impoffible to exprefs my Defpair 
and Horror. I'found now that the laft Day of my 
Life was come, (for it was impoffible to forefee any 
Thing to the -contrary). My laft Recourfe was to 
the Maker and Giver of all good Things, for I had 
tried all Other Means in 1 vain ; as alfo had my poor 
Wife,' whofe Rage and Defpair overcame her; and* 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 257 
fhe was carried away by the Women in the utmoft 
Agony. After my Wife was gone, they fet Fire to 
the Wood which enclofed me; which being green 
and wet with the late Rain, was a great while in 
burning; all the while it was a kindling, fome of 
the Indians jumped round me, and danced after 
their barbarous Manner, while others flood ready 
with their Bows and Arrows to fhoot at me (as I 
fuppofed) if the Fire rtiould burn the Bands that 
tied me, and I fhould offer to ran away. The Wood 
being green (as I faid before) was very flubborn 
in kindling,- which made the Apprehenfion more 
dreadful : I made feveral Effays to break the Bands 
that held me,' but all my Efforts were but in vain ; 
and I obferved every Time I made my fruitlefs En- 
deavours, the barbarous Crew Ihoiited and laughed 
for Joy. The Fire increafing, 'I prayed to Almighty 
God to give me Strength to bear the horrid Pain I 
was going to fufFer ; and, if it was poffible, to go 
out of the World with the Patience and Fortitude 
of a good Chriftiari, who was only going to change 
this troublefome Life for a better. Icompared my- 
felf to a wounded Perfon, that mult bear probing of 
his Hurts, in order to cure them. 
I no*v had given myfelf up entirely to my 
Thoughts of the other World ; and this feemed to 
me like abandoning a barren Ifland, in order to go 
to one where was Plenty of every Thing. But 
before the Fire reached me, there fell fuch a pio- 
digious Shower of Rain, mixed with Thunder and 
Lightning, that extinguifhed it. The Storm lafted 
for 
258 The Adventures of 
for feveral Hours with the utmoft Violence, and I 
remained ftill tied to a Tree. When the Storm was 
over, they began to renew their Fire, and brought 
the Wood nearer than before, it being at firft half a 
Yard from my Body all ro-und, but now they piled 
it clofe to me, that the Fire might the fooner be my 
Executioner, which I wiftied for, as knowing it 
would put me to a fpeedier Death. But before they 
had well placed the Wood, they heard Shouts, and 
Noifes in the adjacent Woods ; upon which the /»- 
dians immediately ran away from me, and took to 
their Arms in an Inftant, old and young. The 
Noife came nearer, and nearer ftill, till at laft I 
could perceive feveral Indians bolt out of the Wood, 
who were met by our Indians^ and a bloody Fight 
enfued. The Enemy Indians feemed to have the 
beft on it, by Reafop of fome Fire Arms that they 
had, with which they made ftrange Havock with 
our Indians ; the Battle continued for fome Hours 
with a great deal of Heat, and many of our 
dians fell. At laft the Enemy Indians drove ours, 
ever* beyond the Huts, and I could only bear the 
Noife they made, fpr J was ftill fattened to the 
Tree. The Fight continued out of Sight about 
half an Hour, when my Wife came running with 
all the Tranfports of Joy imaginable ,* and after 
having put her Head under my Feet fhe untied me, 
and fell upon me with all the Signs of a fin cere 
Love. I muft confefs I was mightily rejoiced to 
fee rnyfelf at Liberty, and let what would happen, 
my Condition could not be worfc than it was fome 
Hours 
Capt. Richard Falconer. *59 
Hours ago. I could not forbear exprefling my 
Love to my Wife by Kifles and Embraces. We 
went to our Hut, and I took my Sword that had 
been laid up from my firft being amongft them, I 
was going out of my Tent in order to go with my 
Wife to fome other Part of the Ifland, that w.as 
not known to thefe Indians : But juft as we came 
among the Tents, three Indians met us that had run 
away from the Fight (as I conjedured). As foon as 
they faw nie and my Wife, they came up with a 
great deal of ill Nature in their Countenances ; and 
after fome Talk with my Wife, one of xhem with 
his wooden Sword, went to make a Blow at me ; 
but my Wife interpofing, received the- Blow upon 
her Head, which ftruck her to the Ground, bloody 
and fenfclefs. My Rage rofe fo high upon this, 
that I could not contain myfelf ; but I drew my 
Sword, and thx.uft it up to the Hilt in the Wretch's 
Body ; the other two feeing their Companion's 
Death, ran upon me with the Rage of Lions, but I 
flipping on one Side, avoided the Strokes intended 
me; They turned immediateJy upon me, and let 
drive at me feverai Blows, which had the good 
Fortune not to hit me; but I run ope of them into 
the Throat with my Sword ; upon which he fet up 
fuch a Cry that frightned me, and ran away, and 
was immediately followed by the other. 1 then ran 
to the Affiiiance of my Wife, wholayalmoft ftrangled 
in her. own Blood. I raifed. her from the Earth, 
and feated her under the Tiee where I was tied, 
and 
260 The Adventures of 
and brought her to herfelf a little; but I found her 
Skull was cracked with the Blow the Indian gave 
her, and to my great Grief perceived fhe was jult 
expiring. But the Sorrow and Tenderncfs to part 
with me, (as I judged by her Aftions) ftruck me 
to the Soul. She laid one Arm about my Waifr, 
and her Head in my Lap, but with fuch piteous 
Looks with her Eyes that almoft diftrafted me. 
She made Signs to me to look upwards (as I fan- 
cied) to pray f<?r her, though I could not tell for 
certain what (he meant; but fhe pronounced feveral 
Word? with Earneftnefs and Paflion ; arid I really 
fancied, if we could have underrtood one another, 
I fhould have found "ihe would have had fome 
Notions of a fupreme Being. Before ihe expired, 
the Enemy Indians retained \tfith all of our Indians 
Prifoners; I mean all that they had not killed; for 
out of two hundred Indians of our Party, there was 
not above twenty- two left. They were mightily 
furprifed to find me, for many of the Enemy Indians 
knew me ; and when I came to examine their Faces, 
I remembered they were the Indians that inhabited 
about the Bay where our Ship lay. One or two of 
them could fpeak a little Englijh*, which they learned 
by conve ling with the Englijh that ufually an- 
chored in the Bay. One of them knew my Name, 
that he had gathered from our Sailors enquiring for 
me, when fent by the Captain before the Ship 
failed. Mafter Falconer y faid he, me be glad to fee 
you ; white Men belong to great Ships come look 
for you very great, and not look you here go away 
,much forry. My Wife took up all my Thoughts, 
who 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 261 
who was juft dying; and though her Strength and 
Speech failed her, yet me endeavoured to pull 
down my-Face to hers, which me kitted; and then . 
funk her Head into my Bofom and expired. I was 
really as much concerned as if! had married one of 
my own Complexion and Country ; for I had great 
Hopes, if ever I could have made my Efcape with 
her, and could but have taught her EngLjb, to have 
made her a good Chriuian. With the Aililtance of 
my now friendly Indians* I laid her in the Earth ; 
They told me /he was Daughter to one of the 
Chief of their Enemy-Tribe. From the/e Indians I 
learned, that thofe I had fell among were a Tribe 
of Indians that had lived on this Side the Ridge of 
Mountains for many Years, and declared open War 
with thofe of the other Side for holding Correfpon- 
dence with /TZv/<?/ ; and where fo ftria, that they 
put all Indians to Death that ever attempted fingly 
to go o,ver the Mountains, which was the Reafon 
of my Danger of burning. The Women that they 
took, (all that were with Child) were (hot to 
Death, and the Men in general ran the fame Fate ; 
for they were refolved not to have any one of the 
Breed alive. When they plundered the Huts, they 
went through the Woods, and over the Mountains 
again, and fo to their own Huts, which I knew. 
The old Men and Women met them, fkipping and 
dancing for Joy of their Succefs, and fome mourn- 
ing for a Huftand, Brother, or Father, that was 
flain in Battle. Thefe friendly Indians were often 
plagued with their fudden ruining upon- them, and 
deftroying 
262 The Adventures of 
deftroying many of them, till at laft they took up a 
Refolution to affault them, and if poflible to ex- 
tirpate the whole Race ; and they had often made 
Inroads upon them, which leflened their Number 
till this laft ended them, as I faid before. The 
Women and female Children dwelt contentedly 
among them, being they had no where to go. I 
began to live contentedly among thefe Indians, and 
ufed to partake of their Diverfion and Labour; 
as, Hunting and Fifhing, &c Thefe Indians were 
fo expeit in mooting with their Bows and Arrows, 
that I have feen them hit the Mark three hundred 
Yards, within the Compafs of a half Crown . 
This Ifland of Dotnlnico took its Name from its 
being difeovered on a Sunday. It is computed to 
be in Length about thirty Leagues, and about 
twenty eight- in Breadth. It is very mountainous, 
efpecially to the North- Eaft. I have heard there 
are fome Fre?icb Settlements upon the Ifland; but I 
enquired of the above mentioned Indian, who 
afTured me there were not any Inhabitants but Na- 
tives, and of thofe not above an hundred Families, 
who were moftly feated near that Part that com- 
pofed the Harbour. Said the Indian that I ufed to 
talk with, there be fome indeed a great Way off in 
de Ifland, dat are our Fathers and Mothers; and 
fome of our Wives, that when dcy die we throw 
into the Sea, and dey fwim to dat place ; and when 
we die we fwim dere too. By this we might per- 
ceive they had fome Notion of the Immortality of 
the Soul, I did my Endeavour to make him fenfi- 
blc 
Capt. Rich aru FalcotIer. 263 
ble of the Joys of Heaven, and Pains of Hell, but 
to no Purpofe. I told him of a fuperior Being; that 
commanded all Things below, and that righteous 
People dwelt with him after this Life. He aflced, 
where my God did live ? His Throne is in Heaven, 
anftvered I, pointing upward, where he fits to 
judge the Quick and Dead. He live up dare, 
high ; how you get up high, no Steps reach dare ? 
It is our immortal Part, added 1, that afcends, our 
Soul, which is c'oathed with the Grace of our 
Divine Creator, and enjoys an Eternity of Bleifings. 
You be de White Mm, you have Soul ; wc be no 
White* we have no Soul; when we die, we fling in 
Water, big Fifh come carry us to an odcrPlace, den 
we live dare and die again, and Firh bring us upon 
Back to an oder Place. How are you a/lured of 
this (faid I?) Have you ever feen any that have 
been tranfpofted in the Manner you tell me of? No 
(anfwered he); but me be fure it be fo. But when" 
we were carried by Fifti to that oder Place, we eat 
de Leaf of Tree, d'at we can no remember what 
we do in toter Place, dat we be bring from. All 
the Arguments P could ufe were of no Effect ; for * 
Heath-enifm was fo rooted in him, and all the 
Mans, that it will be the greater!: Difficulty ima- 
ginable to bring them to embrace Chriftianity. 
Their Underftandings are fo infirm, that without a 
Miracle there will be no curing them. The Indians 
would have had me married into one of their Tribe; 
and I; fearful to deny them, brought myfelf off by ' 
faying no 'White couhi marry under twelve Mocms 
after 
264 ¥t>e Adventures©/* 
after their Wife's Death ; with which they feemed 
fatisfied, but made me promife when that Time 
was expired to change my Condition of Widower to 
that of Mirried Man. I might have been ac- 
commodated with a She-Companion if I had found 
any Inclination, but I evaded it as well as I could. 
The Soil of the lfiand is very fruitful, and there's 
Plenty of evcrv Thing. 
I could not perceive that thefe Indians worfhipped 
any Thing except the Moon : Which when at full, 
they would all gather together, and, locking up- 
v*a.ds, (land, gazing a corfiderable time, and then 
with one Confent pronounce a Word which founded 
like Hiu! This Word they generally repeated three 
Times. When they had done Star -gazing they 
would fall to Jumping and Capering like fo many 
mad Thing?. When that was over, they would 
retire to their feveral Huts, and not ftir out till 
Morning upon any Account. 
I aiked Will (for that was the Name of him that 
could fpeak Eugli/b, who was mighty proud, to be 
called fo) what Ceremony was it they performed 
after they were retired into their Huts ? But he an- 
fwered, Me 710 Jell dat, Wife make much Noije, fce no 
care for aat ; when you have new Wife, you know what 
ave do, but me no tell till den* What gave me a Curi- 
oiiiy to know, was, Will told me, that after the 
Ceremony was over, I mufl not offer to come out of 
my Hut, nor come nigh any of theirs ; for if I did 
they would kill me. The Hut that was built for, 
me was ordered in another Manner than their own, 
with 
Capt. Richard Falconer, 265 
with a high Door made of Wickets, their's being 
Jfo low, that an ordinary fized Man mull have 
flooped to go in or out. 
I ufed to go to fifli in their Canoes with them, 
where they would catch good Store ; and Jet it be 
what it would, the Cargo was divided among the 
whole Tribe, only he that caught them chofe nrih 
I told Willy that as foon as ever a Ship arrived 
there, I did defign to embark in her, in order to 
purfue my Voyage : But he told me I mud take 
care not to let any other of the Indians know it, for 
they would never fufFer any one to go from them, 
after they had been once fettled among them. 
How do you know that, fa id I ? Have you had 
any Talk with them concerning me? He told me 
he had not, but it was their Way: For he gave me 
to underiland, that about fix Years ago there were 
four Men left on Shore upon their 1/land, by 
Reafon of their VefTei driving out to Sea by a 
Hurricane ; and thefe four Men fettled among them, 
and married Indian Wives, and had Children by 
them. But at any Tjme when a Ship came into 
the Bay, they were hurried a great Way up in the 
Country, and detained there till the Ships were 
gone, and then lived with them as before. But a 
imaU Vcffc! putting in there by Night, the ZV 
glijtmun fpied it, before any of the Indian, and 
were got to the Shore-fide, conrerfiag with the 
Crew of the Vcflel before the Indian found them 
out ; but v.iieN they faw them talking together, they 
were mi^U.Ay enraged. The four Men weat.on 
Board the VeiTel to make merry with their Coun- 
N try men 
266 The Adventures cf 
trymen, and afterwards came on Shore again and 
made it no Secret that they defigned to go on Board 
that VefTel in order to go to their own Country. 
The Indians took no Notice for the prefent : But the 
Day they defigned to em bark, they fet upon the Vefi'ei 
with their Canoes, and kiJled every Perfon on Board 
it. When they had done that, they touk as ms.iy 
Things out of her as they had Occafion for, and lot 
her adrift* He told me that the four Lnglijkmcn 
were the firft that taught them to ufe Fire-Arms, 
and in the Ship they took, they hid feveral 
Mulktcs and Quantities of Powder and Shot. But 
carrying the Powder to their Huts, a Boy met 
them fmoakin* in a Care, they calJ a fmoakin^ 
Cane, and by 1 me Accideut the Fire caught hold 
of the Powder ana Mew it up, vuth the Death of 
eight Indians, and wounding feveral others. After 
they had brought every Thrrig up to their Huts, 
they took the Wives of the four Sailors, (the In- 
dians with their Chiidien) and fhet them to Death 
with Arrows. This is the Senfe of the Story In- 
dian Will told me, which was pretty hard to pick 
out too, confidering his Manner of telling it. The 
Relation made me very upcafy, yet put me upon 
thinking to /hake my Efcape the firft Opportunity. 
I waited a full Mouth before I could fee any Vefll!, 
but at lait one came into the Harbour. I perceived 
they came in order to get Wood by hoifting out 
their Long Boat ; but as I was obfervim. :hem I 
was fcized by feveral Indians, and carried at leail 
fix Miles up in the Country, in order to be fecured 
till 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 267 
till the Ship was gone. I began to defpair now of 
ever getting away, being it was natural to fuppofe, 
that they would be more watchful over me for the 
future. Be/ides, I did not know but they would 
ufe me after another manner, and not let me have 
fo much Liberty as I had before. I wanted for 
nothing in my Confinement, and was only guarded 
by four Indiaiu that went to fleep when I did. I 
once thought I might make my Efcape whilil they 
flept ; but afterwards repented that Thought, in 
knowing if they lhould chance to wake, I was cer- 
tainly a dead Man ; for Indian Will told me, as I 
was carrying away, that the Indians had Orders to 
fhoot me if I offered to make my Efcape : Befides, 
I fhould have found it difficult enough to have 
known my Way, efpecially in the Dark ; for they 
carried me a Place that I had never been at before. 
I had been here four Days, and had given over all 
Hopes of my Liberty, and began to call together 
my fcattered Thoughts, that were fluflcred upon 
that Occafion ; when, on the fourth Day about 
Noon, I was agreeably furprized, and wifhed they 
might come to the Place where I was. I was not 
iong in expecting them ; for one of them fpying the 
Hut, where I was, called out to the others to come 
along; for here's an Indian's Hut, faid he ; we'll 
go in it, and fee what they'll give us. With that 
they immediately came in before two of my Indian 
could hide me, (the other two being gone in the 
Morning to the Village) : as foon as everl favvthem, 
though Strangers, I could not forbear mowing mv 
N 2 Tranfports 
263 The Adventures of 
Tranfports at the Sight of my Countrymen. They 
were mightily furprifed to fee n»c ; and when I told 
them my Condition, they faid they would have me 
alone. 'With them in Spite of their Teeth : But I told 
them that was very dangerous ; for if thefc Indians 
ihould raife the Village (that lay within a Mile of 
the Shore) we fhould all lofe our Lives* Some ad- 
viled to knock them on the Kcad ; but I could not 
agree to that, for thefe were Indians that had never 
injured me. Two of my Countrymen had got a 
Couple of Spaw Water Flafks filled with Rum, 
upon the Sight of which a Thought came into my 
Head, that feemed the mofl likely to ctmpafc my 
Defign. 1 told my Countrymen, if wc couid make 
the Indians drunk there might be fomc Hopec of 
getting off without either hurting them or endan- 
gering ourU K es. We diank to one another, and 
the Indians did us Ju/\ ice in pledging us; for I 
belic\e out of the two Flaflcs they diank one and 
three quarters. It foon began to work with them, 
and they got up and fell a dancing moil madly, 
and a while after diopt down drunk ; we refolved 
to t'.e them Hands and Feet, that if they awaked, 
they might not follow us, and raife the whole Body 
of lad.am upon us. With the Help of our Gariers 
we tied them fall enough without waking them, 
and made the bell of our Way towards the Sea- fide. 
' AH the Danger we ran was iu meeting with any of 
the other ImHsms, but wc happily avoided them, 
and came to the Place where the Boat lay. The 
Slr.p was roady to fail, having got their Wood and 
Water 
Capf. Richard Falconer. 269 
Water aboarU; and thefe eight Men were thole 
that had been labouring hard in cutting Wood, £sfr. 
and fo were refolved to go up the Country to view 
it, never having been farther than the Place where 
they felled the Trees, and happily for me came to 
give me my Liberty under Province. As we 
were getting into the Boat to go on Eoa.d (the Ship 
having made a Waft in her Ancient) Indian Will 
came running down almoft out of Breath, and 
cried, get quick in Ship, they come down prefentlv 
kill all, me go wid you, dey kill me elie for tell 
you. We hurried away, and Indian Will with us, 
and got on Board in very good Time ; for before we 
were well under Sail, wecoulJ perceive at Icall two 
hundred Indians bringing their Canoes them. 
We had a brifk Gale, fo that they could not well 
overtake us ; for they never go above two Leagues 
from Shore. Neverthelefs they put their Canoes 
into the Water, and began to paddle after us. 
The Captain was for firing at them with our gre.n 
Guns, but I perfuaded him againit it, by telling 
him it might be worfe for other Engl-jh VeiTeU that- 
fliould come after us; and as they could not over- 
take us to do us any Damage, it was bell not ta 
take any Notice of them. When we had loir Sight 
of Dominico* I afked Indian Will the Reafon of their 
endeavouring to detain all Whites i n that clandeiline 
Manner; and he gave me to know, that they 
feared if the Whites llio-ald- know the Smallnefs of 
their Number, that they would put them all to 
Death, and fcize upon the whole Ifland^ The 
N 3 , Ship 
270 The Adventures of 
Ship that took us up was called the Twins from 
Carolina, Captain Fuller Commander; fhe came 
then from Barbadoes, and was bound for Jamaica. 
I took Indian Will as my Servant, and did defign to 
give him fome Cloatbs, as foon as we arrived at 
Jamaica ; but for the prcfent I had none for rnyfelf, 
*nd made but an odd Sort of a Figure. My Beard 
was pretty long, and being fomething inclining 
to red, looked but oddly : My Linnen was all gone, 
fo that my whole Drefs confided of a Hat, a Waift- 
coat, a Pair of Breeches, and a Pair of Shoes, the 
Captain was fo kind as to lend me a Shirt and a Pair 
of Stockings, and I got my Beard off, and once more 
looked like a Chriftian. We made Jamaica without 
meeting with any Thing material, and found the 
Fleet at Anchor. I went on Board the Admiral, 
and paid my Refpe&s to him, which he took very 
kindly. 1 there once more met with my Friend 
Kir. Mnfgra<ve, and the reft of my Companions who 
had given me over for loft ; for Captain Walton told 
the Admiral and my Comrades, that I was certainly 
murdered by the Indians. I had all my Things re- 
ftoied me, that were brought in the Albion Frigate, 
that arrived about a Week before me with the Stores 
of the Fleet, after fhe had been in the Dock at 
mouth and well mended. She alfo brought News of 
War being declared between England and France, 
and the Death of his Sacred Majefty King William 
the Third, of Glorious Memory, and the Coronation 
of her Majefty Queen Jnm. July the nth 1702, 
the whole Fleet fet out from Jamaica, in order for 
a Defcent upon St. Dominico, as was fuppofed ; but 
Things 
Capt. Richard Falconer. . 271 
Things not anfvvering, the Admiral, in the Breda* 
Captain Fog, with fix other Men of War, <r/~. De- 
fiance > Cap twain Kirby ; Greenwich, Captain Wade ; 
Wind/or, Captain Confiable ; Ruby , Captain I -Fait 'on ; 
Falmtuth, Captain Vincent ; and Pendcnnu, Captain 
Hud/on, went in Queft of Monfieur Du Cafife, the 
French Commodore, that was defigned for America 
with Ammunition, Forces, Provifion, and Money 
to pay the Garrifon, befides feveral Governors to 
be put in the Room of others that were called back* 
We directed our Courfe to Port Longoan, where Du 
Cojjc was expedted every Day : But when we came 
there we were informed that Du Cajfe was failed for 
Carthagcna, upon which we directed our Courfe for 
that Place, after having taken three Ships, one of 
iixteen, another of thirty, called Heine de Angeles, or 
the Queen of Angels, and another of fix Guns 
richly laden, befides three Barks taken by Captain 
Confiable, in the Wind/or, and a fourth funk ; like- 
wife a French Man of War of forty Guns burnt. 
On the 19/A of Augufi, O. S. about ten in the 
Morning, we difcovered ten Sail to the Eaftward of 
us, which we bore up to, and found them to be the 
Fleet we were in Quell: of ; though there were ten 
Sail, yet there were but fix righting Ships, the reft 
were Store-Ships which made the beft of their Way; 
fo when the Admiral came up with them we had but 
fix to engage. The Line of Battle was formed about 
Three in the Aftemeou, the Defiance led the Van, 
the Wind/or the fecoud, and Btmbow in the Breda the 
third. Tliefe three kept pretty clofc together, but 
N4 the- 
2?2 *fhe Adventures cf 
the other four were a League behind. At four in 
the Afternoon we began the Engagement, but the 
Defiance after firing three Guns bore away to Lee- 
ward, and lay there out of Gun-fliot all the Evening, 
fo that the whole Strength of the French Fleet lay 
♦ upon the Admiral and the Wind/or till it was dark. 
1 n the Night the Wind/or fell foul of our Ship, which 
flarded a great many, that were not upon Deck, as 
believing it might be a French Fireihip, though 
we knew they had not one in the Fleet ; but Fear, 
as well as Paffion blinds our Reafon. The Wind 
chopped about in the Night, fo that we had the 
Weather- gage of them ; upon which we bore down 
upon them, and engaged for three Hours; but the 
Jtufy 9 Captain Walton, was difabled, and ordered 
by the Admiral to make for Port+RoyaL My Man 
Indian Will, who was on Board, drefied like an Eu- 
ropean, was terribly frighred with the Noife of our 
Guns ; and every Time he faw the Flam, of our Ene- 
my's Cannon, he would fquat down upon the Deck, 
and lye flat upon his Belly for feme Time; one of 
our Men that was fliot in the Guts lay expiring, and 
Indian Will was getting away on t of Danger, he faid, 
but unfortunately Humbled over the dying Man, 
who in the Pangs of Death grafped Will fo fall, 
that he cried out luilily for Help ; but it was more 
than' I could do unclench his Hand till he was 
quite dead, and then we releafcd poor Will, frigh- 
ted out of his Wits, who could not be prevailed 
upon to come upon Deck any more till we told him 
we had done Fighting. Yv'c took one Ship from 
the 
Capt* Richard Falconer. 27J 
the French* that they had taken from the Englijh in 
their Voyage. The Fight lafted fix Days, on and- 
off; but the Admiral being wounded in the Thigh, 
and finding that Wade* Kirby, and Hudfon, did not 
care for fighting, we left them, after difabling two 
of their Ships, and dire&ed our Courfe back to 
Port-RoyaL As foon as we arrived there, the Ad- 
miral fent Orders to confine Captain Conftable, Wade,  
Kirby, and Hudfon> and fummoned a Court Marflial, 
tried them, and found' 'them guilty of Cowardice, 
excluding Conftabk ; and accordingly the other three 
were fent to England ' to receive Sentence of Death, 
which was executed upon two of them. The third,  
Captain Hud/on, died in the Voyage, and fo prevent- 
ed an ignominious Death. How eafy it had been 
for the Englijh to have , taken the French, if they " 
had been unanimous ; but fuch an Inftance of Pusil- 
lanimity is not to be found in the -Records -of the * 
Navy. 
December the i^th, 1702, we were all concerned at : 
the News of Admiral Eembo-w's Death, who died 
of the Wound in his Thigh that he received in the ' 
Engagement with Monfieur Du Cajfe, lamented by 
all. I obfeved there was a perfect Groan in every " 
Ship in the Fleet,- when the Admiral Fiag was low- 
ered with a Whiff, - which is the Cuitom at Sea. He  
was buried at Kujgst&ivn,. where he died. He had " 
feveral rich Plantations in Jajnaica* and many Slaves. 
He had made five fuccefsfuj Voyages' to Jamaica 
and returned home laden with Wealth and Honour j ; 
but the fixth proved fatal to him. He- had a perfed - 
N.5 . Knowledge .* 
274 Adventures of 
Knowledge in the Navigation of America, having 
been feveral Years Captain of a Privateer there. He 
was a Man beloved of both Officers and common 
Sailors; a Perfon of true Courage, and Fortitude: 
for when he 'was wounded in the Engagement, he 
Ordered the Carpenters to make him a Cradle, that 
he might be upon Deck to give Orders. Nothing 
went more near his Heart than this unfortunate Ex- 
pedition ; and the Surgeons reported, that the Grief 
he conceived from it, hindered the Healing of his 
Wound, which was given with a Mufket-Ball, and 
not a Chain Shot, as has been reported in our Pub- 
lick Papers. Admiral Martin, as being the elded 
Officer, fupplied his Place till Admiral Whet Jl one 
arrived in the Boyne* My very good Friend Captain 
Hercules Mitchell, Captain of the Stromlolo Fireihip, 
was made Captain of the Windjhr ; and Admiral 
Bembmo being dead, I removed myfeif, with Capt. 
fog's Leave into his Ship. The Fleet fet Sail with 
the Merchant Ships for E .gland, March the Bth y 
1703, and met with nothing worthy of Note. 
On May the we entered St. John's Harbour 
in Newfoundland^ and flayed there till May the izth, 
then fet Sail for the Bay of Bulls, a convenient 
Harbour for Wood and Water in the fame ifland. 
After we had provided every Thing we wanted there, 
ve weighed Anchor in order to fail for Enghvtd. In 
weighing our beit B.ow:r (an Anchor fo called) the 
Nippers giving Way, the Capftorn-Bars killed us 
three Men and broke the Back of a fourth, who died 
in a. Week after* 
Capt. Richard Falconer. 27^ 
November the 1 ft, we were feparated from the Fleet 
by a dreadful Storm, that threw all our Mafts by 
the Board, and our Boltfprit was alfo fprung, but 
we iifhed that which preserved it. We were in a 
very pitiful Condition, and I am furein great Dan- 
ger, for I really heard fome of the Sailors at their 
Prayers. We loft two of our Men, who fell with 
the Main-mail over Board. The Storm lafted for 
two Days, and the Weather continued fo hazy we 
could not take our Obfervations. We put up our 
Jury-Malls, but could make but little Way- We 
had Captain T*iubbur?i y $ Company of Manxes, and 
Major Bowls* Major of the Regiment that did belong 
to Colonel J ores, who died in the Voy2ge ; fo that 
having above our Complement, our Proviilon began 
to be at an Ebb, which obliged us all to come to 1 
half Allowance, and half a Pint of Water a Dav to 
each Man, for we did not know how long we ihould 
be out at Sea; but we made Ireland beyond all our 
Hopes November the 20// 1 , and got fife into Galhvay 
Harbour on the i^d, and it was a great Providence 
we did fo ; for on the zyb there arofe fuch a violent 
Storm, that mull have inevitably deftroyed^us. This 
was that fatal Hurricane that did fo much Damage 
in England, tsf*-- There were two Ships in Gdkvaf 
Harbour that were ftranded, and it was allowed by 
every Body that we fhould have run the fame Fate, 
if our Mafts had been ftanding; but having none but 
Jury-Mafts, which we took down when the Storm 
began to be pretty high, fo that the Wind could 
nothave the fame Power over us , neither do I think 
N. 6 that 
276 The Adventures of 
that the Storm was fo violent in Ireland, by all De- 
scription, as it was in England, Holland, and France. 
We fiayed at Galkvay four Months, and in that Time* 
we had got Marts up and repaired our other Dama- 
ges. While the Ship was fitting up, I lay on Shore 
in the Town. Galhvay is a neat well fortified Town,, 
as big as Sal/Jlury, yet has but one Church. Every 
Thing is very cheap there. I had my Board in a* 
private Houfe for four Shillings per Week, and feU 
dom dined without two or three Difties at Table r 
W e bought the bell French Wine for Fourteen Pence 
prr Quart, and fometimes under. We fet Sail from 
Galkytiy, February the zjtb, 1704, and arrived fafe- 
ly at Plymouth. Thus after many Misfortunes and 
Hazards I once more fet my Feet upon my dear na- 
tive Country (accompanied with Indian Mill, who 
ftili lives with me, and proves an honeft faithful 
Servant; and J have taken Pains to have him in- 
itru&ed in the Chriflian Religion, and likewife to 
have him chriitned by the Name of WdHam Dominica,* 
from the Ifland that he came from ;) and though 
warned by many Dangers I had run, I could not 
forbear making three Voyages more, but yet in a 
Station different from what I went before. But a* 
th y vvere but common Voyages, that is, nothing 
extraordinarily happening, I fhall conclude with 
my Prayers and Thanks to Heaven for the many. 
Mercies I have received; wifiiing long Life and 
Happinefs to my King, Prosperity, Peace and Rich- 
es to my Country* and a hearty Union among my 
Fellow Subjects. 
F I N I S. 
INDEX, 
A. 
ALacranes, (or Scorpion) lf.es, Sufferings cf the 
Author \ and jomc others there, page £3^ 
Antonio, Father, an honefi Pricjl, a great Rarity, p. 
U2> III; 
Arabella and Lionel, a diverting Love Story , p. 200^. 
B. 
Barbadoes dcfrihed, p. 1 
Beads, an Account of tv:o f range ones, carried aloat - 
^ Spaniard # Shovs, p. 158. 
Benbow, Admiral, his Death, and C bar a fie r, p. 27 3* 
Bermudas, or Summer Ifands, a Defcription of 
them, p. 
Briftol, a Perambulation thither from London f p. 1 8 3 ». . 
c. 
Cedar Tree, defer ibed, p. 1 26, 
St* Christopher's, dferibed, p. lS. 
Crocodile, Defcription cf one, p. 2JL 
Campechy, fails for that Buy, in Qufl of Log^vcod 9 
33. Several Skirmijhes occafioncd thereby, 3^ feq. 
Hook a rich Prize, 32i Storm poetically defer ibed 
by Shakefpear, Milton, and Dry den, ^2. Saiv a 
Water Spout , 44. Saved from a Shark, but afier- 
muards fell into the Sea, ibid. Caf upon a defolat* 
If and, The Havdjhips fujfered there, a2+ A 
index:. 
"Bark forced on the fame If and by Strefs of Weather, 
with four Perfons, 5^ One of vjhom dies, 84. 
Drove to Sea in the Bark, and ivus greatly grieved 
at leaving bis Companions on the deflate If and, at 
length arrives fafe at Campechy, Relieves his 
Companions, 96* 
Cuba Iiland, thrown thereon by a violent Storm, I 32. 
148, 158. Ccurtcoufy entertained at the Fort, 14.7* 
Several fine Harbours, i_zz* Had a Veffcl given us, 
befdes a very generous Contribution for cur Support to 
enable us to return to Jamaica, 1 50. Arrival 
there, i6q. 
Cayon, a furprifng Creature, 158, 
D* 
Deity, Notion of the Indians concerning one, p. L&L. 
Dolphins, the Manner of catching them, p. 9 
Dominico, If and of, and the Manners of its Inhabi- 
tants, defer i bed, p. 243, z&l* 
E. 
Earthquake, an exaft Narrative of the great one vdich 
happtned at Jamaica, in 1692, p. 165. 
England, our happy Arrival and Return thither* 
p. 183* 
Execution of four Indians, p. 1 53, 
F. 
Falconer Capt* and his Company attack the Indian.^ 
p. 141. 
Flamingo, a Fowl defer ibed, p. 157, 
Florid a* 
INDEX. 
Florida, faffed that Gulph with Safety, and got the 
better of fome Indians, who attacked us, p- 176^ 
Funzal, City of defcribed, p. 197. 
G. 
Gloucefter, came thither , in Purfuit of Highway -Meitp, 
p. 153. 
Gonfales, his Adventures and Difcoueries, p. 209. 
Guimar, «// Account of the Ca ves of Interment there y 
p. 221. 
IL 
Havanna, f/&* capital City cf the I/7and of Cuba, 
fcribed, p. 1 46. 
Hereford, £0£r thither, where he hears of his Father's 
Death, Sec* 187. Attacked by Highway-Men, p, 191, 
Hogs, Manner of Hunting Wild Ones, p. 2j_. 
L 
Jamaica, his Voyage thither, defcribed, £. J Ship- 
wreck, Ceremony of pajjing the Tropick, io*. 
Attacked by Pirates, IU Arriues at Port-Royal, 
Description of the Ijland of Jamaica, 22* Fuiits, 26+ 
Cocoa-Nuts, 2£. 
Indians, majfacrcd ly the Spaniards, p. 152. A barba- 
rous Murder committed by t hem upon an E n g 1 i fh vn a n , . 
p* 245. Siirmijhes among them, 247. The Author 
taken by them, and obliged to marry one of their Wo~ 
men, 250. Their Marriage Ceremonies defcribed, 
25 I. The fevere Treatment he met with among them, 
2^7> His Wife killed by them, 259. Their Notions, 
of a future State, 262. Their Manner of worjbip^ 
ping the Moon, 264, Four Englilhmen Jhipwreckedy. 
who married Indian Women* 265 . Indians murder a 
whok 
I N D E X. 
whole Engllfh Ship's Crew, 266. Eight Indians 
blown up with Gunpowder, ibid. Attempting to 
make his Ejcape, the Author is again fcized by them* 
ibid. The Author s Efcape from the Indians, zfriL. 
His Return to Jamaica, 270, Sails for Carthagena, 
27 1 . Arrives at Newfcundland, 274. L far. is tt» 
Ireland, 275. And from thence to England, 27 6~ 
Jucatan, Province of, defer iked, p. 
M. 
Madeira, Hiftory of th: Difcavery of that If and, p. 1 90. 
Mevis, or Nevis, dcjcribcch p. 16^ 
Make-Shift lfland, fo named by the Author, defcrihed % + 
P- 53- 
N." 
Newfoundland, defcrihed, p. 1 So* 
O. 
Oratava, Journey from thence to Tencriff, p. 21 i» 
P. 
-Py rates, Adventures among, andEfcapes from them, cjS. 
feq. their Cruelty, 1ZQ. A Fight between them 
and the Indians, 137. 
Portfmouth, forced into a Duel there, p. 195 . 
Randal (Mr.) an Account rf his Sufferings in failing 
from Cork /// Ireland, to the Baliick, and miracu- 
lous Preservation in a Storm, p. Caji upon a 
Rocky fi2_ His Planner f Living there for threee 
Months, dd. Gets off' in a fmall Boat and arrives at 
Copenhagen, 6^. The generous r, cctmcnt he found  
there* 
INDEX. 
there, and his Return Home to Cork, 7 1 . Sails to 
Virginia, £5V. and is thrown ajhore among Indians, 
72. Saves the Life of himfelf and Companies by 
Heeding their King, 75. His providential Ef\:pe 9 
and Arrival at Bofton, 78. His Death and £urial $ 
84. His Character, 85. 
S. 
Sharks, the Manner of catching them, p. (}♦ 
Sword-Fifli, defcribed, p. 17. 
Spaniards attacked by the Indians, p. 137. 
T. 
Teneriif, Pike of defcribed, &o p. 211, 217. 
Tortoiies, the Manner of catching them, p. 127* 
Vclafques, the Pyrate fhot, p. 236. 
W. 
Waller, Edmund, his fine Verfcs on the Summer Iflands. 
p. 128. 
We It- Indies, fails thither, and in the Voyage engages a. 
Turkiih- Galley, 226. But was wounded and taken 
Prifcner, 227. Obtains an Efcape for himfelf, in 
Concert with fever al other Englifh Pr if oners y 233. 
Seize the Turkiih Galley, which was funk by a 
Shot from a Man of War, who engaged her, being 
bound after the Fleet for the Welt Indies, 237, 
DEUS NOBISCUM. 
A 
NARRATIVE 
0 F A 
Deliverance 
A T 
E A. 
WITH 
The Name of the Master, Ship, and 
thofe that fuffered. 
By WILLIAM JOHNSON, D. D. 
Late Chaplain and Sub-Almoner to his Sacred 
Majesty. 
Quod durum eft pati, 
MmtJJi } duke ejh Sen. 
The Sixth Edition, Corrected. 
LONDON: 
Printed for G. Keith, in Grace-Church-Street,, 
and F. Blyth, No. 87, Cornhiil. 
MDCCLXIX. 
Great 
s 
To the Honourable Society of the Eaft- 
Country Merchants refident in England, 
Dantzicky Koninjlcrg^ and clfcwherc. 
Worthy Friends, 
Y AM led to bomur your Society net by the hafty Choice 
J. and Election of the Will, which tmt&rss i. u avfj orted 
with Pajfton, and loveth without any Merit; tut ly 
the rational and undemanding Part, which hath a long 
Time perfectly known and } under ft ood your many Excellencies, 
that I cannot chufe but lo ve and honour the Society. Neither 
are you beholden to any for the Refpee? they gi<vc 9 or rather 
pay you, but to your own Merit, to which it is due. You 
eremt/i&eSolomon's Merchants, thofe I mean that brought 
over Apes and Peacocks ; but you furnijh this ljland with- 
fuchftaple Commodities, that ye have made London as fa- 
mous as that City of Tyre, that crowned City, whofe 
Merchants are Princes, and whofe Traffickers are the- 
Honourable of the Ear h. Th zre is as natch Difference, 
between the Trade of thaje worthy Merchants that furnijh 
us with Spices, Plumbs, and Tajfaties, and our E aft- 
Country Trade thai bring' th us in Mafts, Materials for 
Cordage, and Ncccffaries for Shipping, as there is in Re- 
ligion, between Ceremonies and Fundamentals. Spices and 
fuch Things are pretty Ornameats > and ceremonial Supple- 
ments to our t'Veli being: But our Eaft- Conn try Commo- 
dities are thefe which do conftitute the Being, an J lay the 
Foundation of a rich and flour ijhing Commonwealth : And 
without them, if not the Art, yet the Praelice of Naviga- 
tion would be left among us. For we cannot jail to the In- 
dies tn a Nutmeg, embark ourfelves in Cinnamon^ make a 
Maft- 
The Ep'ftle Dedicatory. 
Maft of a Race of Ginger* and wing our Ships with Taffaty. 
Kc, tt ts our Eaft- Country Trade that doth furnijh us 
with th f at\Gtutt Ne ijfarics for Navigation, and is indeed 
the ve*\ Prme.ple and Foundation cf all Merchandize, and 
hke a M*jt > *wheJ :n a Watch, fetuth ail ether on Work. 
So that w^at Coeds are brought i to this Nation, ?nay be 
faid plncilally and primarily to be inserted by your Aid 
and AJfftance, though fetched hither by the Hands of 
others. 
This is a general Good, ohligeth every one to honour ycu: 
Bui I have an Argument oj an higher Nature, which doth 
dfpute and convince my Ajjccitons tnto an high Efeem and 
Reputation vf your Society, 
Tour Company in Prulfia wsre the fir ft that called me to 
the. Excrcife of my minijhrial E unci ion, being theft f Charge 
that ever I u deuce A to preach to: And had 1 not been fr- 
eed tj com: into EngUnd by an Obligation which I could 
not in Co* jeience break, I had ra her have parted with my 
Life than them, for they were, as the Apo/t/e writtth to 
the Philippics, my hope, my Joy, and Crown of 
rejoicing in the Lord Jtfus. 
That 1 had a Deftre again to come unto them, witnefs 
thoje many Sufferings, Lojjes, Shipwrecks, Fears, Straights, 
Danger j, Deaths that I did undergo in that fecond Adven- 
ture ; and for the Lcve I bear them, am willing to repeat 
tbern over again, not in Words only, but in real Suflrings, 
fc I might be any Way fervieeabk for the Good and Salva- 
tion of their Souls. 
But fame will fay to me, Why would you venture to Sea 
again, feeing yen have Jo eft en found the Ship unfife, the 
Mariners fearful, the Wiitds treacherous , and the Waves 
rebellious? 
I an* 
The Epiftle Dedicatory. 
I anfwer, if God call me to it, I pall net fear the 
Frowns of Neptune, nor the crooked Face of an angry 
Tempejl. It <ivas a brave Spirit of that Roman, who 
being to undergo a dangerous Voyage at Sea for the Service 
of his Country , being difjiiadcd from it, made this Anfwer, 
srAeiv waym, £?* uvuyKV) : It is neceflaryyfcr me to fai I , 
but i t is not neceflary for trie to live. And'uwasa nol L and 
virtuous Rcfolution in another, who /aid, if he were command- 
edto put forth to Sea in a Ship that neither had Mafsmr 
Tackling, he would do it ; and being afced, what Wijdom 
that was? replied, The Wifdom muft be in him that 
hath Power to command, not in him whofe Confci- 
ence bindetli to obey. When the Service of Cod calleth 
2ts to hazard our Lives, why pould we not be willing to 
facrijice them? Quid revolvis ? Deus prxcipir, faith 
Tertullian. IfChrif pould call me to Sea again, why 
pould I he more afraid io go aboard a ftatcly Ship, than 
St. Peter was to walk upon the very IVavcs, when Chriil 
talk J him to come to bimf 
Bui feeing God would not let me go to Tarfus, but fent 
me back in an angry and furious Temfeft, and made me a 
Preacher of Repentance in this Place, I fjall ferve you in 
my Devotions, and, as the Apofile faith, make Mention 
always of you in my Prayers, that ye may be like that 
nvlje Merchant in the Go/pel, who when he had found 
one Pearl of great Value, fold all and bought that 
Pearl, which was the Kingdom of Heaven. 
The firft that fought after Chrift, and (when they had 
found him) fr fented him with Gifts, were the IVife Men 
that came from the Eafl: They pre fented to him Gold, 
FrankincenfC) 
The Epiftle Dedicatory. 
Frankimenfe> and Myrrh: I Jhculd be glad it might befaid 
fo of you, that go to and from the Eaji. Ivjijb, with, all 
my Hearty that ye voculd frf fcek after Gbriji J ejus, and 
*w en ye have found him out, bang guided to him by the 
Star of your Faith, that then ye offer up to him the Sacvi* 
fee of a cheerful Obcdic?ice y in a true an I faithful Service 
of hi?n ; and that voill be as fweet and acceptable to our 
Saviour i as the Gifts of thofe Chaldean or Arabian Af 
trammers % their Gold, Frankincenfc, and Myrrh, or all the 
Riches of the Eali. 
So prayetb, Sirs, 
Your poor Orator, 
and Humble Servant, 
Will. Johnson, 
To 
To the Right Worfhipful the Governor, 
Affiftants, and Fellowfhip of the Eaji- 
hand Merchants in Lor.don. 
Right Worfhipful, 
JN Ours of the z%tb of Auguft, <ive ga<vc you Notice, 
that hi our dcjlltute Condition, it p'iea Jed Gcd by his 
fingular Providence to fupply our fpiritual Wants by the 
Minijhy of Mr. William Johniun, an able ami pious 
Divine* But he being n<nv called Home, by a Charge fal- 
len ?mto him. We cannot fuffcr him to pafs without this de~ 
fcr*vcd 'Tejlimony: That, for his Pcrfon, he hath been a- 
jxchgf us, Gra ve, Retired, Learned', in his Life, *v:th~ 
cut Blame, ana Scandal ; in his Studies, Laborious ; in 
his Preaching, both Orthodox and Pcwstful: fo that tru~ 
ly, in Regard cf the fngutar fruition oj'f.is Labours paj} y 
and fohfidering our drfolaie enjuing Condition, lf r e cannot 
but mourn at hi  D parture. ♦ 2 ~et hath he left us this Com- 
fort behind him, That the prrfent Dijlradwns at Howe may 
be a Motive to ai/peje of his Living there, and to return 
to us again in the Spring, if it pleafe God that he be there- 
unto lawfully chofen and called. Unto , us he is a Man 
without Exception, which nve tejlify by this our general 
Suhjo'iption* It may pleafe you therefore and it is curferi- 
ousandcarncft Reo-ejl, that, if his Occafonwitl fat with 
cur D'fres, you ivill hear him Preach, and by an undoubted 
Election 
( vii ) 
Eleclkn return him back again with all Speed. And this 
<will he an aftual Prayer to implore Divine Mercy , and 
to turn Curfes into BleJJings. We fay no more, hut the 
Lord be your Proteclor and DirecJor. 
Your Worfhips, in full 
Dantzick, 
Jan. i. Affurance to Command, 
Will. Gore. Ambrofe Griggs, 
Richard Jenks. Geo. Hackett. 
Sam. Travell. Fran. Sanderfon* 
Robert Searles. Amb. Medcalfe. 
Ed. Weftcoxnb. And. Taylor. 
Sam. Short. Ed. Daniel. 
John Collins. Jof. Oley. 
Rich. Wallis. Nich. Mitchel. 
Will. Williamfon.Tho. Clench. 
Will. Shires. Tho. Dawfon. 
Ja. Hutchinfon. Will. Lockwood. 
Jo. Coozin. Jo. Whitehall. 
Rich. Wayndc Jo. Pearce. 
The Name of the Ship, The William and John of 
Ip/ivich. 
The chief Owners, were William Blithe, and John 
Smy their, both Merchants inlpfwich, from whom the 
Ship had the Name ; the latter of thefe my worthy 
Friend. 
O 
The 
( viii ) 
The Names of thofe that ftffered in the Ship- 
wrecks, were, Daniel Morgan , M&fter; Edmund Mor- 
gan> Mate; Robert Lakeland, Mate; Matthew Bird, 
Boatfwain ; Taylor, Carpenter ; John Holmes, 
Rob. Laurence, WilL Englijh, Tho. Crofferd, Mariners; 
and others, whofe Names I cannot remember. 
"0- 
£ « 3 
4 ML M i§ ££ « % 
% K » » j 
A 
NARRATIVE 
O F A 
Great Deliverance 
At SEA. 
^G&&^£ E went aboard from Harwich on Michael- 
W B? the 2 9 th °^ Se P tem t> er - * con - 
fefs ' a dul1 Kind 0< " Sadnefs ( as a Cloud) 
fat upon my Spirits, fo that I could not look out 
cheerfully upon my departing Friends : But I took 
my Farewell of them, as if I had been going not 
only out of England, but out of the World. I can 
give no Reafon for this Dcliquium, for I was fent on 
a good Meflagc, to preach the Gofpel of Jefus 
Chrilt ; I was embarked in a ftout Ship with a fair 
Wind, and a fkilful Pilot ; fo that the understand- 
ing and rational Part of my Soul could not forefee 
any, nor fufpecl the leaft Danger : But (Aire) Na- 
ture (whole Apocrypha we fliall never underiland) 
O z was 
2 A Nark at i v e of 
was fenfible of fome approaching Storm ; for I was 
no fooner at Sea, but I was in a ftrange Anguifh 
and Prepoffeffion, fo that I fuffered Shipwreck in 
my Mind, and all the Terrors thereof before it 
came. I prefently fell fick (as I ufually do at Sea) 
for Water has always been an unkind Element to 
me : Yet that Sicknefs hath no fpecifical Name ; 
we neither call it Fever nor Ague, Palfy nor Gout ; 
but I think it is all thefc, with the reft of human 
Infirmities, or at leaft an Index where we may find 
them ; for I was fo really Tick* that to be drowned 
had been a Punifhment indeed, but in my Thoughts 
no Affliction to me. This Sicknefs was neither Ter- 
tian nor Quantan, but Quotidian ; for I was as fick 
the next Day as before. About four of the Clock 
in the Afternoon, the Mailer of the Ship came 
into our Cabin with more Hafte than he was wont, 
for he was quickened with the Senfe and Appre- 
hcnfion of fome fudden and enfuing Danger ; which 
though he concealed from me, I faw it in his very 
Countenance, written plainly in pale Characters of 
Fear and Amazement, which made me afk him, 
Whether all was well? And like a loving, a tender- 
hearted Man, who is loth to tell his dying Friend 
that he is fo near his End, he anfwered me, All is 
nvclL , 
But when I faw him ftiift himfelf, and make 
Hafte out again in great Speed, but greater Pafllon, 
I rofe from my Bed, and crawled upon the Deck, 
where I faw a fad Spe&acle  The Ship having 
fprung a Leak, or rather a Plank, was ready to 
fink. 
A Great T> diver ance at Sea* S 
fink. I do not wonder now I was fo fick before, 
feeing Death was fo near. Oh how the Face of 
every Man was changed by this Affrightment, fo 
that we could not know alxnoft one another, having 
loft our natural Complexions through the Extremity 
of Paffion ! One was at his Prayers, another wring- 
ing his Hands, a third his Eyes fnedding of Tears, 
when we had no need of more fait Water- But after 
this Fit, they foil to Work, and (as it is ufual in 
fuch Extrearm) we were all bufy about doing of 
nothing, and we did we knew not what. We began 
one Thing fed facii pattitet, but we prefently 
fell to another, and perfe&ed nothing to our Safety. 
The Mailer's Mate and Brother, whom we fent 
down to fearch out the Leak, quickly returned to 
us with a fad Countenance ; though naturally his 
Face was red, yet Fear had fnowed it into a pale 
Complexion. This Man with trembling Hands, 
Gnaftiing of Teeth, a quivering Tongue, and 
Words half fpoken, fignilied to us that the Wound 
was incurable, that the Leak could not be flopped; 
and the Water came in fo faft upon us, that we mufi 
perifh in this Moment. I never heard a Death's 
Head fpeak before ; for he did look not like a Mef- 
fenger, but Death itfelf ; had he faid nothing, we 
might have read. our Fate, and Ruin in his Coun- 
tenance. 
Here was now no Room for Counfel, neither had 
we Time to afk one another, what was beft to be 
done? But we prefently caft out our Long-boat, and 
O 3 (hot 
4 d Narrative of 
ihot off Come eight or nine Guns, which Teemed to 
me to be fo many Tolls of a Paffing-bell before our 
Death. But it was to give Notice to one Bartholo- 
mew Cook t who was Mailer of that Ship that came 
out with us, , and was but a little before us, that he 
fliould come to our Relief. In thefe fair Hopes we 
leaped into the Boat; but it was my fad Chance to 
leap fhort, one Leg in the Boat, ahernm in Cbarontis 
cy?nba : but not without fome Danger, I fcrambled 
out of the Sea into the Boat; but was no fooner 
there, but one of the Mariners leapt out of the Ship 
upon me, and beat me down with his Weight; 
which I took kindly enough, being willing to have 
carried them all upon my Back to have faved their 
Lives. But there was one, and but one, left in our 
iinkingShip, who made fuch lamentable Moan, that 
his Tears prevailed againft the Fears of our prefent 
Danger, and we took him into the Boat, when we 
expected our Ship (whofe Sails lay now flat upon 
the Water) fhould fink immediately, which mull 
necefTarily have drawn our fmail Boat after it, as 
the greater Fifties fwallow up the lefs. 
But (God be thanked) we all came clear off the 
Ship, but now were rowing we knew not whither : 
For Mr. Cook came not to our Relief, and we beean 
o 
to be fevere in Language againft him, as if he had 
not been kind enough to us; when all that knew 
him will fay, he was a Man of a foft, tender Na- 
ture, and a Friend to others rather than to himfclf. 
But all Men are fufpicious in Adverfity, and com- 
monly 
A Great Deliverance at Sea. 5 
monly take all Things in the worft Part, and fo did 
we, not confidering at all how it r) 
. . - . , , . , n iv/r n Umnes ambus 
might fare with this honelt Mailer, rej y ufff m j nus 
who, poor Man, was in greater fecund* magis 
Dirtrefs than themfelves, and drank Junt nefcio quo- 
a deeper Draught of Aflii&ion ; modo fufpicioji 
for both he and his Ship, and all ^ ^ e [ . CU ~ 
his Men, perifhed in that Hour, 7^ e n^AdeIp 
not a Man efcaped to tell us the 
Caufe, Manner, and Method of his Fate. 
Now were all our Hopes daflied, as well as our- 
felves, being in Defpair of human Help ; for we 
were left in the North Seas, which feldora wear a 
fmooth Brow, but at this Time contending with the 
Wind, fvvelled into prodigious Mountains, which 
threatened every Moment to fall upon us. 
To fpeak plainly, it blew half a Storm, and we 
were now in a fmall VelTel :' what Credit could we 
give to our Safety in a fmall and open Shallop, when 
fo Aately a Caftle of Wood, which we but now loft, 
could not defend itfelf againft the Infolency of the 
Waves ; we were many Leagues from any Shore, 
having no Compafs to .guide us, no Provifion tofuf- 
tain us, being ftaived with Cold, as well as for 
Want of Visuals ; and the Night grew black upon 
us, having nothing in our Boat but 
a fmall ♦ Kettle, and three Bags of * Which ferv- 
Pieces of Eight, to the Value of c 1 * 
# n 1 i\ , . , Scoop to caft 
300/. Sterling. But alas! what the Water out 
Good can Money do where there of the Boat, 
is no Exchange ? we could not eat 
O 4 nor 
* J Na RRAT1VE of 
nor drink our Silver; neither could our Pieces of 
Eight keep us warm. Money, in its own Nature, 
is but an impotent Creature, a very Cripple, inutile 
pondus, a Burthen of no Value. 
Good God! into what a fad Condition haft thou 
now brought us ! for which of our Sins doll thou 
thus punifli us ? Teach us, O Lord, that we may 
know it, and firft drown ourfclvcs in Tears of Re- 
pentance, before the Sea fwallow us up ; that 
though our Bodies be caft away, we may fave our 
Souls. Such Language my troubled Thoughts fpake 
within me; for it was with us now as it was with 
St. P aul ; All Hopes that <we foould be faved were 
taken a<way y A As xxvii. Nothing could preferve us 
but a Miracle, being out of the Reach of human 
Help ; we were finful Creatures, and could not ex- 
peel that God mould go out of his ordinary Way to 
fave us. Though the Waves carried us up to Hea- 
ven, yet we could not hope or believe that God 
fhould put his Hand out of the Clouds, and take us 
miferable Caitiffs unto himfelf from the Top of the 
riling Wave ; we had nothing to help us but our 
Prayers. I am forry that Word flipped from my 
hafty Pen. Prayer is a Multitude, a Troop of Suc- 
cours, and many enough to deliver us out of the 
Depth, though we were intombed in the Belly of a 
Whale, as it did Jonah. Prayer, if it be well qua- 
lified, is that Rod of Mofes, that can turn the Sea 
into a Wildemejsy and make us pafs through upon dry 
Land, Pfal. cvii. Upon this only Staff did we all 
lean ; and I fuppofe it was with us, as in the Cafe 
of 
A Great Deliverance at Sea. 7 
of Jonah : The Mariners were afraid, and every Man 
called upon his God, Jonah ii. And truly, I think I 
may with Modefly confcfs, I thought on thofe 
Words of David, though after a more imperfeft 
Manner ; Out of the Depth ha ve I cried unto thee : 
Lord, hear my Voice, and let thine Ears be cttentlve 
to my Supplication. I Jink in the deep Mire, where 
there is no /landing. Let not the Water-food overflow 
me, neither let the Deep /wallow me up, Pfal. lxix. 
But bejide our perfonal Devotion, I amperfuaded 
the Extremity of our Condition pleaded for us, and 
ourMifery cried aloud in the Ears of God, for Pity 
and Compaffion. It is an ufual Expreffion, when we 
fee any Man extremely poor and miferable, to fay 
his Poverty, or his Mi/e*y /peaks /or him. And com- 
monly we are not fo much moved with a clamorous 
Beggar, who hunts after our Alms with open 
Mouth, and makes Hue and Cry after our Charity, 
as if we had ftolen fomething from him who begs of 
us, I fay, we are not fo much moved with fuch 
loud Impudence, as with the Silence of thofe difeafed 
Cripples, and infirm Lazaro's, that lie at our Doors, 
in the Streets, and fay nothing, but fhew only their 
Wounds and Sores to thofe that pafs by. Thefe Beg- 
gars fpeakloudefl to our Affe&ions ; their very Con- 
dition is eloquent; quot Vulnera, tot Or a ; Jo many 
Wounds, /o many Mouths, that cry aloud for Pity, and 
cannot chufe but melt us into a charitable Compaf- 
fion. This was our Cafe ; our Mifery was louder 
than our Prayers, and our deplorable Condition cer- 
O 5 tainly 
8 ^ Narrative 0/ 
tainly was more prevalent with Almighty God, thaa 
our imperfefi Devotions; for we may fay with the 
People of Ifrael) He beard our Cry, and bad Compaf- 
fton on us, Exod. ii. It is the ufual Way of God 
to help in Extremities ; when we are in abfolute De- 
fpair of all outward Means, he loves to fave us, that 
we may fay, // is bis doing alone. 
For in this Moment of Death, when we were 
without the lealt Expectation of any Deliverance, he 
fent a Ship to us, which we mutt needs confefs to 
be Digitus Dei, tbe Finger of God, that pointed and 
directed that Ship to our Deliverance : For though 
many Ships come from the fame Place, and are bound 
for the fame Haven, yet :hey feldom meet in the 
vaft Ocean, and fail in the fame Line : for there are 
no beaten Paths in the Floods, no Highways and 
common Roads in the Sea. But fuch was theGood- 
nefs of God, this Ship made towards us, and we 
what we could towards it ; but we had but two Oars, 
and the Seamen counted that a great Difadvantage 
both to their Speed and breaking of the Waves : 
Befides, it blew hard, and the Sea, that knows no 
Pity, rofe high upon us, fo that we were forced to 
fit clofe to one another, to keep out the Sea with 
our Backs; a poor Shelter againfta raging Enemy, 
who rinding himfelf checked, through Indignation 
flew over our Heads into the Boat, and fell upon us 
in angry Showers ; fo that had we not had that 
Kettle, to call the Water out as faft as it came in, 
we might have been drowned from above with Rain 
of our own making. It was my Lot to fit on the 
Weather- 
A Great Deliver anee at Sea. p 
Weather-fide, (and there is no Compliment,, or 
changing of Places in a Storm) and the Waves beat 
on me fo fail, that I had almoft faid with the Pro- 
phet David, The Waters bad even entered into my 
Soul, Pfal. vi. 9. 
And now we grew into another Defpair ; for 
with all our Endeavours we could not reach the Ship, 
nor the Ship us: Yet that good Man the Skipper, 
hung on the Lee, and did what he could to retard 
the Courfe of his Ship ; and we, or the other Side, 
did what we could to fpeed our own. His Ship 
rode on furioufly before the Wind, like the Cha- 
riot of Aminadab ; and ours flowly, like the Chariots 
of Pbaraob; and how could we expeft, that our 
Snail fuould overtake this Dromedary ! Thus our 
pregnant Hopes brought forth nothing but Wind 
and Water ; and we that before flattered ourfelves 
with an A flu ranee of Safety, are now as much con- 
founded with a Certainty of Perifhing. It had 
been better, I t'nink, and lefs AiHi&ion to us, to 
have had no Hopes at all of a Deliverance, than 
prefently to fall from it. Ic did redouble the- Pu- 
nifhment of Tantalus to kifs thofe Apples with his 
Lips, which he muft not tafte with his Tongue : 
to have Happinefs near us in our Eye, and not to 
enjoy it, is the Extremity of Unhappineft. Many 
Manners, in a Storm and Ternpeft, when they fee 
a fatal Neccffity upon them, are contented to die; 
but thefe Men would murmur, Portu ferire, to perijk 
in an Haven. 
O 6 This 
lo A Narrative of 
This was our Condition ; we had a Ship hard 
by, but could not board her by Reafon of the Wea- 
ther; fo that we were ready to perifli, whilft we 
looked Safety in the Face. And that which, in all 
Probability, increafed our Danger, and made our 
Fate inevitable, it grew dark Night, fo that we did 
not know which Way to row. 
But this, though it was an Evil in its own Na- 
ture, by Accident became a Benefit to us ; for now, 
not feeing our Danger, we underftoodit not, andfo 
grew bolder, and applied two to an Oar, and fo 
broke through the Waves in a moil dcfperate Con- 
dition towards the Ship, as we conceived ; and that 
good Chriflian, the Mailer of the VefTel, hung out 
a Light to us, which was as a Star to guide us to 
him ; and fo, by Degrees, we grew nearer and 
nearer. 
But left the Howxoner (for the Mailer was one of 
Hoivzon) mould think we were loft, and fo hoiil up 
r his Sails and be gone, (for he could not fee us by 
Reafon of the Night, though we faw him by Virtue 
of the Light he lent us) Order was given, that 
when a Wave took us up, we fhould give a great 
Shout, which we did fo loud, that I believe our 
Cry was heard to Heaven ; for by God's miraculous 
Alfiftancewegrew very near the Ship, and our own 
Safety. 
Now were we in Difpute which Side of the Ship 
we Ihould go aboard, which was concluded on the 
Lee-fide ; and Promife was made we fliould go up 
by Order as we fat, left by a hafty Rifing we fliould 
endanger 
A Great Deliverance at Sea. n 
endanger ourfelves, and by making too much Hade 
to fave our Live^, lofe chem. But we had no fconer 
come to the Ship, but they all ftrove to run up at 
once; and the Seamen being dextrous in the Art 
of climbing, got up in a Moment, and left me 
alone in the Boat : Neither do I blame them, for 
Life is fweet, and when that is in Jeopardy, we 
care only for ouifelves. 
And now was I the third Time loll, and in the 
greateft Danger of drowning ; for befides the natu- 
ral Weakness I had in my Hands, they were fo be- 
numbed with Cold and Wet, and made ufelefs, that 
I could not climb up a Rope though it was to fave 
my Life. But I held the Rope which was flung to 
me out of the Ship fait in my Hands, that our Boat 
might not ftave off ; but it flruck three Times againft 
our rowling Ship, or rather our Ship againft it, and 
as often flruck me down in the Boat, which was half 
full of Water; fo that I was afraid I ihould have 
been drowned in that Epitome of the Sea. It would 
have grieved a Man, but now to have efcaped the 
vail Champain of the Sea, and to be drowned in its 
Enclofure; And it was God's Providence, the Boat, 
being fo often ftruck, did not break in Pieces, as it 
did prefently afterwards, when it had done its laft 
Office to my Deliverance. But having ufed feveral 
Ways to get up in vain, there came at laft, two Sea- 
men down to me on the Side of the Ship, and would 
have heaved me up by the Arms : But being fo often 
wet, my Cloaths, together with my own Weight, 
were too heavy a Burthen to be trufted in their 
Arms ; 
12 J NARR'ATIVE of 
Arms ; and in this Strait and Exigency, I really knew 
not what to do. I began to have fad Thoughts of 
my fdf, and to think, that I alone was the Offender, 
and mult now be faciificed to the Fury of the Sea, to 
appeafe and calm the Tempeft. But vvhilft I was thus 
wounding my B re a ft with thefe Thoughts, one of the 
Seamen gave me down a Rope with a Nooze, and bid 
meput it about my Middle : But as foon as I got it on 
one Shoulder, he began to pull, and had like to have 
forced me into the -Sea; but defining him to ftay a- 
vvhile, I then got it over both Shoulders, and ordered 
him to pull, but the Boat waving up and down, cafl: 
me off at fome Diftance, to that he firil drew me in- 
to the Sea, and my own Weight drew the Rope fo 
faft through his Hands, that had there not been a 
Knot at the End of the Rope by meer Chance, (for 
he tied it not, as he afterwards told me in England) 
I had gone doun into the Deep in a Moment; fo that 
.1 may truly fay, there was not an Inch between me 
and Death. Then at the next Pull, he llruck me a- 
gainft the Side of the Ship, which I (hall always look 
upon as a Courtefy, being the kindeft Blow that ever 
I received ; it was like a Dole oi Opium to a Man that 
hath the Extremity of the Stone, which maketh him 
forget himfelf as well as his Sorrow; and fo it fcrved 
me, for I remembered no more either Good or Evil. 
But certainly the Mailer was a good Chriilian, and 
.was indulgent to me; fori found myfelf in his own 
Cabin the next Morning, where I flept all Night 
very well, though in wet Cloaths: But I found my- 
felf fore and lame all over. I thought of the Man 
in 
A Great Deliverance at Sea. I J 
in the Almanack, wounded in every Part and Mem- 
ber; only I really was what he feemed to be, and 
had fome Signs Hkewife of it on my bruifed Body. 
But I rofe from my Cabin, very defirous to know 
how it fared with my Fellow-Sufferers ; and truly I 
found them, contrary to my Expectation, heavy, not 
with Sleep, but with Sorrow. I thought I fhould 
have feen Joy ride in Triumph in their cheerful Coun- 
tenances; but their Looks were dejected, and they 
murmured within themfelves, fuffering (I fuppofe) 
over their Shipwreck again in their fad Thoughts, 
and every Man telling himfelf of his own Misfor- 
tune: But the Truth was, they having faved their 
Lives, were now at Leifure to think of the Lofs of 
their Goods : And I know it was a heavy Lofs to 
fome, who loll much; and yet a greater Lofs to 
others, who loll lefs. For they having but a little, 
loft a great Deal, that little being all they had. For 
my own Part, I loft more than I had, (for it call me 
in a Debt, which I have not yet waded through:) 
But the Quantity of my Lofs doth not fo much trou- 
ble me as the Quality; for (befides my Goods and 
whole Library*) I loft all my Sermons, Notes and 
Obfervations of fome Years Travel abroad, Things 
in themfehes of no Value, nor much in my Efteem, 
yet they weie the Fruits of my (many Years) Labour 
and Study, and might have been ufeful to me, both 
in my minifterial Function, and Hkewife in the fe- 
cular and Lay-Part of my Life. But it were a Sfcame 
to name any Lofs, when God fo gracioufly gave us 
'our Lives; and a Sin to juurraur at any Damage, 
whe# 
14- A N AR RATIV E Of 
when God fo often and fo miraculoufly fnatched us 
out of the very Jaws of Death, It feeras to me like 
calling Lazarus out of the Grave, and do we 
think Lazarus, when he was reftored unto Life, 
complained that his Winding-Sheet, and Napkin, 
were fpoiled by lying four Days in the Grave? Or 
that he murmured that the Ointments and Spices 
were fpent in vain at his Funeral? For fure Mary, 
that had a Box of Ointment for the Burial of our 
Saviour, would b:- at fome Colt at the Funeral of her 
beloved Brother Lazarus. But thefe Things are not 
to be thought upon, when our Life is given us : But 
we are fo enamoured of the World, that we cannot 
but look back upon Things we love and lofe ; and 
we. would fain be comforted after our LolTcs, as Job 
was, with twice as much as we had before : But then 
we muft remember, it was at the latter End of Job; 
and before that Time Gcd may redouble thefe tem- 
poral Bleflings upon us. 
The next Day, being I'ucfday, it blew very fair 
for Norway* thither oui Ship was bound ; and about 
Twelve o'Clock at Noon we came in the View of it: 
But Norway being a ragged Coaft, full of Rocks, and 
feeing we could not reach it whilft it was Day, and 
afraid to come upon it in the Dark, we turned our 
Sails, and thought to have kept off the Coaft till the 
Morning, that the Sun might fhew us the Way thi- 
ther. Which done, we fat down to Meat, fome of 
us having taken no Suftenancc fince we firft came to 
Sea; and truly I eat an hearty Meal, being the only 
Meal, I made in five Days : And fo we were all very 
well refrefhed and comforted. And now God thought 
it 
A Great Deliverance at St a. 1 5 
it fit we ftiould fuffer again; had it pleafed the Lord 
before this Refrefhment to have brought us in fome 
newDiftrefs, we certainly, being weak, had perill- 
ed under the Weight of it, and the very Conceit of 
it would have killed us, and a little more Sorrow have 
drowned us without a Wave. But God will lay no 
more upon his Children than they are able to bear. 
About Ten o'Clock at Night, when we had fet 
our Watch, and prayed, with fafe and fecure 
Thoughts we laid ourfelves to reft, fome of us upon 
our Beds; but God had appointed an harder Lodg- 
ing for us, fuch as he provided for Jacob in his Jour- 
ney to Padan-Aram, when be took of the Stones of the 
Place, and made himfelf a Pillo<w 9 and lay dvwn in that 
Place to Jleep. For this our fecond Ship with full 
Sails ran upon a Rock, and gave fo great a Crack, 
that it was able to awake the moft dead afleep among 
us: I wondered, I confefs, what the Matter was ; 
but the Mariners, knowing the Danger better than 
myfelf, cried out, Mercy, Mercy, Mercy, with fo dole- 
ful a Tone and Accent, that, together with that hi- 
deous Noife which both the Wind and Waves made 
in this pitched Battle one againft the other, it feem- 
ed to me to be the very Image and Reprefentation of 
the Day of Judgment. I made what Haile I could 
out of my Cabin, but was the laft that came upon 
the Deck; where meeting with our own Mailer, 
with both his Hands upon his Eyes, which yet could 
not (top that Current of Tears, which ran down his 
Cheeks, he bade me pray for them, pray for them, for 
*ve /ball certainly perijh. I could believe no otherwife, 
being taught that LefTon by our Mailer; and there- 
fore 
16 A Narrative of 
fore I fell prefently upon my Knees, and vvasjuft 
in the Condition of a condemned Perfon that expeft- 
ed the Stroke of the Executioner, the Night having 
put a Blind before mine Eyes ; and having prayed 
awhile, I wondered the Waves did not come to do 
their Office ; for 1 forgave them with all my Heart, 
having wholly refigned up myfelf to Death. 
But fo it pleafed God, that the Ship with full 
Sails (truck itfelf fo fall into the Cleft of the Rock, 
or rather, as the Seamen fay, between two Sledges 
of Rocks, with her Bow over the main Rock, fo 
that it flood as firm, for the prefent, I mean the 
former Part of the Ship, as the Rock itfelf. So I 
prefently rofe, and pulled off my Coat, with an 
Intention vs> caft myfelf into the Sea, and fwim 
thither; but was advifed to the contrary by a 
prefent enfuing Danger : For prefently there arofe 
a high and mighty Wave, one of the chief Giants 
of the Sea, which firft knocked againft our Ship, 
as if it would have called me forth, and then with 
greater Violence dafhed againtt the Rock, and 
brake itfelf in Pieces ; which did plainly reprefen.t 
unto me my future Condition, and foretel my For- 
tune, had I ventured to ftride that great Leviathan, 
and e-ndeavoured to fwim to the Rock* 
But prefently our Ship, like St Paul's Ship, 
brake in the hinder Parts, and we were taught to 
efcape our Danger, by our Danger; for our Ship 
breaking in the Stern, we werfe for- 
Matthew Bird ced to fly to the former Part ; and one 
of Ipfwich. of the Seamen (the fame that pulled 
me up by the R.ope) leaped from the 
Bow 
A Great Deliverance at Sea. 17 
Bow of the Ship upon the Rock with a Rope in his 
Hand, which was fattened to one of our Mails, and - 
held it with fo ftiff an Hand, that another flipt 
down by it, and fo all our Company, and fome of 
the Daws, (Eight and Twenty in Number) came 
fafe to the Rock that Way. 
AW this while, being left alone upon Deck, I be- 
gan to wonder what became of my Company, not 
then knowing that they had found any iJeans of 
JX'liverance ; but perceiving that they all crowded 
to the Head of the Ship, I went to fee (God knows 
that was all my Intention) what they did there, and 
fo I came to the Knowledge of their Efcape, and 
an Opportunity of my own. For I found a Dane 
endeavouring to Aide down hjmfelf and a fmall 
Leather Trunk by that Rope, who like a loving 
Man took Pity on me, and prefently whipt away his 
Trunk, and bid me Aide down there : But I re- 
turned him his Kindnefs, and defired him to go 
down firft ; not fo much out of Compliment, but 
that I might know how to Aide down ; for I faw 
none of them go before me, and I did not know 
whether I mould go with my Head or "Heels fore- 
moll. I had no Time to aflt Counfel, or make Ex- 
periment, but prefently I got upon the Rope, with 
my Heels foremoft, and Back uppermoft ; But the 
Waves beat upon me, and the Wind (which was 
high) blew me round, and had almoft made me 
let go my Hold ; but, 1 praife God, I came fafely 
to the Side of the Rock, and they cried, Of, off\ 
not out of Unkindnefs to me, (whom they knew 
not 
*8 A Narrative of 
not in the Dark) but that I might make fpeedy 
Way for another, which I quickly did : For having 
laid one Hand upon the Rock, I came off the Rope, 
and fo on ail four, climbed up to the reft of the 
Company. 
I was the laft that came down the Ship that Way, 
for in that very Moment the Ship began to decline 
from us, and give Way, which the Mailer per- 
ceiving, (who was ftill aboard) made lamentable 
Moan to us to help him, which we did with our 
utmoft Endeavours ; But the Ship brake, and funk 
immediately ; there was this good Man, and four 
of the Mariners drowned. I faw the Matter, with 
a Light in his Hand, fall into the Sea ; the faddeft 
Sight that lever yet beheld in this World, and 
that which pierced my very Soul, to fee him that 
faved our Lives, lofe his own. There was nothing 
fo bitter to me in all my Suffering at Sea, as the 
Lofs of this Man; it raifed fuch a Storm and 
Tempeft again in my Affeclions, that I am not yet 
calm within. I never think of him, but I am caft 
in a troubled Sea of Sorrow, and fuffer Shipwreck 
daily in my Mind ; for as he was a Man of a meek 
and charitable Difpofition unto all, fo I found him 
kind unto myfelf after a more fpecial Manner* 
How folicitous was he for us in our Dittrefs, and 
ufed all Means, though it was to his own Hin- 
drance to fave us ! and in all Probability, had he 
not ftaid for us, he might have arrived at his own 
Harbour in Safety. What ihall we fay ! fhall we 
plead with the Almighty, with the Prophet, Jeremy? 
Jer. xiu 
A Great Deliverance at Sea; ig 
Jer. xii. No ; it is better to cry out with St. ?auU 
Oh the Depth of the Riches, and Wifdom, and Knowledge 
of God ! How unjearchahlc are his fudgments, and his 
Ways pafl finding out ! For who hath known the Mind 
of the Lordy or who hath been his Counjellor ? Rom. xi. 
33* 34> 35' All that we can fay, is, that God 
fometimes thus dealcth with his own Children : 
Thofe whom by his Grace he hath made Inftru- 
ments of great Good upon Earth, he taketh unto 
himfelf, to make them highly blefled in Heaven. 
Certainly the Spirit of God moved upon^hefe 
Waters, and called this good Man, as Chnil did 
St. Peter on the Sea of Galilee, Mat. xiv, to come 
to him, that for this high A& of Charity he might 
receive him, and prefently crown him with Glory. 
Now were we upon the Rock, but knew not 
where ; and fome of the Company, before I came 
to them, had meafured it round with their Feet, 
and had found it both a Rock and an IiJe, and, 
contrary to our Hopes, inhabitable ; fo that we 
waited for the Morning Star to draw the Curtain 
of the Night, and difcover us fir ft to ourfelves, 
(for as yet, in the Dark, we were as ignorant of 
ourfelves, as of our fad Condition) and then, to- 
fhew and difcover fome Coaft or Land to us, which 
we hoped we were near to. It was a long and fad 
Night with me : A Rock is an hard Pillow to ileep 
on; befide, I was thinly clad, having caft off" my 
Coat, when I intended tofwim, and had no Leifure 
to put it on again, for 1 thought it belt to leave 
that behind me, rather than myfelf. We went 
from 
20 i Narrative 0/ 
from Place to Place, up and down, I may truly 
fay, for I had many a Fall upon the flirny Rock; 
fometlmes we were up to the Ankles in Water, I 
cannot fay over Shoes, for I had none, fo that my 
Feet were cut with the fharp Stones, as my Body 
with the cold Wind; fo that I felt the very Teeth 
of Winter bite quite through me: for Winter in 
that Country, is an old Man with a grey Head, 
when it is but a Child with us. At length 
we lighted on a Hole of the Rock, which was 
a wym Shelter to us againft the Wind, And 
now the long expetted Morning drew near, and 
we fain would have feen bcfoic we could. In 
that Twilight, every black Cloud we diicerned, 
we flattered ourfehes was Land; and here it was, 
we faid, and there it was : But when the Sun arofc, 
we faw it no where, only we had a Glimpfe of 
the Coaft of Norway ; but it was at that Diftance, 
that we were not in any Capacity to reach it, but 
with our Defires. 
Truly, when I rofe up and took a View of the 
Sea, and the Place where 1 was, I was ilruck down 
again with Amazement to fee many Hundreds of 
Rocks round about us, lying for the moft Part under 
Water, which the Seamen call Breakers, becaufe 
they break the Sea, and turn it into Feathers. It 
was a great Providence of God, that we ftiould in 
the Night, with full Saih, pafs by all thefe Rocks, 
(the leaft Touch againft them had been as mortal 
to us as our Sins) and then to come to the great 
Rock, which was as a Church above Water. I am 
fure 
J Great Deliverance at Sea. 2i 
Aire it was an Afylum to us. The Country People 
defervedly call it Jm-Scare. It was vhe fame Hand 
again of God's Providence, that our Ship fhould be 
carried with a full ftrong Wind into the Cleft and 
open Part of the Rock, which was as a Bofom to 
receive us ; had we touched upon any other Part, 
we had been utterly loft in the Twinkling of an 
Eye. They ibat go down to the Sea in Ships, and oc- 
cupy their Bujinefs in great Waters, thefe fee the Works 
of the Lord, and his H'onders in the Dcep y Pfal. cvii. 
The Wonders of his Deliverances, as well as the 
Miracles of his Creation : Neither are the Creatures 
more to be admired than his Mercies. There is as 
much Wonder and Variety in thefe as in the other. 
Oh that iw would therefore praife God for his Goodnefs> 
and the Wonders he doth for the Children of Men, 
Pfal. cvii. 8. 
But now again were we loft in the Eye of Man, all 
our Hope was, that a Ship might pafs by to relieve 
us, which in my Judgment was Vanity of Thoughts. 
For if a Ship ihould by Accident come by us in the 
Day-time, they feeing the Rocks would be afraid 
to come at us ; had it come in the Night, it had cer- 
tainly periftied, as ours did. And yet we did hope 
even againfi Hope. But having fpent all that Day, 
with fore Eyes, in Expeftation of an imaginary De- 
liverance, in looking for a Ship (or rather Caftle in 
the Air) and feeing nothing come towards us, we 
began to defpair, having now no Kind of Suftenance 
to feed on, nor fcarce Cloaths to keep us warm; fo 
we 
21 A Narrative of 
we again crept into an Hole of the Rock, and lodg- 
ed there, rather than refted, the fecond Night. 
In the Morning we arofe before the Sun, and ftill 
we were looking for that which came not : And now 
we began to be an hungry ; and fome of our Couir 
pany went fearching about the Rock, wifhing (I fup- 
pofe) thofe Stones were turned into Bread. One of 
the Sea-Boys brought me a Leaf of Scurvy-Grafs, 
which I told him was Sauce rather than Meat. Some 
of us went a riming, but with no other Angle than 
along Arm, nor no other Hook then a bent Finger. 
They put cheir Arms into the Sea as far as they could, 
and drew up fome fmall Mafcles, which they eat 
heartily. I began to be very fick in a feverim Dif- 
temper, and ib had no Stomach, which I think is a 
Benefit when we have no Meat to eat : But I did burn 
with Thirir, fo that I would have given all that 
I had for a Draught of freflb Water. God 
oftentimes makes us know the Worth of his 
Creatures by the Want of them: Nothing fo mean 
in our Efteem as a little Water, we fpill it eve- 
ry where upon the Ground, and we look not after it 
anv more; yet at this Time a Drop of cold Water 
had been more welcome to me than the Gold of O- 
phir> and in my Efteem, a better Creature. I went 
into the highell Place of the Rock, thinking the Wa- 
ter (that flood every where in Holes) might be frefti- 
cr there ; but I found it fait ; fo I perceive in fome 
Storm it bounded thither from the Sea. Though it 
was fait, yet it -as Water; and therefore (like one 
of thofe that were chofen to fight againft Midian,) I 
lapped ic with my Hand to my Mouth, till it 
quenched 
A Great Deliverance at Sea. 23 
quenched my Thirft : But it came up again as faft as 
it went down, and brought a great Drought with it; 
and this I did very often, which I am perfuaded was 
both my prefent Cure, and future Prefervation of my 
Health, as a learned Phyfician told me fmce, Dr. H. 
And now between Ten and Eleven o'Clock we 
faw a Ship coming towards us with full Sails, which 
lifted up allourHearts with Joy, gilded overourHearts 
with Cheerfulnefs, and fo painted our Faces with 
Gladnefs, that we feemed to be new Creatures. The 
Ship came nearer and nearer, and then we went all 
of us to the Top of the Rock, and waved our Hats 
to jfhew ourfelves to the Men of the Ship. But I 
know not the Caufe, for they never came at us ; nei- 
ther did they fend out their Boat to know what we 
were, or our Condition. Whether this Unkindnefs 
proceeded from the Fear of our dangerous Rocks, 
or from their own more ftony Hearts, harder than the 
Rock we lay upon, I cannot fay; but it put us out 
of Charity with them, as they feemed to be with us. 
He was a Dam, of the fame Country with our former 
kind loving Matter; fo that I perceive there may be 
feveral Difpofitions under the fame Climate, and one 
Womb may bring forth Twins of feveral Natures; 
one was as fmooth to us as Jacob, the other rough 
as Efau. When we faw the Ship pafs quite from us, 
our Hearts began to fail, and our Countenances 
changed into their former Palenefs. How foon was 
our fair Morning clouded over, and our beautiful 
Hopes turned into Deformity and black Defpair? To 
teach us that Man's Happinefs is but for a Moment, 
P and 
24 A Narrative of 
and the Joy of this World but a Span long. Anil 
now -we -were all loft, even in our own Eyes; our 
Condition, being ready to famifh, would not give 
us Time to expect another Ship, neither had we 
now Faith enough to believe, fliould there come one 
by Chance, that the Mariners would venture their 
own Lives to fave ou . 
So we betook ourfelves to our old Remedy, <p«p- 
(Mikqv KGtBofav.ovy our Prayers* The Danes (I con fefs) 
firft began their Devotions, having fung oneof Luthr's 
Pfalms, fell to their Prayers, and then we fung one of N 
our own Pfalms, and as long as I was able to fpeak, I 
prayed with the Company; and after fome Exhorta- 
tion to my Pel low -Sufferers, being very weak, I laid 
myfelf down upon the Rock, thinking I mould rife 
no more in this World. 
But 1 overheard one of the Seamen, M. B. (the 
fame that firfr. leapt upon the Rock) fay Let us ?nah 
a Ruth and venture to Sea, I had rather be drowned, than 
lie Urc nd he flawed. They all prefently concluded 
to .follow that Deiign, though it was full of Danger. 
Eut, you know, a finking Man will take hold of a 
Bnll-rum, and one that is ready to pcrilh will catch 
at a Feather. All Things fell out to further this De- 
fig n: For the Waicr had now fallen from the Rock, 
and left on the Side of it the Bottom of the Ship, the 
Anchors, tlic the Sails lying on the Rock 
like Linen upon an Hedge. In a Ihort Time they 
brake a Ma ft in Pieces, untwiftcd a Cable, made 
fmnll Cords, tied four or five Boards to the broken 
Mail, put up the fmall End of the Mizcn-M«lt, cut 
out a fmall Sail, with fome flight Stern they had 
made. 
A Great Deliverance at St a. 
made, and fo ventured to Sea oh thefe Ruins* God' 
oftentimes faves by weak Means, and preferves us by 
% Improbabilities. There were four on this Raft, two 
Danes, and two Englijb ; I do not remember whether, 
it was by Lot* or voluntary EledlibiT. * 
It was now a great Calm, fucft a Calm I conceive 
as was upon the Sea of Gallilee when our Saviour 
rebuked the Sea and the Winds, Mat. viii. It 
, blew only * fmall Breath, which was our Advantage,, 
for it direftly carried them toward that Place we con- 
ceived the Coaft lay. It was the miraculous Pood- 
nefs of God, that after the Lofs of two great Ships, 
he ftioujd fave ns by a fwimming Plank: For this 
Raft paft through, and get clear of all the Breakers; 
had it touched only on one of them, they would have 
rent the Raft in Pieces, as Sampfcn did the Wreath 
when the P/riliJlines were upon him : But they pafTed 
by them all, and we that were upon the Rock fol- 
lowed them with our Eyes as long as we could fee, 
or rather as long as they could be feen ; for our Life 
wa? wrapt up in theirs, and the Hope of our Deli- 
verance had no other Foundation but their Safety. 
And now I may fay, God ftretched forth his Hand, 
as Ch.rift did to Saint Peter when he was ready to 
fink, and faved thefe Meh, and brought them to 
Shore; which yet we were ignorant of, and fo pul- 
led in Pieces between two feveral Paflions, Hope and 
Fear, and both of them equally troublefomej as we 
fee in, an Ague, which hath two feveral Operations, 
contrary in thcmfelves, as hot and cold, yet both of 
them alike affiittive. Our Hope being with that 
P 2 Violence 
2,6 ^ Narrative of 
Violence of Paflion, was as wounding to our Affecti* 
ons as our Fear. 
But thefe Fits were foon over, for before Night 
we fpied feveral Shawls rowing towards us, which 
gave us a certain Knowledge of the Safety of our 
Men, and a Promife of our own Deliverance : They 
brought with them Provifion ; but we were more 
greedy of the Shore than our Meat, and therefore we 
made Hafte into the Boats, and by God's Goodnefs 
unto us, we came all of us once more to Land. 
The Place that we arrived at was an Ifland in 
Norway, called by the People Waller I/land; fo mean 
and inconfiderable, that Ortclius takes no Notice of it in 
his Maps, for I have fcarched with 
My Lord of E. better Eyes than my own, I mean 
Dr. H. more knowing in Geography, and 
could not find it* A Place it feems 
not worthy to be remembered, but I am fure never 
to be forgotten by us. Though it was a Wilderncfs 
in its own Nature, yet it was a Paradifeto us. 
There was but one Houfe where we landed, and 
that was the Parfon's, an honeft Lutheran, who had 
many in his Family. They fiewed us, as Saint Paul 
fays, no little Kindnefs : A£ts xxviii. 2. The Language 
they fpake was Nofs; but I think it was not much 
unlike Dutch, for we that fpake Dutch, did partly 
underfland them, and they us, and yet two feveral 
Kinds of Speech. I fuppofe there is the fame Diffe- 
rence between thefe two Languages, as there is be- 
tween a Lobfter and a Cray-Fifh, (which both are in 
Plenty 
A Great Deliverance at Sea. 27 
Plenty there) for though they both are alike, yet they 
are two feveral Species* 
We made a Shift to tell the fad Iliads of our Mif- 
fortune to the People of the Houfe, and they made 
a Shift to underitand us, for they wept moil bitterly at 
our Relation ; fo thatone would have thoutht that they 
had fuffered Shipwreck, and not we. Which fhewed the 
Goodnefs and Tendernefs of their Nature, which are 
principle* gratia, the very Beginnings of Grace* or elfe I 
may fafely fay, they are thejirft Difyejitions, or at leaft, 
Capacities of Grace* 
They fet before us what Meat they had; and the 
Mariners fell to it fo heartily, as if they would have 
repaired all they loft before by their long Fafting, a^ 
one Meal. Their ordinary Bread was Rye-Pancakes, 
but their Beer very ftrong. I thought of thztEngliJb 
Proverb, A Cup of good Beer is Meaty Drink and Chart- 
ing. Sure thefe People thought fo ; for though at 
that cold Seafon fome of the People had no Stockings 
nor Shoes to their Feet, yet they kept their Under- 
ftandings warm, and their Mouths well lined with 
Lubeck Beer. 
I loft my Stomach not with eating, but long fall- 
ing, and fo went fick to Bed : in the Morning 1 found, 
myfelf well, 1 praife God. And we began now to 
examine ourfelves, and one another, what Monies 
cur double Shipwreck had left us : all that we had 
we freely laid down ; but there was an Ananias a- 
mongft us, who, we fufpefted, would conceal fome 
Part; and therefore we fearchedhim, and found no 
lefs than four and twenty Pieces of Eight, which 
P 3 certainly 
2 " A Narrative of 
certainly this Man ftoleout of our Bags when we were 
in the Boat, after our firft Shipwreck, at that prefent 
Time when we expefled every Moment we Ihould 
be call av>ay. Did this Man think that Saint Peter 
would not let him into Heaven without his Peter's 
Pence? Or that he ihould go the other Way, and 
muf: pay Chatcn nauhm fuutn ? It was a fad Thing for 
a Man to ileal in articuk mortis^ at the Pcint of Dtutb* 
But it wzz well for us, for we loft ail our 
Monies in the fecond Shipwreck, but what this Man 
fide from us. There are fome Divines that fay, Sin 
is committed crdlnante D:o ; but the Ancients are wont 
to fay Ceo frnm'ittcnte> which is a more medeft and 
civil Expreffion. I will not difpute the Que (lion 
lere: But I believe, if God did ever oidain Sin, it 
was in this Man's Healing; for this Money was our 
Relief in cur neceffitous Condition. 
We ilaid in this Ifland till Sunday : In the Morn- 
ing we went to hear our Landlord preach ; after Ser- 
mon he gave us Coma dulix 9 a dcuLtful Meal, full of 
Variety in one Dim, as Beef, Mutton, Lard, Goat, 
Roots, and fo many of God's Creatures, that it 
fecmed to me to be the £rft Chapter of Gcnejis in a 
Dim > but fo confounded, that the befi: Palate could 
not read what he eat, nor by his Tafte know and 
dHlinguifh the Creatures. Though God hath given all 
his Creatures for the Ufe of Man, fo that we may do 
what weplcafev/ith them ; yet I think it not bandfomc 
with our grand Me/Ie's and OlfcfwJiJa's to confound 
* and undo the Creation, cook it into a new Chaos, and 
faucc 
A' Great Deliverance at St a* 29 
/auce God's Creatures out of o'lir Knowledge. I love 
to know what I eat, that I may praife God for the 
Variety ot his Bleflings,: 'W truly I do rot K*mc 
the People of this Place ; for I think it is not Cu^o- 
-fityhere, butCuftom, and good Huftandry, rather 
than Uxurioufriefs, who boil all together to fare 
Charges, 
After much Thanks, and a little Money, we 
parted with this good old Prieft ; and I having 
purchafed an old Pair of Shoes, at the Price of a 
new, we travelled on Foot to Frederkkftat a City m 
Norway by the Coaft Side, and were very kindly 
entertained by the Burgo- Matter, The chief of his 
Difcourfe to me, was in Commendation of the hie 
Archbifnop of Canterbury, whom he called Exalhn- 
tijpmum Dcminum, I wonder how he came to know 
him. But Aire, thought I, if he be thus charitable 
to fpeak well of the Dead, who could not hear 
him, he will be bountiful to the Living, who are 
ready to thank him even beforehand. And truly 
he was Very kind to us, for he commanded fome of 
the City to entertain us civilly, and provided us 
Ships both for Holland and England, with the : 
Promife of fomc Provifion at his own Charge. 
I remember how the People ran after us in the 
Streets, and what their companionate Eye faw we 
wanted, their charitable Hand was ready to give % 
without afkir.g. A good old Man beftowed on me 
an excellent Pair of Mittens, which I brought into 
England. We found much Civility every where: 
though the Country is all rocky, yet the People's 
P 4 Hearts 
3° A Narrative of 
Hearts are tender; God made them e melton fur*, 
cut of a better Soil than their own Country. 
But to make hafte out of my Story, as well as 
out of Norway; We went away from Frederkkftat 
three or four Miles to Oflerfound, the Haven where 
our Ships lay, having laid into the Ship, that was 
bound for England, fome fmall Provision, as much 
as our Stock could pay for, yet not fo much as our 
Neccflity required ; for had not God bleficd us 
with a favourable Wind, we certainly had wanted 
much. But we, with all that was left us, which 
wa3 now nothing, but ourfelves, entered into the 
Ship in the Evening. In the Morning, before wc 
went out, there came a Ship from Lynn in Norfolk, 
that (truck againft our Harbour, which was natu- 
rally walled about with Rocks, and fo perifhed im- 
mediately. This was a fad Omen, and it feemed 
to me as a Prologue to a new Tragedy. We had 
not been above two or three Hours at Sea, but 
there was a fad Diftra&ion amongft us in the Ship, 
and the Mariners crying again for Mercy, Mercy, 
for we had almofl fell foul on a Rock, which lay fo 
cunningly in the Water, that we did not fpy it till 
we were upon it; but by the Goodnefs of God we 
failed clofe by it, and efcaped it ; the leaf! Touch 
of it had been our Ruin. Thus God oftentimes 
doth bring his Children as near the Mouth of 
Danger, as may be, but he lets them not fall 
therein, that they may both fear and praife his 
Name. 
About 
A Great Deliverance at Sea* 31 
About Noon we came clear off all the Rocks on 
the Coaft of Norway, and were failing for England 
with a fair Gale of Wind. Bat in this Profperity 
another fad Accident befel us ; this third Ship 
fprang a Leak, a new one I cannot fay, but rather 
repeated an old one, and fo our Ship began to 
fwim within as well as without; and we had no 
Way to relieve ourfelves, (for the Leak could not 
be found) but by Pumping ; which we did Day 
and Night, and fo took Revenge of the Sea, by 
fpitting that Water back again in its Face, as faft 
as it came into our Ship. But now again we were 
an a fad and deplorable Condition, being in Danger 
to be drowned from the Spring that rofe within us, 
and to fuffer an interline Shipwreck, which, like a 
Civil War, is moft dangerous, We had our Life 
now at our Fingers Ends ; and if we had not lifted 
up our Hands to pump, as Mcfcs did to pray, thefe 
Jmahkites had prevailed ; I mean thefe mercilefs 
Waves had overcome us. Good God ! in what, 
and how many Streights haft thou brought us ? 
,Our Sins are many, as the Waves of the Sea; and 
fo halt thou, O Lord, made our Funiihments. 
For now we were, as I conceive, in a worfe Con- 
dition than ever before; for though our Dan- 
gers were great, or rather greater, yet they 
came upon us fo on a fudden, that we under* 
flood them not. That Danger is iefs afflictive 
which we lefs underftand ; and that Mifery we 
apprehend not, is none at all, or at leail none of 
P 5 our 
3^ " A N A R R ATI VI 
our own. But now we fee Death before our Eyes, 
and are ia Expectation to perilh every Moment; 
fo that we may fay, with Saint Paul, We die daily. 
I Cor. xv. We were in the Condition of him that 
feeth himfelf bleed to Death. In our former 
Dangers we had like to perifh  fuddenly, which 
had been lefs penal to our Affe&ions : We were 
now to die at Leifure, and to be drowned with 
Premeditation ; which is more affli&ive to our 
Thoughts, though a lefs Pumfhmeiit for our Sins. - 
Melius cjl per ire femel, quam timer c fempcr : the Fear of 
Death is more dreadful than Death itlelf ; and it 
is better once to die, than to be always dying. 
With thefe Fears about us, and black Apprehen- 
fions, we failed on ftill with a fair Wind ; and after 
four or five Days and Nights fail, fo it pleafed 
God, we came in the View of the EngUJh Coaft on 
Norfolk Side, near Winierton ; where we faw the 
Ruins of a Shipwreck, and the Country -People en- 
riching thcmfelves with the Loffes of other Men ; 
the worft way of getting in the World. This was 
the Epilogue to our Tragedy, yet we had one Scene* 
of Sorrow more * For when we came near Yarmouth- 
Road, on our left Hand lay the Shingles, on our 
right, the Shore; and we could not agree amongil. 
ourfelves on which Side we fliould go. Our two 
Matters, and two Pilots, (for fo many : we had in 
one Ship,) like four Winds, blew contrary Ways* 
In this Conteft they made a fearful Noife and Quar- 
rel ; their Language was as foul as the Weather, and 
as high as the Wind, - and brought us in as^ 
grea't 
> 
A Great Dlliwranee at Sea* 33 
great Danger {as our own Matter told me), as ever.. 
I think Monarchy is the belt Government in a 
Ship, -as well as in the State. Many Pilots with 
their Overwifdomnefs, are oftentimes the Ruin' 
both of themfelves and their Veffel. . 
At length we did agree, and ordered one of our; 
own' Company (a Man, who beft knew the 
Coaft,) to lit at Stern; but this crazy and ill-built 
Ship, though fte was (leered one Way, ftew another,; 
as if all Things had confpired to our Ruin. We 
refolved to fail by the Shore- Side, that in Cafe our 
Ship fllould mifcary, we might fwim to Land. 
Thefe were but fad Hopes; but it pleafed God, 
we came fafe into Yarmouth Road ; and having, call 
our Anchor, thought ourfelves fecure. But our 
Anchor came Home to us again; and the Wind/ 
which was very high, had like to have driven 
us on a Scctchnan: They cried out, and fo did 
we; for they^ could not be more afraid of m> 
than we were of ourfelves ; for had we boarded 
them, we certainly had endangered Jboth our 
jShips : but that God that had begun and gone 
along with us in fuch vifible Characters of his ex- 
traordinary Mercy, would not now leave us at 
the laft, but did perfect our Deliverance; for our 
Anchor, held, and we rode very fecure that Night.: 
The next Morning we hung out a Whiff, and there 
came four Men in a Shallop from Yarmouth, and 
demanded no lefs than thirty Shillings to carry me, 
a Angle Perfon, to Shore, when our whole Sto,cfc 
was but two Pieces ofcEight- Though I did long 
for Land, yet I could not purchafe it at iWh a 
P 6 Rate : 
34 / Narrative 
Rate : But at length they were content to take 
lefs, becaufe they could not get any more; and 
took fomething, rather than to turii back with 
nothing. 
But they no fooner had got me into the Boat, but 
they rowed me up and down, to weigh Anchors ; 
for there had been a great Storm the Night before, 
and many Ships had broke their Cables, and were 
driven away by the Tcmpert. They tried at feveral 
Anchors not without great Danger, as I conceived; 
but rinding themfelves not ftrong enough, they at 
length brought me to the Shore, which was no 
landing Place; but four Men, which flood waiting 
for us on the Shore, ran into the Sea up to their 
Middles, laid Hands on our Boat, and fo ran it 
on the Sands, and tumbled us over and over ; fo 
that I cannot fay, whether I fet my Head or Feet 
firft on the Shore. After this Manner fure Jonah 
was cad upon the dry Land, when the Whale vo- 
mited him up ; I fuppofe that great Leviathan did 
not caft him upon his Legs : But a Man that had 
made fuch a Trade of frittering at Sea as we did, 
and after fo long a SuccefTion of Evils, would be 
glad to be caft on dry Land in any Polhire. 
From the Shore I went into Yarmouth Town, with 
a Company of People following at my Heels, won- 
deringat me, as if 1 had been fome ilrange Creature 
come out of Jmcrica, though they knew none of 
my Sufferings, but faw me in a fad ragged, wea- 
ther-beaten Condition. I prefently got into an 
Jnn, to hide myfelf from the Wonder of the People, 
and 
A Great Deliverance at Sea  35 
and from the Trouble of their impertinent Quef- 
tions ; but chiefly, that I might praife God in 
private for his great ard many Deliverances. I 
cannot chufe but tell you fo much, left I mould 
feem ungrateful to my gracious God : But I will 
fay no more, left I may feem vain-glorious to my 
Friend. Therefore I will conceal from you my 
particular Devotions : Non eft Religio ubi omnia 
patent ; I learned it from the Door of a Capuchin's 
Convent. 
The Sign of the Inn was the Arms of Varmottif?, 
the Man, I fuppofe the Hoft of the Houfe, was as 
kind to me as Saint Paul 9 * Hoft Gains was to him. 
And here I mult not forget the Kind- 
nefs of a true Friend indeed, a good * Tf:omas Lc- 
Samarhatu * who had Compaflion on man, Efq. of 
me, bound up my Wounds, pouring TVenbejlon in 
in Oil and Wine, and fet me on his SajblL 
own Beaft, brought me to his own 
Houfe, and had a Care of me ; and, which I took 
moft kindly, he beftowed on my Sufferings Nazi- 
anzen's Charity, a Tear of Companion, [Orat 6. 
5/ nihil babes, da iaernmulam']. Gcd I hope, will turn 
this Kindnefs to me, in Bleflings upon him, and 
his dear Wife and Children. By the Kindnefs of 
this Gentleman, 1 was recruited with all Manner of 
Comforts ; and now behold another Shipwreck, 
not of my Goods but good Name. Some there 
were, when they heard of the Monfter of my Suf- 
ferings, were affrighted out of their Wits, I 
fuppofe, as well as out of their Charity, and con- 
cluded 
3f A Narr a tive of ' 
eluded I was a Malignant. Thus God is pleafed 
to afiimulate my Sufferings to Saint Paul's in fome 
Meafure (the Latchet of whofe Shoe I am not 
worthy to untie) who, when he had efcaped the 
Danger of the Sea, was flung by a Viper as foon 
as he came to Shore. Arts xxviii. Suppofe I flfould 
fay, I do ferve my God that Way which the World 
calls Malignancy. Ami fuch an one, becauie the 
People fay it ? Or was Saint Paid an Here tick, be- 
caufe the World thought him fo ? I do not care 
what the Many fay of mc, Bellua mult or nm Capitum % 
a Beajl of many Heads, Jed nullitts Ingcnii, hut rf no £/;/- 
derfanding. Thus the People cenfured Joh-i the 
Baptijl, the Morning Star of the Gofpe! ; and like- 
wife our Blcffed Saviour himfelf, that glorious Sun 
of Righteoafnefs, or as St. Ltdc calls him, Lukeiw 
the Day that f -rings from on h ;gh ; although their De- 
portment in the World >vas different, walking under 
feveral Schemes, and living after feveral and con- 
trary Fa fiii on >. For, John the Baptifi came neither 
eating Bread nor drinking Wine, andye fay he hath cDc<vil 9 
the Sen of Man is come eativg and drinking, and yc 
f>y behold a gluttonous Man, and a JVinc-hihher, and a 
Friend of Publicans and Sinners. Luke vii. 33, 34. 
Thus the People are never pleafed, neither fail nor 
falling. Neither the; Auflcrity of St. Johns Life, 
nor the Swectnefs and Familiarity of our Saviour's 
Convcrfation could content the People. 
But you are a knowing Perfon, and one whofe 
good Opinion I eficcm ; I have therefore, here en- 
cJoied, lent you better Words of me drawn by the 
Company o[Da;:tzick } and fent to the Eajllaml Com- 
pany 
A Great Deliverance at Sta. 57 
pany here in London, for whole Sake I have faffered 
thefe adverfe Things, and am content to run them 
over again to do them Service ; fnch an Affection. 
I do and fhall ever bear to their Society. 
Thus I have given, at your earneft Requeft, the 
fad. Story of my Sufferings in my Eaftlaiid Voyage* 
What I have related, my unhappy Evidence hath 
found it too true ; yet I cannot tell you nil, for 
there were many Dangers which I underflood not. 
It was my Chance, a if car after our Arrival in Eng- 
land, to meet with one of my Fellow Sufferers, 
(M. B. the fame Man that drew me out of the Sea) : 
he prefently began to repeat our Shipwrecks, (for 
Men that have fullered together, love to talk of 
their Dangers paft, and bemoan one another) ; he 
made Mention of feveral Streights, Extremities, 
Dangers, Deaths that we were in, which I do not 
remember; fo that from his Mouth this Story 
feemed to be fo prodigious a Romance, that few but 
thofe that felt it would believe. But I have not 
told you in this Relation, what others fay, but what 
1 myfelf have fullered; and though I was loth to 
begin, I am now as unwilling to make an End' - 
Omnibus hoc Vitium — And therefore I fhall tell you 
what further Adverfity I have fuffercd by this bar- 
barous Element of Water. 
I will not tell you of my Venture over the Ears 
in foul Weather to the Mm at Dantzk.i in the Bal- 
tici Seas, for that it may be was our Fear, and not 
Danger; neither will I fpeark of my Paflage from 
Groningcn 
3$ ^ Narrative c/ 
Grout a gen t o Amfterdam , w h e n o u r S h i p ft r u c k a gai n ft 
the Sands ; for there was Danger and no Fear ; for 
t \e Ship got off as foon as we knew it was on : But 
I will acquaint you with what happened to me upon 
the River Loire in France, at Orleans. 
I was advifed by a French Gentleman, that had 
formerly travelled with my noble 
* Whofc Bro- Lord t ] ie pre fent Earl of Weft- 
ther, Mr. Robert ^ * nQt tQ ^ theBrjd 
Fane, was in our . 
Company. at Agency, for the Bndge is 
made, not with a direct Line 
over the River, but fomcthing obliquely, and fo 
oftentimes dangerous to Pafftngers. When we 
came near the Bridge, I would have bribed the 
Batelier with a $uart cFE/cu, to have fct myfelf and 
two of my Company afhore on this Side the Bridge, 
and to have taken us in on the other Side. But the 
reft of the Company were unwilling to be hindered 
in their PafTage, and we were almoft as contented to 
venture. But this thin Deal Boat (which Boats are 
made on purpofe to fwim down the River to Nants 9 
and return no more), came with a fwift Stream to- 
wards a Corner of one of the Arches of the Bridge, 
which the Batelier feeing, cried Aous fommes perdu, 
We are all loft. He did ftrivc, by putting his Rud- 
der againft the Bridge, to keep off the Blow, but 
brought it upon himfelf ; for it beat him all along, 
and (truck off one Beard of our Boat, that we Avam 
almoft equal with the Stream, and the Water looked 
in upon us : One Touch more would have darned 
our 
A Great Deliverance at Sea, 39 
our Boat in Pieces, and fo we had been all drowned 
in whole fale ; for there was no Avimmiog oat of a 
Crowd, when our Arms were pinioned together with, 
fitting clofe to one another. But by the Gcoduefs 
of God we got through the Arch, and came fafe to 
Shore. 
There came prefently to me two Corddier Friars 
which were our Fellow PafTengers ; the one bade me 
thank him, for he made the biggeji Cro/s ; the other 
told me, / muft thank him, for he prayed unto the 
Blcjfd Virgin for us. I do remember, indeed, when 
we were in our greateft Danger, thefe Friars being 
ftruck with Fear, (which oftentimes killeth before 
Death), fell down in the Midft of the Boat ; one 
of them meafured himfelf with his Finger, or, a3 
he faith, crofled himfelf ; the other pulled out a 
fmall Image, I fuppofe of Wood, about the Big- 
nefs of my great Toe, and it feemed to me not 
much unlike; to this he whifpered fomething, 
which I believe it did not hear, no more than we. 
I thanked them both, one for his civil Ignorance, 
the other for his religious Folly. I confefs, in fo 
fad and fcrious a Matter as drowning, I do not love 
fueh Puppet Piety, fuch mechanic and handicraft 
Devotion; my Thanks mult be addrelfed to God, 
the Author and Fountain of our Deliverance, after 
a more fpi ritual Manner. 
After this, the fame Year, it was my Buiinefs to 
return into England. I came to Calais the Day after 
the Packet-boat was gone. Being weary of a charge- 
able 
4° ^ NARRATIVE tf/ 
able Town, and burning with aDefire of feeing my 
own Country again ; having taken Advice by a 
Merchant, I ventured to Sea in a Shallop, which 
the Tide before ame from Dwr, and brought 
three Ahnaim fafe to Cain**, without any 
Danger. The Example of their fafe Arrival, 
was a fufficicnt Argument to perfuade rne to 
venture from thence to Dover. So at four of 
the Clock in the Mo/nin* with the Tide we went 
to Sea; but had not r r -nc half a Le.'^ue. but there 
arofe a great and mighty Wind, which did blow 
not only our Candle, but our Lanthorn out, I mean 
out of the Boat, fo that we were fain to let our Boat, 
drive till it was Day-light. 
I o ire red the Seamen their Fare to carry us back 
again to Ca!r.ts> which they did endeavour, but 
could not, the Wind was fo ftrong ; yet as fair a 
Wind as could blow out of the Sky to carry us to 
Dover ; but we had too much of it* The Surfeit of 
good Things is as great an Evil as the Want of 
them, and a Man may be too well fometimes. How 
did Neptune play at Tennis with us poor Mortals, 
' and how like Balls were we banded up and down by 
his furious Waves ? Sometimes, as the Pfalmilt 
faith, they mounted us up to Heaven, as if they would 
have fhewn us Lazarus in the Bofom of Abraham. 
Sometimes they carried us down in the Deep, as if we 
had been fent with more than a Drop of Water to 
cool the Tongue of Dives. By and by there arofe 
a great Wind, which with the firfl Blaft fpJit our 
Sail in Pieces ; fo that we were forced to ufe our 
great SaiJ, which was too big for the Wind, as the 
Wia 
A Great Dehwrance at Sea* 41 
Wind was for it, and therefore we made Ufe but of 
one half: the other ljing on the Side of the Boat, 
made it run fo much on that Side, that I expected 
every Moment it mould topple over. We could 
not go backward, and we were afraid to go for- 
ward. I laid mvfelf down in the Boat from the 
View of thefe threatening Waves (as a dying Man 
is not willing to look the Executioner in the Face), 
cxpefting every Moment to be fvvallowed by thofe 
roaring Lions of the Sea, who came upon us with 
open Mouths, ready to devour us. But God flop- 
ped the Mouths of thofe Lions that they mould not 
hurt us; and our fmall Vellel rode in Safety and 
Triumph upon the Head of the proudelt Wave. We 
could not fay to the Pilot, as the Emperor did, O- 
farcm <z'cJw, Esfc. — but there was in our Boat a noble 
Gentleman, both by Birth and Virtue, (the bell 
and trueft Nobility), and likewife another.civil Per- 
fon. Thefe Gentlemen had fo much Worth and 
Merit in them, that they fhould not need fear the 
Threatening of an infolent Wave, but might boldly 
fay unto the Sea, Sea, do thy nvcrft. But I'll rather 
impute all to the Goodnefs of God, in whofe Hands 
we were, and therefore could not mifcarry. 
By and by a Wave took us up, and fliewed us 
England: But it was with us as it was with Mofes, we 
might from this watry Pi hah > and Mountain of the 
Sea, behold the Land with our Eyes, which yet we 
muft not reach with our Feet. One of thefe Gen- 
tlemen called to me to rife, faying, I might fee Do- 
ver Caftle : But I thought it of no Concernment to 
me, and therefore lay Mill, but wifhing that we 
4 2 A Na rrativs of 
we were all Prifoners there, and fo I faid, little 
thinking that within a few Days after I ftiould be 
apprehended and accufed for tak- 
At Wcjlonhan- j Doz , er Caft , and k fome 
gar, my Lord ~ . r 
St rang ford** Months Pnfoner in Kent. God 
Houfe, which knows I would have taken it with 
was then made all my Heart, but for a Refuge 
a Prifon to fe- on , nQt as a SoIdier taketh the 
cure the honcit _ 1 n , . „ 
Gentlemen of Fort of ,11S E * em y> but as a P 00r 
that County. Weather-beaten Traveller taketh 
the Iioufe of a Friend, as a Shelter. 
The Storm continued fall, and the Wind blew very 
Wgh, which though it put us in great Danger, yet 
being fair for us, blew us the fooner out of it. 
For now we came near Dover, and therefore I 
defired my Friend to lie off my Legs, for now I 
thought I fhould have fome Ufe of them myfelf ; 
which he did, and I rofe up and faw a World of 
People Handing upon the Pier at Dover, holding up 
their Hands, not only in Admiration of our Dan- 
gers, but in Zeal and Devotion for our Deliverance. 
They directed us with their Hands which Way we 
had befl: enter into Dover, and fo with a frefli Gale 
of God's Mercy, as well as with a fair Blaft of 
Wind, with full Sails, we, not without fome Dan- 
go in hitting the Pier, ran afhore. 
I mult not omit one Mercy more, (which I forgot 
in my laft) becaufe it is fo near of Kin, and allied 
to my Deliverances at Sea, a Pre-delivcrance, a 
Deliverance before-hand, an antidated Mercy, 
For 
A Great Deliverance at Sea. 43 
For after I had fpent Come Time in Prujfia, and 
had feen Elbing, Koninjberg, which is the Univeriity ; 
the Pillow, which is both the Key to the Country, 
and to the chief Revenue of the Marquis of Bran- 
denburg in Prujpay I returned to Daztzick, with a 
Refolution for England, having met with a fair Op- 
portunity as well as a Wind ; for there was one 
Captain Sharper of Ncw-Cafth, a King's Man, (as 
they call thofe that love the King in that Country) ; 
this was Argument enough both to confirm and 
ha/ten my Refolution. 
This honeft Captain being ready fraught and bound 
for England, 1 prefently went to him tofpeak foru^ 
PafTage; he, like a kind Man, as well as a King's 
Man, promifed me a PaiTage gratis. The Englijh 
Company at DantzSck undeiftanding fo much, the 
greater Part of them came to me, and importuned 
me to ftay with them, and continue my preaching 
with a Promife to anfvver my Pains with more than 
I could defire or deferve. This unexpeded Kindnefs 
and Love, which is above the Price of any Reward 
upon Earth, foon melted me into a Compliance with 
their Defires, and fo without any Contract, I free- 
ly, as fuddenly, without farther Counfel, promifed 
to ftay with them. 
But God was in it, who inclineth our Hearts to 
thofe Ways which lead to our Safety and Felicity, 
though we do not for the prefent fee the Secrets of 
his Love and Wifdom ; for this good Man, Cap- 
tain 
44 A Narrative of 
tain Sharper* with all his Company # , Come few 
Bays after they went to Sea, were caft away near 
the Scund, not a Man efcaped. Thus God fometimes, 
preventeth his Children from falling into Ev.il, *s . 
well as to deliver them when fallen, that they may 
enjoy the Comforts of his Mercy without theSorrow _ 
of fu fieri ng. :  
To deliver his Children when they are fallen into 
any Calamity and Trouble, is an high and broad 
Expreffion of his Love and Kindnefs to them ; yet 
there is fome Bicternefs in the Evil, though there 
be Sweetnefs in the Deliverance : but now, by 
IrH .Grace and Goodnefs, to cfcape before we 
are taken, and to be delivered before we fufFer, 
is a Mercy we cannot hope for, a Bleffing we 
could not expeft, and I am fare cannot exprefs. 
* Amongft them were my two loving Friends, 
Mr. Randolph Price, el deft Son to Mr. Price of EJber, 
a Gentleman of great Hopes, taken away in the 
Flower of his Youth and Virtue. I gave him the, 
Holy and blefled Sacrament before he went to Sea, . 
which he received with much Devotion, which no 
Doubt was a prefent and heavenly Cordial to hira- 
felf; fo I mention it as a dwelling and perpetual 
Comfort to his ftill weeping Friends, Captain Vaug- X 
han, who accompanied me in my firft Voyage into 
the Eajl Country. . 
" It 
A Great Deliverance at Sea* „ 45 
I* is like pure Wine without the Allay of Water; 
a lively Pi&ure, and true Portraiture of the State- 
of the Bleffed In Heaven, who poffefs Fulnefs of 
Joy without any Mixture of Sorrow, and Life 
without the Shadow of Death. I hope I (hall ne- 
ver forget this great Mercy ; and it is the greater, 
becaufe it was bellowed upon one that had no 
Tideto.it> but the free Grace and Goodnefs of 
God. 
After thefe great and many Dangers at Sea, 
and as many and great Deliverances, I had 
thought once to tell you what happened to me oa 
. the Shore. > * * 
Plus habet infefta Terra timoris Aqua. 
But T will conceal them from my Friends; for in 
this (ad Age every Man hath Sorrow enough of his 
- own, and is not atJLeifure to confider the fad Con- 
dition of another from bemoaning and pitying 
himfelf: I will therefore conclude, giving Glory to 
God for his many Mercies, and my Thanks to 
you for giving me an Opportunity to remember 
them. 
I hope you will pardon my plain Language; Sor- 
row is dull and black, and fad Stories ought not to 
be prefented in painted Words, and gaudy Exprefli- 
ons of Rhetorick, No Man mourneth in coloured 
Taffety. What is wanting in Allegories, you have 
46 ^ Narrative 
in Reality : Truth needeth.no Metaphors. You have 
a true Relation of many fad Accidents and Afflic- 
tions at Sea, by him who did undergo them, who 
is, 
Sir, 
Tour moft affectionate 
Friend to feme you* 
9 . - Will. Johnson. 
FINIS. 
