THE 

FOOL OF QUALITY 



BY 

HENRY BROOKE 



WITH A BIOGRAPHICAL PREFACE BY 
CHARLES KINGSLEY 

AND A NEW LIFE OF THE AUTHOR BY 
E. A. BAKER, M.A. 



LONDON : 

:ORGE ROUTLEDGE AND SONS, LIMITED 
NEW YORK : E. P. DUTTON & Co. 




Printed in Great Britain 



INTRODUCTION 

ANY further introduction to an author whom Charles 
Kingsley ushered in with so eulogistic a preface would 
be a work of supererogation, had not the opportunity 
arisen of making some additions to the little that is 
generally known about Henry Brooke. Kingsley's preface 
has been retained in the present edition of The Fool of 
Quality, for it is now identified with the book in a way 
that few prefaces are at all events, such as are written to 
introduce other men's work. It contains the finest portrait 
we have of the character of Brooke, a portrait that has the 
charm of eloquence and enthusiasm, and displays the in- 
sight born of complete and fervent sympathy. Kingsley had 
the good luck to find, in a writer who had preceded him by 
nearly a century, a man singularly like himself in tempera- 
ment, in imagination, in social, ethical, and religious ideas. 
No proper biography of Henry Brooke existing for 
Kingsley's account is, after all, only a sketch there is 
no excuse needed for trying to fill in the outlines with a 
few fresh details. For much of the material to be used 
for this purpose I am indebted to Mr. Henry Brooke of 
Liverpool, a descendant of Robert, the younger brother of 
the Counsellor Brooke, as he was familiarly known in his 
own day, author of The Fool of Quality. Mr. Brooke has 
kindly supplied the appended family tree, which he has 
taken considerable pains to verify, and has lent for repro- 
duction the life-like monochrome portrait which is included 
here. He has also put at my disposal, for the purposes of 
this introduction, his interesting collection of Brooke papers 
and letters. I am further much indebted for a number of 
references and other notes to Mr. Ernest Falser, who has 
made a special study of the life and works of the author. 
Several of the references to the contemporary press are due 
to the researches of Mr. J. K. Bowling. 

As the reader who casts an eye over this introduction 
will doubtless peruse Kingsley's preface, I will not worry 



vi INTRODUCTION 

him with repetition, but will refer him to that for a more 
connected account of our author. This is, in the main, 
but an attempt to fill up some of the lacunae. First let 
me deal with Brooke's ancestry, no unimportant matter, 
for, as a critic points out, the mingling of Sheridan, 
Fitzgerald, and Digby blood with the religious nature of 
the Brookes was bound, sooner or later, to produce a man 
like Henry Brooke and a book like The Fool of Quality. 
Henry Brooke was the second of three sons of the Rev. 
William Brooke, and not, as hitherto stated, the elder of 
two. The eldest was Digby Brooke, born 1697, in County 
Cavan, and educated by his father. He entered Trinity 
College, Dublin, in 1714, graduated B.A. in 1719, and 
M.A. in 1722. What happened to him afterwards cannot 
be traced. It is probable that he died young, as there is 
no mention of him either in the old biographies or in the 
letters and papers left by his nephews and nieces, who refer 
to two brothers only Ht nry, the elder, and Robert. The 
father, the Rev. William Brooke, of Rantavan (born 1669, 
died 1745), was the eldest of three brothers, sons of 
William Brooke, a physician in County Cavan. He was 
rector of Moybolgue (now Bailie - borough), Mullagh, 
Killinkere, Innismngrath, Kildallon, and Lavey, a very 
large area in the same county, and is also stated to have 
been chaplain to King William. In a memoir prefixed to 
the Reliques of Irish Poetry, by Henry Brooke's daughter, 
Charlotte, he is described as 'a person of considerable 
talents and amiable worth.' He was a scholar of Trinity 
College, and was elected a member of the Convocation 
proposed to be held in 1704. At the time of his death 
November 10, 1745 a long obituary notice appeared in 
George Faulkner's Dublin Journal^ which states that 
1 through a residence of fifty years and upwards he was 
distinguished for his piety as a clergyman, his justice as 
a magistrate, and his benevolence as a man . . . and his 
death has deprived us of the only person that would contra- 
dict this recital of his virtues.' He married Lettice Digby, 
a daughter of Simon Digby, bishop of Elphin, who married 
Elizabeth Westenra. The bishop and his wife died in the 
same week, and were ' both interred at one time, carry 'd in 
one herse, one Funeral Sermon, and in one vault, on the 
2oth April, 1722.' Simon Digby is commended as a 
miniature painter by Horace Walpole, and it is probably 
from the Digby strain, says Mr. Brooke, 'that Henry's 



INTRODUCTION vii 

brother, Robert, and several generations of the latter's 
descendants, derived their artistic skill.' The great- 
grandmother of Lettice, Lettice Fitzgerald, who married 
Sir Thomas Digby, and later became Baroness of Offaly, 
when alone in her castle of Geashill, King's County, in 
April, 1642, was besieged by the rebels, and conducted 
an heroic defence in person. ' As the baroness was 
looking out of a window, a shot happening to strike the 
wall beside her, she immediately with her handkerchief 
wiped the spot, showing how little she cared for the 
attempts of the assailants.' So much for the Digby and 
the Geraldine blood. The relationship between the Brookes 
and Sheridans rests only on an old family tradition, corro- 
borated by a few other circumstances. (See Life of Mrs. 
Frances Sheridan, by Miss Le Fanu, p. 108, and Lord 
Dufferin's life of his mother in her collected poems.) We 
find the younger members of the two families addressing 
each other as cousins. 

Henry Brooke was born in the house of Rantavan, which 
stood on the paternal property, not far from the village of 
Virginia, in the county of Cavan. Kingsley gives the date 
of his birth as 1 708 ; the writer in the Dublin University 
Magazine, the Rev. R. S. Brooke, from whom he borrowed, 
as 1706. But we have the register of Matriculation at 
Trinity College, Dublin, which runs as follows : " Februarii 
die septimi, 1720. Henricus Brook, Pension. Filius 
Gulielmi, Clerici, annum agens decimum septimum, natus 
in comitate Cavan ; educatus Dublini sub Doctore Jones." 
He was born, therefore, in 1703. He was a delicate lad, 
and became the special charge of his mother, who early 
cultivated in him a love of letters. At the age of seven, he 
was able to repeat many fine passages from the English 
poets and dramatists. His first schoolmaster was Mr. 
Felix Comerford, who, says Mr. C. H. Wilson, author of 
the anonymous Brookiana, 'had traversed the lettered shores 
of antiquity,' and accordingly l imagined that all knowledge 
worthy the pursuit of a rational being was treasured up in 
the Greek and Roman tongues,' every other language being 
merely a jargon, unfit for anything but to carry on the com- 
munication of sordid trade, or the inferior arts of life. 
Another writer describes Dominie Felix, who was the 
principal schoolmaster in Cavan, as 'priggish, acute, 
scholastic, intensely professional; like lago, "nothing if 
not critical," pouncing like a hawk on every breach of 



viii INTRODUCTION 

accidence, and exploding in thunder upon every hapless 
perpetrator of a false quantity. Contracted as to general 
information, but semper paratus, by pun, quibble, quotation, 
or sophism, to make up all deficiencies in learning by ready 
rejoinder and mother wit.' He appears to have been a 
character worthy of Carleton's pages, and a good-hearted 
fellow to boot. When Harry is about to leave him for the 
school in Dublin kept by Dr. Sheridan, who, the worthy 
man admits, 'in politiori literatura palmam tenet,' he sends 
some excellent advice to the father and mother, adding, ' I 
plainly see it, that Nature intends that this child should 
act some great part on the theatre of human life. Nature, 
I say, or rather the God of Nature, has endowed him with 
an excellent memory, and the seeds of taste already begin 
to peep forth. Young as he is, he is interested in every- 
thing that interests man.' ' I was walking with Harry the 
other day,' continues Mr. Felix, ' and as we were passing by 
an old hedge he pointed to a bush. " If I chose," said he, 
11 1 could have caught a thrush on her nest in that bush, 
but I would not for the world," added he, " be guilty of 
such a cruel act. I was afraid that some of the other boys 
would have found it, but luckily, they did not ; so that to 
my great joy, the mother and her young have escaped." ' 
This reminds one strongly of the earlier chapters of The 
Fool of Quality^ the autobiographic element of which 
should not be lost sight of autobiographic, that is, as an 
interpretation of character. 

Dr. Thomas Sheridan, ' the Quintilian of his day,' and 
the grandfather of Richard Brinsley Sheridan, was a more 
remarkable character even than Comerford, and rivalled 
Person not only as a classical scholar, but also as a wit and 
good liver. Swift and he were at one time close friends. 
The Dean was often entertained at Rantavan on his way to 
visit Sheridan at Quilca. But Swift presently quarrelled 
with his old friend, and, not content with gibing at him 
living, assailed him savagely after his death. Young Brooke 
was so nettled by a satire that Swift had written on the 
home of the Sheridans at Quilca, where he had often 
been an honoured guest, that he attempted to retaliate 
in kind. A set of verses entitled 'Quilca House to the 
Dean,' was fathered on a certain dancing -master, Peter 
Murray, who was so pleased with the notoriety they gave 
him, that he forthwith provided a continuation from his 
own pen. Dr. Johnson said to Sheridan, whom he did 



INTRODUCTION ix 

not like personally, that he ' wanted neither parts nor 
literature, but that his vanity and Quixotism obscured his 
merits.' Harry Brooke, the Doctor's favourite pupil, gives a 
more generous testimony to his talents and his character. 
Several of Harry's cousins were taught by Dr. Sheridan. 

The university register already quoted proves that Henry 
Brooke went to a third school, about which nothing further 
is known. Brookiana preserves many relics of his juvenilia, 
prose and verse, none of them in any way remarkable, 
except as showing his natural bent for literary composition. 
Dr, Sheridan made him an excellent classical scholar, but 
the share Dominie Comerford had had in his education 
must not be forgctten. It was largely to his mother and 
her training that he owed his deep religious fervour, and his 
love of civil and religious liberty, both of which were to be 
exhibited powerfully in his conduct and his writings, and to 
have no small effect upon his fortunes. 

Though Henry had been entered as a pensioner at 
Trinity College, Dublin, and duly served his terms, he 
was not intended by his father to follow his own footsteps 
in the Church, but was sent to London in 1724 to read 
law. In his short stay at the Temple, he made the 
acquaintance of several men of wit and learning, including 
Pope and Lord Lyttelton ; Swift he had already met at 
Rantavan. The Dean is reported to have said that 
Brooke was a ' young man of genius, but he was sorry to 
find that genius incline to poetry, which of all other pur- 
suits was the most unprofitable.' He treated the young 
man with great kindness and indulgence, and was repaid 
by sincere admiration for his powers and keen sympathy 
with the patriotism displayed in the DrapieSs Letters. 
Brooke was suddenly recalled to Ireland by the news that 
a beloved aunt was on her death-bed. 

He arrived in time to receive the blessing of his relative, 
who delivered to his guardianship her daughter, Catherine 
Meares, a beautiful girl of twelve. The relationship seems 
to have been on his mother's, the Digbys', side. The child 
was left with but small provision ; so at his mother's 
suggestion, Brooke took her to Dublin, and put her in a 
boarding-school. His visits were frequent, and the pair of 
children at once fell in love. Catherine's schoolfellows 
were not long finding out their secret, and vexed her con- 
tinually with their raillery. At length she complained to 
her precocious guardian, who proposed an effectual remedy, 



x INTRODUCTION 

marriage. The clandestine wedding commented upon so 
feelingly by Charles Kingsley was the result. A letter of 
Catherine's to her nephew, Henry Brooke Junior, gives us 
glimpses of a lovable character : 

DEAR HARRY, I am very much obliged to you for your pretty 
letter, and accept your offer. , You shall now be my gardener, if your 
brother will join to help you. I have spades making for you both, 
and I will give you what wages you please. I told one of the cows 
you were coming, and she was so glad she calved last week, that she 
might have milk enough for you ; but I am afraid your young primate 
will be too saucy to be a gardener to a poor farm. If so, we want a 
parson sadly, and he shall dig all the week, and say prayers for us on a 
Sunday. I am, my dear Harry, your most affectionate aunt, 

CA. BROOKE. 

She was furthermore a woman of piety and good sense, 
as may be inferred from a postscript she adds to a letter of 
her husband's to Mr. George Howard : 

One word more of your gratitude and the man would be angry ; you 
know he can be vexed ; so though you have got out of ear-shot, don't 
provoke him, for fear I should come in for a share of what you deserve. 
I am, I think, just such a busy good-for-nothing as you left me, and 
Charlotte is gtown a much better girl, and we all often regret the loss 
of our dear Mr. Howard when the toil and business of the day is over. 
May the God of love and mercy bless him in all he undertakes ; may 
he be a blessing wherever he goes and wherever he stays, is the earnest 
prayer of his sincerely affectionate 

CA. BROOKE. 

We now come to the time when Brooke went back to 
London, and began his literary career, a period upon 
which our information is, unhappily, very scanty indeed. 
In 1728 he wrote his best poem, Universal Beauty, about 
which there is no need to add very much to what Kingsley 
has said. Though now it possesses merely a historical 
interest, for it has suffered the fate of nearly all didactic 
poetry, the work has sterling merits as a summary of the 
finest thoughts of its time on Nature and the Creator, and 
btars ample testimony to Brooke's depth of scholarship. 
Its thesis is that the beauty of the universe is the 
expression of the Divine order immanent in all creation, 
a beauty which 

Mimicked in our humbler strains, 
Illustrious, thro' the world's great poem reigns. 



INTRODUCTION xi 

The style shows an attempt to graft Milton's syntax on 
Pope's prosody. 

Oft where the zenith's lofty realms extend, 

E'er mists, conglobing by their weight descend, 

With sudden nitre captivates the cloud, 

And o'er the vapour throws a whitening shroud ; 

Soft, from the concave, hovering fleeces fall, 

Whose snaky texture clothes our silver ball. 

Or when the shower forsakes the sable skies, 

Haply the cold in secret ambush lies, 

Couching awaits in some inferior space, 

And chills the tempest with a quick embrace ; 

The chrystal pellets at the touch congeal, 

And from the ground rebounds the rattling hail. 

Or constant where this artificer dwells, 

And algid from his heights the mist repels, 

The ALMIGHTY ALCHYMIST his limbeck rears, 

His lordly Taurus, or his Alpine peers ; 

Suspending fogs around the summit spread, 

And gloomy columns crown each haughty head, 

Obstructed drench the constipating hill, 

And soaking thro' the porous grit distil : 

Collected from a thousand thousand cells 

The subterraneous flood impatient swells ; 

Whence issuing torrents burst the mountain side, 

And hence impetuous pour their headlong tide. 

Still central from the wide circumfluous waves 

(Whose briny dash each bounded region laves), 

The soil, still rising, from the deep retires, 

And mediate, to the neighbouring heaven aspires. 

Hence, where the spring its surging effluence boils, 

The stream ne'er refluent on the fount recoils, 

But trips progressive, with descending pace, 

And tunes, thro' many a league, its warbling maze ; 

Here blended, swells with interfering rills ; 

And here the lake's capacious cistern fills ; 

Or wanton, here a snaky labyrinth roams ; 

Impervious here, with indignation foams ; 

Or here with rapture shoots the nether glade, 

And whitening silvers in the long cascade. 

The theology of the poem, like that of The Fool of Quality, 
is strongly impregnated with the doctrines of the mystical 
Jacob Boehme. The same is the case with another long 
poem, Redemption. These poems appear again in the 
collected edition of her father's poetical works made by 
Charlotte Brooke in 1778. As much of his poetry as the 
ordinary reader will care to examine will be found in 
Chalmers's British Poets. 

Family affairs, perhaps the needs of his children, who 



xii INTRODUCTION 

were multiplying rapidly, recalled Brooke to Ireland ; for 
seven or eight years he practised in Dublin as a chamber 
counsel ; but literary ambition brought him to London 
again in 1736. He received a cordial welcome from 
Pope and Lyttelton, and was introduced by William Pitt, 
afterwards Earl of Chatham, to Frederick, Prince of 
Wales, 'who caressed him with great familiarity, and 
presented him with many elegant and valuable tokens of 
friendship.' l No doubt his engaging character and 
demeanour, backed by an attractive person, did more 
to win him a social and literary position than his achieve- 
ments as an author. Brooke was a good French and 
Italian scholar, and about this time brought out a transla- 
tion in verse of the first three books of Tasso's Gerusalemme 
Liber ata. It was highly praised by Hoole, who stated 
that his own translation of the poem would have been 
rendered unnecessary had Mr. Brooke turned the whole 
into English. 

Kingsley has told the story of the production of 
Gustavus Vasa, a play described by one of Brooke's 
eulogists as ' the foremost production of human powers,' and 
of the circumstances that led to its author's final return to 
Ireland *. There is little reason for doubting that the cause 
of his retirement from the troubled sea of politics in London 
was really the one alleged, namely, his wife's excessive fears 
lest he should get into trouble through his impassioned 
advocacy of the Prince of Wales. The King had now 
publicly broken with his son, who withdrew from the Court, 
and took the lead of the opposition. Though absent from 
his friends, Brooke still kept up an active correspondence. 
The Prince honoured him with more than one letter, which 
with others from Lord Lyttelton and Chesterfield perished 
in a fire. Several letters that passed between him and Pope 
have been preserved by the author of Brookiana. Brooke 
says many flattering things to the poet, but in a tone of 
sincerity that is unmistakable. He quotes a conversation 
that he had had with a Mr. Spence, who had asserted that 
Pope was the greatest poet that ever lived, an opinion from 
which he dissented. * I told him to the purpose that Virgil 
gave me equal pleasure, Homer equal warmth, Shakespeare 
greater rapture, and Milton more astonishment, so ungrateful 

1 A gold seal presented to him by the Prince is still extant. 

2 According to an old play-bill, Gustavus Vasa was first acted in 
Liverpool, in 1807, by Master Betty, 'the young Roscius.' 



INTRODUCTION xiii 

was I to refuse you your due praise, when it was not 
unknown to me that I got friends and reputation by your 
saying things of me which no one would have thought I 
merited, had you not said them.' Brooke is particularly 
anxious to elicit some decisive expression of his patron's 
religious views ; but Pope's replies, for he was at heart a 
good Catholic, are "very cautiously worded. ' It is im- 
possible,' says Pope, 'I should answer your letter any 
further than by a sincere avowal that I do not deserve a 
tenth part of what you say of me as a writer ; but as a man 
I will not, nay, I ought not, in gratitude to him to whom I 
owe whatever I am, and whatever I can confess, to his 
glory, I will not say I deny that you think no better of me 
than I deserve: I sincerely worship God, believe in his 
revelations, resign to his dispensations, love all his creatures, 
am in charity with all denominations of Christians, however 
violently they treat each other, and detest none so much as 
that profligate race who would loosen the bands of morality, 
either under the pretence of religion or free-thinking.' 
Such views were too broad and liberal, and too non- 
committal, to satisfy many people in those days, when, 
except where the influence of Methodism had fallen on 
fruitful soil, there was more dogmatism than Christianity. 
Brooke was, however, one of those who valued religion 
more than formalism ; he was never a party man, even on 
those matters which stirred his feelings most profoundly. 
There is evidence enough of that in his political attitude, 
which was so independent that it annoyed Whigs and 
Tories, Protestants and Catholics almost equally. His 
brother, Robert Brooke, and two of the latter's sons, became 
Methodists. Another Henry Brooke, the eldest of the two 
nephews of our Henry Brooke, distinguished himself by his 
fervent piety. In his life, compiled by Dr. Isaac d'Olier, 
there is a full account of his spiritual history, and of his 
correspondence with the Rev. John William de la Fle'chere, 
or Fletcher, Vicar of Madeley, the friend of Wesley, and one 
of the most devout and earnest workers in the Methodist 
cause. This Henry Brooke Junior was himself an active 
labourer in the same field : several hymns and meditations 
composed by him are inserted in his memoir. The tide of 
Methodism reached our Henry Brooke, but he was not 
carried away by it. A letter written by his daughter 
Charlotte to her friend Miss Thompson shows how he 
regarded certain of their tenets. 



xiv INTRODUCTION 

What effect the opinion of an adored wife might then (at the time he 
wrote the latter part of the Fool of Quality) have had upon his mind, I 
cannot answer ; but I know that while capable of judging, he con- 
demned the doctrines of the Methodists- I remember a reply he once 
made to one of them upon that very subject of the wrath of vindictive 
Deity : ' Sir, if you would teach that God so hated the world, I cannot 
become your disciple. ... My God is a God of love, and he tells me 
that he so loved the world. If you had rather worship a God of hatred 
than a God of love, I must beg leave to depart from your worship. 

His sympathy with the better part of Methodism 
appears at large in the pages of The Fool of Quality ; and 
is corroborated by the fact that John Wesley himself 
thought fit to issue that book as an illustration of what he 
thought noblest in the conduct of life. In the life of Henry 
Brooke Junior, it is related that the book fell into the hands 
of Mr. Fletcher, of Madeley, who, supposing it to be written 
by him, wrote in strong approval of the religious and moral 
sentiments contained in it, and asked his correspondent if 
he lived up to them. 

In the year 1745 old Mr. Brooke died in embarrassed 
circumstances. About this time Henry was made barrack- 
master of Mullingar, 1 in which appointment he distinguished 
himself, as Kingsley relates, by the publication of his 
pamphlet on the various abuses connived at by the 
authorities. This lengthy pamphlet ran into three editions. 
I have never seen it, but the writer in The Dublin University 
Magazine describes Brooke's manner very graphically. He 
says : * With a patient flail he threshed the whole matter 
sheaf by sheaf, occasionally turning his weapon and 
flourishing fierce blows against any little abuse or chicanery, 
on which occasions, no doubt, he dealt himself many a 
hearty blow on the head, which told fatally against his 
future interest, and killed downright any hope of prefer- 
ment for him on the part of the Government.' The 
Quixotism of The Fool of Quality was not more thorough 
than that of Henry Brooke. Undoubtedly, in this case 
the book is the man. 

1 There is, however, some doubt as to whether it was not Phillips- 
town of which he was barrack-master. Vide Magazine of Magazines, 
Limerick: 'Promotion, May 8, 1756. Nicholas Crawford/ Gent., 
appointed barrack-master of district of Phillipstown (Henry Brooke, 
Esq., resigned).' On the other hand, the various memoirs of Henry 
Brooke state that he was barrack-master of Mullinpar at the time of 

5 death. At Phillipstown, thirty-two miles from Dublin, there were 
barracks for a company of foot. Formerly it had been a garrison. 
Possibly Brooke was promoted thence to Mullingar. 



INTRODUCTION xv 

The year of his father's death was that of the Jacobite 
Rebellion. The followers of Charles Edward had overrun 
Scotland, won the battle of Prestonpans, and invaded 
England. In 1746, when the rebellion was still running 
its course, Brooke published his Farmer's Letters, calling 
attention to the perpetual source of danger to the country 
that existed in Ireland in the irreconcilable Catholics, who 
outnumbered the Protestants by five to one, and were 
ready, now as ever, to rise against their English conquerors 
whenever they received the least support or encouragement 
from outside. Later events have proved the justice of 
Brooke's reading of history, and his diagnosis of the 
general situation. He surveys the course of English 
history as a protracted struggle between the instinct of 
liberty and the forces of oppression, tracing the sinister 
influence of the Papacy throughout, and pointing out that 
the return of the Stuarts would mean a revival of the 
principle of absolute monarchy, and the possible overthrow 
of the Protestant establishment. ' This common enemy,' 
he declares, ' is now at hand. He is our enemy by nature 
as well as education, and my intent is to prove that, were 
it possible for him to prevail, the consequence to us would 
be the same as if this whole frame of heaven and earth was 
to be broken and thrown into its first darkness and con- 
fusion ; for such is the antipathy between a Popish prince 
and Protestant subjects, and such would be the ruin of all 
our interests, and the utter subversion of our State.' But 
the time for such a revolution had long passed away, at 
least in England ; the letters were hardly in print before 
the Jacobite Rebellion collapsed, and the cause of the 
Stuarts and of a Catholic reaction was lost for ever. But 
in Ireland the danger from the oppressed Catholics yet 
remained a danger that was still being fomented by the 
mistakes and downright tyranny of the English, as Brooke 
very fairly demonstrated in a later work, A specimen of 
his powers of argument, with the declamatory eloquence 
into which he continually rises, may be quoted : 

I have already represented to you, in two former letters, the great 
and heavy dangers that impend over us and our posterity from the 
power of France and Spain, the principles of our inmate enemies, and 
the intrigues of the Church of Rome, who, like the world, the flesh, 
and the devil, make up a triple alliance of strength, intimacy, and 
craft sufficient for as formidable a war as ever was waged against 
religion and liberty. I have also shown you how the Church of Rome, 
like that arch-politician, makes use of both the other powers to reduce 



xvi INTRODUCTION 

us by force, or circumvent us by treachery : that, as she is ambitious 
of being the prince of this world, she aims at the perversion of all 
mankind ; that she has already seduced millions to her state of perdi- 
tion ; that, for many ages, she has attempted these kingdoms of light 
and liberty, and that now, once for all, she makes her grand effort ; 
she exerts all her influence and summons all her powers to subdue us 
to her dominion of darkness and chains, to which the descent is easy, 
but from whence there is no redemption. 

I am sensible that there are many specious traitors who would 
insinuate to you that there is no necessity for this great alarm ; that 
nothing is meant of those evils I have represented ; and that the worst 
intended by the present invasion is a transference of the Crown, with- 
out any design against our constitution, our liberties, or our religion. 
They will persuade you that the young man who hath adventured so 
daring an enterprise is a person of many virtues and accomplishments ; 
that he has undertaken this expedition merely to promote our welfare - 
that, accordingly, he hath issued his manifestoes, and promises, upon 
his honour, to preserve our constitution in Church and State. Observe, 
my countiymen, he promises upon his honour. Who is then so credu- 
lous as to doubt his intentions ? Not I, nor you, I hope : no, nor the 
traitors who would insinuate such delusions, nor even his godfathers 
Lewis and the Pope who would lay this child at our doors, and are 
ready to vow all things in his name. His promises, indeed, are merry, 
but Heaven preserve us from the woeful performance. 

Can he promise away his nature and education ? Can he promise 
away the principles and blood of his ancestors ? Can he promise away 
the hopes he has already given our enemies, his gratitude to abettors, 
and pre-engagements to confederates ? 

Disease and weakness are ever ready to promise what health and 
power as quickly disavow ; but the promises of design are like scaffolds 
to a building they are made but for the season, they ate framed to be 
brought to dissolution, they engage in order to destroy. 1 

To a large extent, the Farmers Letters were a warning 
against a danger that no longer existed ; they were not 
altogether fair to the Irish Catholics, whose disaffection had 
at least the excuse of deep provocation. Brooke felt this, 
and in his Try al of the Roman Catholics, published in 1761, 
he tried to redress the balance. Here he takes up a 
contrary attitude, though not an inconsistent one, and 
pleads for justice to his Catholic countrymen. He makes 
amends at the same time for another publication directed 
against them, The Spirit of Party, which had been severely 
criticised by Charles O'Conor, author of Dissertations on 
the History of Ireland, in a pamphlet entitled The Cottager. 
Brooke now pleads for a relaxation of the penal laws 

i See Whitehall Evening Post, March 6, 1770. Philadelphia, 
September I, 1769; A gentleman in Virginia has lately left, by his 
will, a handsome fortune to the author of the Farmer's Letters, as a 
grateful acknowledgment of the eminent services thereby rendered to 
the British colonies. 



INTRODUCTION xvii 

against the Catholics. The plan of his book is well set 
forth by the title-page, which runs as follows : The Tryal of 
the If oman Catholics, on a Special Commission directed to 
Lord Chief Justice Reason, Lord Chief Baron Interest, and 
Mr. Justice Clemency ; Wednesday, August $th, 1761, Mr. 
Clodworthy Common- sense, foreman of the Jury, Mr Sergeant 
Statute, Counsel for the Crown, Constantine Candour ; Esq., 
Counsel for the accused. 

Wherever truth and interest shall embrace, 
Let passion cool and prejudice give place. 

Mr. Candour's argument is that his clients were most 
unjustifiably oppressed at the present time because of the 
alleged sins of their ancestors. Even were their fathers 
proved guilty of the charges brought against them, this was 
not right in justice and equity ; but, he maintains, their 
supposed guilt is mainly a fabrication of biassed historians. 
For instance, the Catholics are denounced by Clarendon 
and other writers for having in 1641 massacred more than 
forty thousand Protestants. Brooke's spokesman, by a 
somewhat sophistical analysis of the evidence, proves to 
the satisfaction of judge and jury, and also of the hostile 
advocate, who confesses himself convinced, that this 
occurrence never took place on anything like the scale 
depicted in the current accounts. This he describes as a 
fair example of the unfounded charges under which his 
unfortunate clients have laboured, and for which they have 
suffered all sorts of outrage and contumely. To the 
question whether ' the People, properly called the Roman 
Catholics of Ireland,' were guilty of the barbarities alleged 
against them in 1641, the jury return an answer of not 
guilty. ' Are the religious principles of Roman Catholics 
consistent, or inconsistent, with the welfare of civil govern- 
ment ? ' To this also there is a favourable reply, and the 
same again to the demand whether there is any danger to 
apprehend from the attachment of Irish Catholics to the 
fallen house of Stuart. So ends the Tryal proper ; but the 
Popery Laws themselves are next indicted, and after a 
further hearing Baron Interest concludes: 

Enough, enough, Mr. Candour. You have demonstrated, in all 
lights, that the laws, especially called the Popery Laws, have conduced 
very little to the strengthening of the throne or government of Ireland ; 
and I am persuaded that Mr. Sergeant himself is of the same opinion. 

A 



xviii INTRODUCTION 

Another pamphlet connected with this question was 
written by Brooke, entitled, A Proposal for the Restoration 
of Public Wealth and Credit by Means of a Loan from the 
Roman Catholics of Ireland in Consideration of enlarging 
their Privileges. 

Garrick addressed the following lines to Brooke, on his 
publication of the Farmer's Letters, which were read with 
much admiration in London : 

O thou, whose artless freeborn genius charms, 
Whose rustic zeal each patriot bosom warms, 
Pursue the glorious task the pleasing toil ; 
Forsake the fields, and till a nobler soil : 
Extend the Farmer's care to human kind, 
Manure the heart, and cultivate the mind ; 
There plant religion, reason, freedom, truth ; 
And sow the seeds of virtue in our youth. 
Let no rank weeds corrupt, or brambles choke, 
And shake the vermin from the British oak. 
From northern blasts protect the vernal bloom, 
And guard our pastures from the wolves of Rome. 
On Britain's liberty engraft thy name, 
And reap the harvest of eternal fame. 

Brooke was not seduced by this invitation to forsake his 
retirement. His satirical opera, Jack the Giant- Queller^ the 
best of all his poetical works, which appeared two years 
after the Farmer's Letters, did not, as Kingsley supposes, 
escape the vigilance of the censor. After being once acted 
in Dublin, it met the fate of Gusavus Vasa, and was 
prohibited under an act passed by Walpole in 1736, on 
the score of its political allusions. Brooke published the 
songs contained in it, and issued a pamphlet, written in 
scriptural style, entitled The Last Speech of John Good, 
vulgarly called Jack the Giant- Queller, who was condemned 
on the ist of April, 1745, and executed on the third of 
May following. This tract is full of bitter sarcasm against 
venality and corruption ; ' yet,' an admirer says, ' so varied, 
so versatile, and we may add so anomalous, was the man's 
mind, that he sums up all with a peroration descriptive of 
the great story of Redemption, so eloquent and orthodox, 
that a Leighton might have read it for its spiritual beauty, 
a Calvin endorsed it for its truth, and an Edward Irving 
preached it for its gracefulness and originality.' One of 
the songs contained in this opera was such a favourite 
among Brooke's readers and hearers that it may as well be 



INTRODUCTION xix 

quoted as a specimen of his verses. It is founded on the 
love affairs of two young people he knew. 

Jack : Farewell to my Gracey, my Gracey so sweet, 
How painful to part ! but again we shall meet. 
Thy Jack, he will languish and long for the day 
That shall kiss the dear tears of his sister away. 
Tho' honour in groves of tall laurel shall grow, 
And fortune in tides shall eternally flow, 
Nor honour, nor fortune, thy Jack shall detain, 
But he'll come to his Gracey, his sister again. 

Again at our door, in the morning of spring, 
To see the sun rise, and hear goldfinches sing ; 
To rouse our companions and maids of the May, 
In copses to gambol, in meadows to play. 
Or at questions and forfeits, all ranged on the grass ; 
Or to gather fresh chaplets, each lad for his lass ; 
To sing and to dance, and to sport on the plain, 
Thy Jack shall return to his Gracey again. 

Or alone in his Gracey's sweet company blest, 
To feed the young robins that chirp on the nest, 
To help at her med'cines and herbs for the poor, 
And welcome the stranger that stops at the door. 
At night, o'er our fire and a cup of clear ale, 
To hear the town news and the traveller's tale ; 
To smile away life, till our heads they grow hoar, 
And part from my sheep and my Gracey no more, 

Brooke did not improve the song by changing Gracey, 
the sweetheart, into a sister. This, like many more of the 
songs, was composed for one of the melodies native to 
Ireland and Scotland, and familiar to Brooke's audience, 
to wit, * Lochaber no more '. 

Brooke was continually writing plays, few, if any, of which 
is there any reason to suppose were successful. The 
biographer of his daughter wonders how it came about that 
a man with so strong a bias for ' Methodistical ' opinions in 
religion felt himself at liberty to write so perseveringly for 
the stage. It was, I suppose, only another instance of his 
natural liberality and breadth of mind. The same writer 
tells an interesting story of Brooke's profoundly religious 
character, and gifts that might have fitted him for a career 
in the Church. One Sunday, while the congregation were 
assembled in the parish in which he lived, they waited a 
long time the arrival of their clergyman. At last, finding 
he was not likely to come that day, they judged that some 
accident had detained him, and being loth to depart 



xx INTRODUCTION 

entirely without their errand, they, with one accord, requested 
that Mr. Brooke would perform the service for them, and 
expound a part of the Scriptures. He consented, and the 
previous prayers being over, he opened the Bible, and 
preached extempore on the first text that struck his eye. 
In the midst of his discourse the clergyman entered and 
found his whole congregation in tears. He entreated Mr. 
Brooke to proceed ; but this he modestly refused ; and the 
other as modesty declared, that after the testimony of 
superior abilities, which he perceived in the moist eyes of 
all present, he would think it presumption and folly to hazard 
anything of his own. Accordingly, the concluding prayers 
alone were said, and the congregation dismissed for the 
day.' 

In 1749 Brooke was solicited by a large body of the 
electors of Dublin to stand for that city at the approaching 
election, but he declined the honour, ' because of some of 
the most eminent merchants having published a declaration 
in favour of another man, who,' he modestly says, ' to the 
advantages of being a free citizen and excelling trader, he 
adds an acknowledged superiority in every other merit.' He 
was probably of too Quixotic a disposition to succeed in 
parliamentary life. His various excursions into politics dis- 
pleased every party ; his tracts on the Irish Catholics, in 
spite of the praise they won by their literary merits, had no 
practical effect whatever. It has been well said of him that 
' he saw the peaks of virtue in enthusiastic lights, and if he 
conceived that he was sailing on the current of truth, his 
course then became reckless, and he would scorn the rudder 
while he hoisted every sail to drive with the breeze or catch 
the blast. He had a thorough knowledge of the world in 
theory, and saw into character with a piercing eye ; but he 
was simple and artless in his practical conduct, and too 
chivalrous for common life.' The same writer records a 
pleasant trait in his character. 'A clever pamphlet was 
published against him full of personalities, and just after he 
had finished its perusal a friend came in and inquired how 
he had liked it. Brooke answered, " Why, sir, I laughed at 
its wit, and smiled at its malice." ' Many letters and other 
evidences are on record of his alert sympathy with the joys 
and sorrows of his friends ; he was the kindest of landlords, 
though often imposed upon, and entered into the troubles of 
every cottier on his estate with a degree of sympathy almost 
morbid. 



INTRODUCTION xxi 

After the death of his father in 1745, he lived for some 
years at the old House of Rantavan with his brother. 
Robert, who had married his cousin, Honor Brooke. The 
two families, numbering twenty persons or more, lived 
together in the rarest harmony. Robert was an enthusiastic 
painter. Henry Brooke devoted himself to the education 
of his children. His daughter Charlotte bears witness to 
the systematic zeal with which he superintended her studies. 
But his open-handedness and imprudence at last resulted in 
pecuniary embarrassments. He was forced to give up the 
happy home ; to mortgage, and eventually to sell Rantavan ; 
and to rent a place called Daisy Park, near Sallins, in 
County Kildare, from his cousin, Mr. Digby, of Landenstown. 
Robert had already, in 1758, migrated to Osberstown, near 
Killibegs, in the same county, 1 where by the interest of 
the same cousin he had been made paymaster to the Grand 
Canal. Henry lived by his pen and the profits of his govern- 
ment appointment, which brought him in about four hundred 
a year, and Robert added to his income by the sale of his 
pictures. This phase of his life came to an end with the 
events narrated by Kingsley, which led to his moving back 
about 1770 to the neighbourhood of Rantavan, and building 
' Longfield ', or Corfoddy. During the latter portion of his 
life, agriculture was his ruling passion ; he not only ploughed 
and planted, and wasted large sums on unproductive 
schemes, but he wrote many able essays on the subject, 
which had a wide circulation. ' To him a vein of marl was 
more precious than a vein of gold,' a correspondent writes 
in Brookiana. ' 1 believe he had all the writings of Hesiod, 
Xenophon, Aratus, Eratosthenes, Cato, Varro, and even 
Magon, the old Carthaginian, by rote.' 

He still nursed literary ambitions, projecting several 
schemes that came to nothing. In 1763 he had become 
the editor of the Freeman's Journal. A prospectus for a 
history of Ireland from the earliest times had been issued, 
probably some years ago, but the project fell through, 
difficulties having arisen as to the use of certain documents 
and other materials on which he had counted. Many of 
his productions were in the last degree fugitive. A number 
were published anonymously, for he was very careless in 
such matters. Among these was a series of translations from 
the French of Comte de Caylus, issued in two volumes in 

Robert's daughter, Sarah, born in 1754, has left it on record that 
he ' left his brother Henry at Rantavan.' 



xxii INTRODUCTION 

1750, under the title, A New System of Fairery; or, A 
Collection of Fairy Tales ; entirely new . . . containing (as 
was always expected in those days even of works written for 
entertainment) many useful lessons and moral sentiments.' 
It must be admitted, with regard to these missing works, 
that, though it would be interesting to know them, few of 
Brooke's writings are readable now, with the exception of 
The Fool of Quality. He was sixty years old when this 
began to appear, and by the time the last volume was 
published, in 1770, he was a broken old man. His beloved 
wife died in 1773, and he never recovered from the blow. 
He was reduced for a length of time, we are told, l to a state 
of almost total imbecility.' ' The powers of his mind were 
decayed, and his genius flashed only by fits.' Another 
novel, Juliet Grenville, was a product of this period. An 
extract from it, as just published, appeared in The Whitehall 
Evening Post, of 25th December, 1773, the subject being, 
' True Courage.' It was translated into German the following 
year. The following notes from contemporary newspapers 
are interesting : 

At Drury Lane. ^Mr. Sheridan, we hear, is to appear in the character 
of the Earl of Essex, in the tragedy of that name, written by Mr. 
Brooke, the author of Gustavus Vasa, and never yet performed in 
England. London Evening Post, i8th September, 1760. 

This day was published, price is. 6d., The Earl of Essex, a. new 
tragedy, as it is now acting at the Theatre Royal in Drury Lane, by 
Henry Brooke, Esq., author of Gusavus Vasa. 22nd January, 1761. 

This play is certainly much superior to either of the two former ones 
on this story, etc. , etc. 

Dublin, 29th September, Crow Street Theatre. Mr. Brooke has 
written a Farce in which Mr. Barry and Mrs- Dancer are to perform. 
Whitehall Evening Post, 8th October, 1767. 

Dublin, ist November. We are to have two new pieces brought out 
at the theatre this season, if we can get actors . . . the one, a tragedy, 
by Mr. Brooke, author of Gustavus Vasa. Whitehall Evening Post, 
1 2th November, 1768. 

Brooke died at Dublin on the loth October, 1783. 
1 He died,' says Miss Brooke, ' as he lived a Christian. 
With the meekness of a lamb, and the fortitude of a hero, 
he supported the tedious infirmities of age, the languors of 
sickness, and the pains of dissolution ; and his death, like 
his life, was instructive.' ' My father was the best of men. 
Yet he did not die rejoicing. He died resigned, meek, 
humble. It is the Lord, let him do what seemeth him 
good.' He was buried in his father's old churchyard at 



INTRODUCTION xxiii 

Mullagh 1 . In 1852, { B ' (the Rev. Richard Sinclair Brooke, 
father of the Rev. Stopford Brooke) who wrote the memoir 
of Henry Brooke for the Dublin University Magazine, 
describes in the same periodical how he met with a very 
old and wrinkled woman, by name Judith Gallaspie, who 
pointed out the precise spot where Henry Brooke was 
buried ; for ' seventy long years ago she, as a young 
colleen, went with the whole country-side to Kells to meet 
the funeral coming from Dublin.' 'And she told of the 
tombstone and enclosure which had been erected, but now 
was all broken down and displaced, and scarce a vestige 
remained save a few sunken stones. But the ancient crone 
stooped over the sod, and with her long staff, as with a 
diviner's rod, she traced the lines, and accurately squared 
the spot where close under the south-western wall of the 
ruin, and " in sure and certain hope of the resurrection to 
eternal life," lay the gentle dust of one in whom were 
singularly combined the highest intellect with the humblest 
graces of a Christian. Here indeed is no tomb or 
monumental marble ; but in the absence of all such decay- 
able matter, God's sun shines perennially on the spot, and 
every evening its descending beams will visit the old ruin, 
and with their rich and tender light rest on the good man's 
grave, bathing the green sod in glory.' I have quoted this 
passage for the sake of the reverent feeling that it shows for 
the memory of Brooke. Such a feeling was by no means con- 
fined to his own relatives. Among the lines written to his 
memory may be quoted those by the honest blacksmith at 
Longfield, who wrote them the moment he heard of his 
master's death : 

Here lies a head with learning fill'd, 

A tongue in Greek and Latin skill'd ; 

A heart to pity always prone, 

That felt for sorrows not his own ; 

A hand still ready to relieve ; 

The poor, indeed, may truly grieve. 

His very looks reliev'd their wants, 

And brighten'd up their gloomy haunts ; 

An eye that wink'd at others' failings, 

And ears close shut to noise and railings. 

A foot that often trod in youth 

The paths that lead to praise and truth. 

1 It is curious that on the register of St. Michan's Church, Dublin, 
appears this entry: '1783, October 22. H. Brooks.' It may be a 
coincidence, or perhaps the entry was to fulfil some formality in 
connection with removing the body to County Cavan. 



xxiv INTRODUCTION 

In all extremities a friend, 
Slow, slow to borrow, quick to lend, 
In all his acts sincere and just, 
Then drop a tear upon his dust. 

Of the two best portraits of Brooke one is repro- 
duced here, a small monochrome water-colour bearing 
the inscription, ' From a picture in possession of W. 
Walker, 8 Gray's Inn Square. Engraved and published, 
1821. Engraving, first edition, Fool of Quality ; Henry 
Brooke, after Brooke by Thurston.' This was chosen by 
Charlotte Brooke as the portrait to illustrate her father's 
works, which would probably mean it was the better of 
the two best known portraits. An engraving of it was 
published in London by E. & S. Harding, on July 16, 
1793: 'From the original picture in the collection of 
Mr. Harding, Pall Mall; Brooke pinxt ; Clamp sculpt.' 
The other portrait alluded to is the large oil-painting 
called The Farmer, now in Mr. Henry Brooke's posses- 
sion. It was painted by T. Lewis, a London painter, 
and scene-decorator to Thomas Sheridan, who, on a visit 
to Dr. Thomas Sheridan at Quilca, painted Sheridan's 
* Painted Parlour.' This large oil-painting was engraved in 
Ireland by Andrew Miller, in 1756, with the title of 
The Farmer, and was reproduced again in J. C. Smith's 
British Mezzotint Engravers, 1884. The Dublin Univer- 
sity Magazine for 1852 has a delicate etching, full length, 
from this painting, and Kingsley's edition of The Fool of 
Quality, 1859, has a half-length engraving, by J.* C. 
Armytage, from the same portrait. An admirable word- 
portrait of Brooke is preserved in Brookiana. It is 
contained in a letter describing a visit to Longfield. ' To 
tell you the truth, I was charmed with the manner in which 
he received me. I was scarce half-an-hour in conversation 
with him, when I found I could trace him in all his 
writings. He was dressed in a long blue cloak, with a wig 
that fell down his shoulders, a little man, as neat as wax- 
work, with an oval face, ruddy complexion, and large eyes, 
full of fire. In short, he is like a picture mellowed by time. 
Mrs. Brooke is in a very ill-state of health ; she is quite 
emaciated, and so feeble that she can scarcely walk across 
the room. I never saw so affectionate a husband, and so 
tender a father, in my life. Out of two-and-twenty children 
there are only two alive, a son and a daughter, Arthur and 
Charlotte. I did not see the son ; the daughter inherits a 



INTRODUCTION xxv 

considerable portion of the countenance of her father ; but 
she is as pale as a primrose, and almost as thin as her 
mother. Our conversation at dinner turned chiefly on the 
customs and manners of the inhabitants in the neighbour- 
hood. You would really think that Mr. Brooke was talking 
of his own children, they were all so dear to him ; he prayed 
for them and blessed them over and over again, with tears 
in his eyes. ... In the evening we walked into the garden ; 
his favourite flowers were those that were planted by the 
hands of his wife and daughter. I was astonished at his 
skill in botany ; he dwelt for some moments on the virtues 
of the meanest weeds, and then launched out into such a 
panegyric on vegetable diet, that he almost made me a 
Pythagorean.' 

Of his twenty-two children only two survived him 
Arthur, a brave soldier, who served in Canada, and after- 
wards in India, where he died, after attaining the rank of 
captain; and Charlotte, the Irish scholar. She was an 
early pioneer of the Celtic movement, anticipating the 
labours of Lady Gregory and Miss Hull by a hundred 
years, though her work has not had the permanence that 
may be anticipated for theirs. She made the mistake of 
translating the old Irish legends into verse, a form for 
which they are naturally unfitted. But she has the credit 
of being a pioneer, and of calling attention to this mass of 
forgotten literature, though her appeal fell for the time being 
upon deaf ears. Kingsley gives some account of Brooke's 
relatives. A cousin and namesake, Henry Brooke, was 
high in the H.E.I. Co.'s service at Fort St. George, Madras, 
and a friend and correspondent of Warren Hastings. Two 
of Brooke's nephews went out to the East under his patron- 
age. Digby was killed in action ; Robert, his elder brother, 
attained to high military rank, and amassed a large fortune. 
He founded an industrial village in Kildare for the purpose 
of cotton-spinning, calling it Prosperous ; and was able to 
assist his uncle by redeeming the mortgage on the Cavan 
property. He was afterwards Governor of St. Helena. 
The family tree which Mr. Henry Brooke has kindly drawn 
up gives some interesting particulars as to other members 
of the family. 

In the memoirs of Henry Brooke Junior, an anecdote is 
related which concerns the origin of the present book. He 
and his uncle, the poet, used frequently to ride together 
from Killibegs to Dublin, and the incident took place 



xx vi INTRODUCTION 

during one of these rides. 'My uncle desired me,' he 
relates, 'to keep silence, till I had his permission to speak. 
We rode on together for a considerable time without any 
conversation whatsoever. He then broke silence, and 
called to me: "Harry, I have been just ruminating over 
the prettiest story imaginable ; would you like to hear it ? " 
"By all means, sir; it would afford high amusement on 
the road ; I was longing to hear you say something." 

' The uncle then proceeded to produce from the copious 
storehouse of his lively imagination, and with that beauty 
of language of which he was so complete a master, a story 
containing all the leading facts which render the work so 
very amusing and interesting. This afforded ample enter- 
tainment for the remainder of that journey ; Mr. Brooke 
was hardly less delighted with the brilliancy of the con- 
ceptions than the enraptured uncle ; and anxious to secure 
so invaluable a germ, the seed of so rich a mental harvest, 
as soon as he alighted from his horse, he retired to a room, 
and while the impression was vivid and the recollection 
unimpaired, he providently committed the whole story to 
writing, and laid by the manuscript carefully. The termina- 
tion of the ride concluded the story for that time, and no 
further notice was taken. 

* About twelve months after, one day that Mr. Brooke and 
his uncle were alone together, he thus accosted his nephew : 
" Harry, don't you remember when you and I were riding 
from Killibegs to Dublin nearly a year ago, how I told you 
one of the prettiest stories you ever heard in your life ? " 
" I do indeed, sir." " It is entirely gone from me ; I have 
not the faintest trace in my mind of the particulars; I 
shall never be able to collect them again: I have only 
the general recollection of its being very entertaining, 
How glad would I be if I had then written it down. 
I am sure it would make a very pretty book, and be 
much read. Oh, my Harry, what would I now give 
for it ! " 

_ ' Mr. Brooke then slipped out of the room, and going to 
his escritoire took out his manuscript, containing every 
particular of the story as related by his uncle with the 
utmost raciness. He immediately returned and handed 
him the paper. The surprise and delight of the uncle may 
be easier imagined than described. He embraced his dear 
nephew, and expressed with rapture the overflowings of a 
grateful heart. Counsellor Brooke now began to write the 



INTRODUCTION xxvii 

work which he fancifully entitled, The Fool of Quality. 
He was sixty years old or more when he began it, and 
nearly seventy when the final volume appeared.' 

As letters now extant contain evidence that Henry 
Brooke did not return from Daisy Park to County Cavan 
until 1769-70 (new or old style), the work must have been 
written at the former place, for the fifth and final volume 
appeared in 1770. There are long extracts from it as just 
out in the Whitehall Evening Post of loth and i2th April, 
of that year. Kingsley relates how John Wesley republished 
The Fool of Quality, with certain excisions, during the 
author's lifetime, under the title of The History of Henry, 
Earl of Moreland. He reduced the bulk by at least one 
third, omitting what he calls * the uninteresting dialogues ' 
between the author and his friend, as well as divers 
incidents * that would give little entertainment to men of 
understanding '. He also omitted * great part of the Mystic 
Divinity, as it is more philosophical than scriptural.' 
Wesley's preface is interesting for its candour; the 
criticisms are very free, but the praise is obviously sincere, 
and full of discernment. It is worth while quoting a letter 
written by Wesley to Henry Brooke Junior from Hull, 
8th July, 1774, as it helps to explain how he came to 
adopt the book : 

DEAR HARRY, When I read over in Ireland The Fool of Quality, 
I could not but observe the design of it, to promote the religion of the 
heart, and that it was well calculated to answer that design ; the same 
thing I observed a week or two ago, concerningyiw/z^ Grenville. Yet 
there seemed to me to be a few passages both in the one and in the 
other which might be altered for the better ; I do not mean so much 
with regard to the sentiments, which are generally very just, as with 
regard to the structure of the story, which seemed here and there to 
be not quite clear. I had at first a thought of writing to Mr. Brooke 
himself, but I did not know whether I might take the liberty. Few 
authors will thank you for imagining you are able to correct their 
works. But if he could bear it, and think it would be of any use, I 
would give another reading to both these works, and send him my 
thoughts without reserve, just as they occur. 

Ten years ago, a well-known writer stated in an article 
on The Fool of Quality, that Wesley coolly appropriated 
the book, cutting out what did not meet with his approval, 
'and had the impudence and dishonesty to publish it 
thus mutilated, without the author's consent, and in his 
lifetime, under a slightly altered title . . . and thus 
doctored, this book has been passed off as a composition 



xxviii INTRODUCTION 

of the great head and founder of Methodism.' This, as 
was instantly pointed out by correspondents, is not quite 
true. It is contradicted by Wesley's own preface ; and 
the fact that Brooke granted permission is confirmed by 
a letter from Henry Brooke Junior, which contains the 
following passage : 

He (Henry Brooke Senior) is deeply sensible of your very kind 
offer and most cordially embraces it. He has desired me to express the 
warmth of his gratitude in the strongest terms, and says he most cheer- 
fully yields the volumes you mention to your superior judgment, to 
prune, erase, and alter as you please. He only wishes they could have 
had your eye before they appeared in public. But it is not yet too 
late. A second edition will appear to great advantage when they have 
undergone so kind a revisal. But he is apprehensive your time is so 
precious that it may be too great an intrusion upon it, unless made a 
work of leisure and opportunity. Yet, as you have proffered it, he will 
not give up the privilege ; but hope leisure may be found for so friendly 
and generous a work \ 

The first two volumes of The Fool of Quality were quickly 
sold out, and a second edition was called for in 1767. The 
publisher was W. Johnson, of Ludgate Street. Wesley's 
version also went through a large number of editions, and 
was indeed the form in which the book was best known, 
until the two-volume edition appeared in 1859 with 
Kingsley's preface. The book is as puzzling to describe 
as, say, The Anatomy of Melancholy, or The Doctor. It is 
not only a novel, but also a commonplace book, contain- 
ing the author's thoughts on ethics and social economy, 
politics, religion, aesthetics, and indeed as many multifarious 
topics as those dealt with in the digressions of La Nouvelle 
Htio'ist itself. Such a theme as the youth and education 
of an ideal nobleman gives ample opportunity for wide 
meandering. 

Kingsley's praise is enthusiastic, but not undiscriminating. 
His appreciation of Henry Brooke is eminently just and 
fair. In spite of numerous defects as a work of art, The 
Fool of Quality is, indeed, a brave book, and an eloquent 
book, filled with a noble inspiration that may well kindle 
warmer feelings of love and respect for its author than 
hundreds of more faultless works will ever attain. On the 
other hand, Brooke's editor was just as right in criticising 

1 It is only fair to state that Brooke himself was doting at the time, 
and his nephew practically t ,ok the matter into his own hands in 
jrantmg the permission. Wesley, also, laid himself open to criticism by 
not mentioning the author either on the title-page or in his own preface. 



INTRODUCTION xxix 

his incoherence, his exaggeration, and fondness for impro- 
bability. It is the salient characteristic of the book that 
everything is in excess, the hero's perfections most of all. 
For prigs Brooke had no love ; but with the usual ill luck 
of those who put ideal heroes on a realistic stage, he does 
not always escape the pitfall of making young Harry 
Clinton look priggish. The goats are as jet-black, and 
the lambs as snow-white, as in the works of any melo- 
dramatist of our own sentimental fiction ; although in this 
particular respect the book is infinitely superior to the 
moralistic stories that were in vogue then and later, not 
excepting the ' improving ' fiction of Maria Edgeworth. 
The Alcides exploits of Harry's boyhood and his deeds 
of charity are extravagantly overdone ; so are the calamities 
of the blameless unfortunates, and the marvellous turns of 
fortune by which innocence is at last rewarded. And the 
pathos and tears are carried to preposterous lengths. One 
feels ofttimes as if the victims of ingenious villainy, by 
their unparalleled stupidity, deserved all they got ; and that 
we should like the hero and his friends a great deal better 
if they were a little less demonstrative in their emotions, a 
little less effusive in their love of rectitude. But allowance 
must be made both for the author's strong and fervent 
nature, and for the influence of the school to which as a 
novelist he belongs, if he belong to any. Sterne and 
Richardson were the powers that reigned supreme over 
the fiction written in the third quarter of the eighteenth 
century. Mackenzie imitated Sterne, Robert Bage took 
Richardson for his master ; Mrs. Inchbald, Mrs. Radcliffe, 
Maria Regina Roche, and a number of writers who are 
now almost entirely forgotten, produced novel after novel 
in the manner taught in the school of sensibility. There 
was, as Kingsley observes about Henry Brooke, and might 
have said about a score of other novelists, something rather 
French or Irish in this * passionate and tearful sensibility ', 
something utterly opposed to English phlegm> Brooke's 
sentimentality, however, is at any rate, not of the morbid 
kind. It is the generous excess of the man's temperament, 
the natural ebullition of feeling, that makes him enter with 
the same gusto into the dare-devil feats of Ned and Harry's 
boyhood, as into the miraculous virtues of their precocious 
maturity. 

There is another point that has not been noticed much 
by Brooke's critics. The Fool of Quality was the first or one 



xxx INTRODUCTION 

of the very first novels containing a rational and sympathetic 
study of childhood. It was not till nearly a century later 
that a better picture of true boyhood appeared. This must 
surely have been one of the attractions that appealed most 
strongly to Charles Kingsley, a man so fond of children, 
and with such an insight into their mind. The chapters on 
Harry's infancy and boyhood are surely the tenderest and 
the most fascinating in the whole story. In many of the 
social and ethical ideas the influence of Rousseau is 
probably to be traced, but most of all in those on education. 
Harry's upbringing by his uncle, the natural mode of 
education, which brings out the child's inborn tendencies 
and powers, is contrasted with the false and artificial 
methods to which 'Lord Dickie' falls a victim in the 
hands of his unwise parents. But the book is, if not ahead 
of its time, at any rate, on the very crest of the wave of pro- 
gress, in all its ideas, and in its freedom from any sort of cant 
or affectation. Why complain of our author's incoherence 
and lack of constructive skill ? Books like The Fool of 
Quality are not to be placed in the same category as the 
ordinary stereotyped novel. They belong to that class of 
book which we read in, but do not read through, at least, 
not at a sitting. Rather we should dip into them, jump 
lightly from chapter to chapter ; pick out an episode here, 
and a pretty anecdote there ; ransack them for pithy 
apologues, and tales of heroism nobly told. Taken in this 
way, the book has in it much that is great. Parts, I submit, 
of The Fool of Quality are truly in the grand style. Story, 
character and thought are, in many passages, wrought into 
a perfect harmony, and inspired with an admirable wisdom, 
a genuine humour, and a noble ardour of feeling that makes 
the reader's heart glow with responsive passion. 

Among passages that may be singled out as equally fine 
in manner and in matter, are such things as the fable of the 
Three Trouts, and the old story retold of Damon aud 
Pythias ; Brooke's skill in rehandling an old and hackneyed 
tale, and endowing it with a new freshness and power, of 
itself marks him out as a writer. In his new version of the 
prophet Esdras, he catches something of the poetic spirit 
of the Biblical writers, as well as the magnificence of diction 
and the stately rhythm of their English translators. 

If he cries war, it is war ; the banners of blood are let loose to the 
wind, and the sound of the clarion kindles all men to battle. His 



INTRODUCTION xxxi 

hosts clothe themselves in harness, and range in terrible array ; and his 
horses begin to neigh and tear up the ground, and his chariots to roll 
as distant thunders. They move and cover the earth wide as the eye 
can reach. The forests are laid flat, the mountains shake beneath them, 
and neither the rocks nor the rivers impede the march of his armies. 
They trample into dust the fruits of the field, and the labours of the 
industrious ; houses, vineyards and standing corn ; the villages and 
towns smoke on every side. 

But the gem of the book (or is it only the piece that I 
re-read last ?) is the story from Froissart of the surrender 
of Calais, and Queen Philippa's intercession for the 
burghers ; let me quote a few sentences therefrom : 

As soon as they had reached the presence Mauny, says the monarch, 
are these the principal inhabitants of Calais ? They are, says Mauny : 
they are not only the principal men of Calais, they are the principal 
men of France, my lord, if virtue has any share in the act of ennobling. 
Were they delivered peaceably ? says Edward ; was there no resist- 
ance, no commotion among the people? Not in the least, my lord ; 
the people would all have perished rather than have delivered the least 
of these to your majesty. They are self-delivered, self-devoted, and 
come to offer up their inestimable heads as an ample equivalent for the 
ransom of thousands. 

That is the right epic note. The author himself 
anticipates the objections of those who think we may have 
too much even of a good book. 'Sir,' he says, 'a book 
may be compared to the life of your neighbour. If it be 
good it cannot last too long ; if bad, you cannot get rid of 
it too early.' 

ERNEST A. BAKER. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF HENRY BROOKE 



Universal Beauty : a philosophical poem in six books. 1735. 

A Translation of the first three books of Tasso. 1737. 

Gustavus Vasa : the Deliverer of his country ; a tragedy. 
Intended to have been acted at Drury Lane. 1739. 

Constantia ; or, the Man of Law's Tale (in Ogle's Canterbury 
Tales Modernised). 1741. 

Prospectus of a work to be entitled, Ogygian Tales ; or a 
curious collection of Irish Fables, Allegories and Histories, 
from the relations of Fintane the Aged, for the entertain- 
ment of Cathal Grove Darg, during that Prince's abode in 
the Island of O'Brazil. 1743. 

Fables for the Female Sex, by Edward Moore (author of The 
Gamester), and Henry Brooke. 1744. 

The Earl of Westmoreland : a tragedy. 1745. 

The Farmer's Letters to the Protestants of Ireland. 1746. 

The Last Speech of John Good, vulgarly called Jack the Giant- 
Queller. 1748. 

New Fables. 1749. 

An Occasional Letter from the Farmer to the Freemen of 
Dublin. 1749. 

A New System of Fairery ; or, a Collection of Fairy Tales. 
Entirely new ; translated from the French ; 2 vols. 1750. 

Redemption ; a poem. 1750. 

A Description of the College Green Club, by H. B. ? 1753. 

The Spirit of Party. 1754. 

The Interests of Ireland considered. 1759. 

The Earl of Essex ; a new tragedy, as it is now acting at the 
Theatre Royal in Drury Lane. 1761. 

The Tryal of the Roman Catholics. 1761. 

A proposal for the restoration of public wealth and credit by 
means of a loan from the Roman Catholics of Ireland in 
consideration of enlarging their privileges. C. 1762. 

The Freeman's Journal (edited by Henry Brooke), Dublin. 
1763. 

xxxiii A 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF HENRY BROOKE 

The Fool of Quality ; Vol. I. ; Dublin. Printed for the author 
(tic) by Dillon Chamberlaine, 1 in Dame Street, facing 
Fownes's Street. 1765. 

Vol. II. Printed for W. Johnston. 1766. 

Vol. III. 1768. 

Vol. IV. 1769. 

Vol. V. 1770. 

Vols. I. and II. 1767. 

New edition, greatly altered and improved. 5 vols. 

London : Edward Johnston. 1777. 

Another edition. 5 vols. London : Edward Johnston. 1782. 

Another edition. Dublin. 1796. 

Another edition ; Vol. I. London. 1808. 

Vol. II. London. 1809. 

- Edition in 4 vols. Same date. 
Constable's edition. 1832. 

Henry, Earl of Moreland. An edition of The Fool of Quality, 

edited, with retrenchments, by John Wesley. 1781. 
Second edition. 1793. 
Juliet Grenville. 1773. 
Juliet Grenville ; oder, die Geschichte des menschlichen 

Herzens. Leipzig. 1774. 
A Collection of the Pieces formerly published by Henry Brooke, 

Esq., to which are added several Plays and Poems ; now 

first printed. 4 vols. London. 1778. 
Another edition with large omissions. 4 vols. Dublin. 1792. 

These two editions were unauthorised and defective. 
The History of a Reprobate ; being the Life of David 

Doubtful. 1784. 

Paraphrased by Phillips. 1822. 

The Poetical Works of Henry Brooke. Charlotte Brooke's 

edition. 1792. 
Chalmers, Alexander. Works of the English Poets. Vol. XVII. 

Henry Brooke, etc. 1810. 
Benignity ; or, the Ways of Happiness. Selected from the 

Works of Henry Brooke. 1818. 
A Guide to the Stars ; being an easy method of knowing the 

relative position of all the principal fixed stars. 1820. 



[Johnson, Samuel.] A Compleat Vindication of the Licensers 
of the Stage from the malicious aspersions of Mr. Brooke, 
by an Impartial Hand. 1739. 

Brookiana. Anecdotes of Henry Brooke. 2 vols. London. 1804. 

Mr. Morton's Zorinski and Henry Brooke's Gustavus Vasa 
compared. 1795. 

1 Chamberlaine was father of Mrs. Frances Sheridan, mother of 
Richard Brinsley. 



MEMORABILIA BROOKEANA 



Agriculture, manufactures, and 
commerce, the pillars of the 
world, 25-7. 

Altruism, 31, 40, 261. 

Aristocracy, 276-9. 

Beauty, 133-6. 
Blushing, 124-6, 131. 
Bribery and corruption, 300-1. 
British Constitution, 273-84. 

Canals, 353-6. 

Chastity, 252-3. 

Christ, Divinity of, 324-34. 

omnipresence of, 395. 
Christianity, 419-20. 
Commerce, 352-6. 
Court, The, 306. 
Critics, 68-9. 

Damon and Pythias, 31-3. 
Debtors and debts, 224-7. 
Democracy, 279-81. 
Don Quixote, the greatest hero 
of modern times, 44-5. 

Education, Classical, 73-5. 
Ideal, 127. 

Faults, 130-3. 
Friendship, 31-40. 

Gentleman, A, 137-9, 157-62. 

Ghosts, 17-20. 

God in his Works, 319-20. 

God's 'Anger,' 256. 

Good and evil in all men, 
165-8. 

Good and evil, Difference be- 
tween, 260-1. 

Goodness, 367-9. 

Grief, Kinds of, 398-9. 



Heredity, 142-6. 

Heroes defined, etc., 43-5. 

Honour, 350. 

Imprisonment for debt, 224-7. 
Industry, 351-2, 354. 
Infidelity, 324-34. 
Inland navigation, 356. 

King, The, 273-6. 

Law and lawyers, 149-54. 

Liberty, Civic, 264-99. 

Lion and dog, Story of the, 



T 

London, 309. 

Lycurgus, the greatest hero of 
antiquity, 43-4. 

Magdalene House, 323. 
Man, 258-99. 
Masqueraders, 312. 
Money : its obligations, 346. 
Music, 309. 

Parliament, 281-4. 
Physiognomy, 128, 133. 

Self, 261, 399. 

Self-love, etc., 31-40. 

Sin, 330-1. 

Society, 259-99. 

States likened to men, 257. 

Three Silver Trouts, Story of 

the, n. . 
Trade, 25-7. 
Tyrants, 253-99. 

Wine, King, Woman, 120-3. 
Woman, 119-23. 



xxxv 



WILLIAB 

PHYSICIAN OF RANT. 

COUN1 

Died prior 



Rev. Wi 


.LIAM B. = 


LETTICE, dau. of 


of Rantavan, 
Scholar of T.C.D., 


Simon Digby, 
Bishop of Elphin. 


Rector of Mullagh, 










&c. 










b. 1669, 










d. 1 3th Nov., 1745. 










  




 




DIGBY, * HENRY, = CATHERINE, 


dau. of 


ROBERT, 


= 


b. 1697. Author of 


Meares, of the 


Artist. 




M.A, (T.C.D.), 1722. " Fool of Quality," 


Mearescourt family. 


b. 1710, 




&c. 






d. 1784. 




b. 1703, 










d. loth Oct., 1783. 










* CHARLOTTE, * HENRY, 
Authoress of Artist, 
" Reliques of and friend of 


THOMAS 
Tran 
" Madam 


DIGBY, 
slated 
e Guyon' 


Irish Poetry," &c. Wesley and Fletcher. 


Life, 


"&c. 


d. 29th Mar., 1793. b. Nov., 1738, 


d. 1786. 


d. 6th Oct., 


1806. 







WILLIAM HENRY, 

Artist! 

Illustrated 

" Carleton's Irish 

Peasantry," &c. 

d. loth Jan., 1860. 



THOMAS f 
E. I. Co. 

Secretary of 
and Acting 
at St. H 

b. 26th De 

d. 



Dictionary of National Biography. 



EXTRACT FROM 

BRC 

OF DROMAVANA, AND FORMERL 



BROOKE, 

AN AND DROMAVANA, 

CAVAN. 

April, 1719. 



1 




I 




Rev. HENRY, = 


= THOMASINE,daU.of 


ALEXANDER, = CATHERINE, dau. of 


Scholar of T.C.D., 


Rev. 


of Dromavana, Ri 


chard Young, 


Rector of Kinawley 


Thomas Tucker, 


Physician at Kells, o 


: Drumgoon, 


and Swanlinbar. 


Rector of Moynalty. 


County Meath. C 


ounty Cavan. 


b. 1681, 








d. 1740. 








HONOR 


1 
HENRY, 


THOMAS, Rev. "V 


WILLIAM, 


his cousin). 


E. I. Co. Service, 


M.D., Scholar of T.C.D., 




Governor of 


Physician to Rector of Granard, 




Fort St. George, St. 


Luke's Hospital, Co. Longford, 




Madras. 


London. b. 


1721, 




d. 1786. 

1 


b. 1721, d. 
i8th Oct., 1781, 


1804. 


* ROBERT, 


1 

DlGBY, 


Wn 


.LIAM, 


Col. in E. I. Co. 


E. I. Co. Army, 


M.D., 


Army, 


killed on active 


Physician 


Governor of 


service. 


in Dublin. 


St. Helena. 




b. 


1769, 


b. 1745, 




d. 


1829. 


d. 25th Jan., 1911. 








L 








1 




I 




IY, HENRY, 


WILLIAM (Rt. Hon.) 


Rev. 


ice, Merchant, 


of 


Dromavana, RICHARD SINCLAIR, 


icil, of Dublin. 


Master in Chancery, 


b. 1798, 


;rnor b. 1780, 


&c. d. 6th Aug., 1882. 


i. d. 9th April, 1847. b. 22nd July, 1796, 




774, 


d. igth Aug., 1881. 




H9- 1 




1 








R 


ev. STOPFORD 








AUGUSTUS 


('he well-known 


preacher and writer). 








1 



AMILY TREE OF 

OKE 

OF RANTAVAN, COUNTY CAVAN, 



Rev. WILLIAM B. 

of Rantavan, 
Scholar of T.C.D., 
Rector of Mullagh, 

&c. 

b. 1669, 
d. I3th Nov., 1745. 



DIGBY, 
b. 1697. 



* HENRY, 
Author of 



M.A. (T.C.D.), 1722. " Fool of Quality," 

&c. 

b. 1703, 
d. loth Oct., 1783. 



* CHARLOTTE, 

Authoress of 

" Reliques of 

Irish Poetry," &c. 

d. 2Qth Mar., 1793. 



CATHERINE, 

Meares, 
Mearescourt 



*HENI 

Artist! 
and friend 
Wesley and 
b. Nov., 
d. 6th Oct., 



dau, of 
ung, 
n, 
an. 



IR, 



* WILLIAM 

Artist 
Illustrat 

"Carleton'a l882 
Peasantry, 
d. loth Jan. 



Dictionary of National Biography. 



)RD 
Is 

>wn 
friter). 



OF DROMAVAN/ 



PREFACE. 



IT is not easy to draw a trustworthy picture of Henry Brooke. 
The materials for it which remain are very scanty. Only four 
years after his death, in 1783 so had the memory of a once 
famous personage faded from men's minds it was very difficult to 
get details of his early life. He had lived too long too long, if 
not for the education which great joys and great sorrows give, at 
least for happiness and for fame. The pupil of Swift and Pope ; the 
friend of Lyttleton and Chatham; the darling of the Prince of 
Wales ; beau, swordsman, wit, poet, courtier ; the minion once of 
fortune, yet unspoilt by all her caresses, had long been known to 
Irishmen only as the saintly recluse of Longfield ; and latterly as 
an impoverished old man, fading away by the quiet euthanasia of 
a second childhood, with one sweet daughter the only surviving 
child of twenty-two clinging to him, and yet supporting him, as 
ivy the mouldering wall. She was the child of his old age, 
"remembering nothing of her father," says a biographer, "previous 
to his retirement from the world : and knowing little of him, save 
that he bore the infirmities and misfortunes of his declining years 
with the heroism of true Christianity, and that he was possessed of 
virtues and feelings which shone forth to the last moment of his 
life, unimpaired by the distractions of pain, and unshaken amid the 
ruins of genius." 

So says the biographer of 1787, in the ambitious style of those 
days ; but doubtless with perfect truth. Yet neither he, nor any 
other biographer with whom I am acquainted, give any details of 
the real character, the inner life, of the man. One longs, but 
longs almost in vain, for any scrap of diary, private meditation, 
even familiar letter, from one who had seen, read, and above all 
suffered, so much and so variously. But with the exception of 
half-a-dozen letters, nothing of the kind seems to exist. His inner 
life can only be guessed at ; and all that is known of his outer life 
has been compressed into one short article in the Dublin University 
Magazine for February, 1852, full of good writing and of good 

a2 



PREFACE. 

feeling. Ite author is a descendant of Henry Brooke ; and to him 
I am bound to offer my thanks for the assistance which he has 
given me toward this preface. 

One would be glad, too, (if physiognomy be, as some hold, a key 
to character,) of some trustworthy description or portrait of his 
outward man; to have known even the colour of his eyes and 
hair : but this, too, is not to be had. Some Irish friend describes 
him in terms general enough; as, when young, "fresh looking, 
slenderly formed, and exceedingly graceful. He had an oval face, 
ruddy complexion, and large soft eyes, full of fire. He was of 
great personal courage, but never known to offend any man. He 
was an excellent swordsman, and could dance with much grace." 
There are certainly notes here of that heroical temperament, 
softened withal by delicate sensibility, which shows forth in 
every line of his writings. And there is another sketch of him, 
in 1775, which gives the same notion: "He was drest in a 
long blue cloak, with a wig that fell down his shoulders ; a little 
man, as neat as wax-work, with an oval face, ruddy complexion, 
large eyes, full of fire. In short, he is like a picture mellowed 
by time." There is a drawing of him which seems to be the 
same as that prefixed to his poems. If this, and the still finer 
head on the title-page of Brookiana, be trustworthy, the face must 
have been one of a very delicate and regular beauty. The large 
soft eye, the globular under-eyelid, the finely arched eyebrow (all 
notes of a sweet and rich, yet over-sensitive nature), are very 
remarkable. There is a certain grace and alertness, too, about the 
figure, which agrees with the story of his having been a good 
dancer and swordsman. But on the type of brain, and even of the 
masque, it is very difficult to pronounce. Portraits of the eight- 
eenth century, not very trustworthy in any detail, are especially 
careless in these. There seems no reason to suppose that English 
faces were more sensual or more same a hundred years ago than 
they are now ; yet who, in looking round a family portrait gallery, 
has not remarked the difference between the heads of the seven- 
teenth and those of the eighteenth century ? The former are of 
the same type as our own, and with the same strong and varied 
personality ; the latter painfully like, both to each other and to an 
oil-flask ; the jaw round, weak, and sensual ; the forehead narrow 
and retreating. Had the race really degenerated for a while, or 
was the lower type adopted intentionally, out of compliment to 
some great personage ? Be that as it may, Henry Brooke's portrait 
is too like dozens of that day to be much trusted. Even if we 
accept the lower part of the face, round and weak (though not 
coarse), as the mark of that want of perseverance which was in 
worldly matters his worst defect, yet we cannot accept the length, 



PREFACE. 

between the nose and mouth (which does not appear in the head 
in Brookiana) ; nor, airain, the narrowing forehead, however lofty, as 
the mark of an intellect so fanciful and so subtle ; occupied, too, with 
the ideal more exclusively than any man of his time. Less breadth 
across the eyebrows, with much greater breadth across the upper 
part of the forehead, is the normal form of such brain now, as it 
was in the Elizabethan age ; and we must believe it to have been 
the same a hundred years ago. 

Another source from which one might have expected to learn 
something of Henry Brooke, and from which one will learn little 
or nothing, are two volumes of " Brookiana," published in London, 
1804. One knew that our Irish cousins, among their many charm- 
ing qualities, did not always (whether by virtue of some strain of 
Milesian blood, or of the mere influence of that exciting atmosphere 
which made the Normans of the Pale Hibernis ipsis Eibemiores) 
possess the faculty of historic method and accuracy ; but such a 
mere incoherence as these Brookiana one did not expect. The 
editor (surely an Irishman) seems to have inquired of all likely 
Irishmen and women for anecdotes of Henry Brooke, and to have 
received in almost every case the equivalent of the well-known 
Irish answer : " No ; I don't speak German ; but I have a brother 
who plays on the German flute ; " which answer the editor has 
joyfully accepted as the best he could get, and filled his volumes 
with anecdotes of every one except Brooke, and with notes 
thereon ; notes on the ancient Irish ; notes on the town of 
Kilkenny, its marble houses and free school, rendered necessary by 
the fact that Mr. Brooke once praised a Mrs. Grierson who was 
born at Kilkenny : poetry on all subjects, by twenty different 
people, who had or had not spoken to Henry Brooke at some time 
or other ; Dr. Brett's dedication to Lady Caroline Kussell of his 
sermon on Wedded Love, wherein the doctor discourseth learnedly 
on the three species of kisses ; literal translations of Irish poems 
sent to Mr. Brooke by a person whose name is now forgotten, one of 
which begins " Bring the high-toned harp of the many sounding 
strings, ere the sun ascends the blue-topped mountains of the 
wide extended sky ; " of which if Mr. Brooke read more, it is a 
fresh proof of his exceeding graciousness ; and even a long transla- 
tion of an Icelandic pastoral " by a young man who was enabled, by 
the friendship of Mr. Brooke, to study that language." A mere 
congeries of irrelevant gossip, not free from the sin of perpetually 
dragging in great folks' names from the furthest end of the earth, 
seemingly for the mere pleasure of putting them down in print. 
However, the able editor, whoever he was, must be long since 
gone to his account; and we may leave him in peace, and try 
to spell out for ourselves, from the few hints he has vouchsafed 



Tl PREPACK 

us, something of the character and fortunes of this great Irish 



es horn in 1708, in the house of Kantavan, county Cavan. 
His father was a wealthy and worthy parson ; his mother a Digby, 
a woman of sense and of good family, of whom Swift (stopping at 
Rantavan on his way to Sheridan at Quilca) was said to stand more 
in awe than of most country ladies. 

The boy was sent to school to one Felix Somerford, for whose 
poetry and love-making (unfortunate) vide Brookiana ; who was 
of opinion that " Nature intended that the child should act some 
great part on the theatre of human life," so sweet-natured, so 
greedy of learning was he. And no doubt Henry Brooke was a 
precocious child. At eight years old a fellow scholar brought him 
an ode to the moon, which broke off with the line 

'Ah, why doth Phoebe love to shine by night?" 

Under which Henry wrote at once : 

"Because the sex looks best by candlelight." 

Smart enough, considering his years, and the fashion of the time ; 
and afterwards, when he was sent to Dr. Sheridan's school in 
Dublin, he gave fresh proofs of this rhyming power. There are 
three of them in Brookiana, with a theme or two, full of grace 
and fire. 

While he was at college, Swift prophesied wonders of him only 

"regretting that his talent pointed towards poetry, which of 

all pursuits was most unprofitable." The Dean, says Brookiana, 

when he saw how thoroughly modest and unpretending he was, 

"never asked his opinion of any matter which was beyond his 

power, or which might embarrass him." The artless vivacity 

and sweetness of the lad seems to have softened even that cruel 

heart. It utterly captivated, in the next few years, men of equal 

talent and of more humanity. When he went to study law in 

London, in 1724, he became at once the pet of Pope and Lyttleton ; 

and one of the few really important things in Brookiana are a 

few letters selected from a correspondence between Brooke and 

Pope, which lasted for many years. Where are these letters now ? 

Would that the Editor had given them all, even though, to make 

room for them, he had consigned to obscurity a dozen of Irish 

worthies. Brooke, in one of them written in 1739, is very solicitous 

about Pope's religious tenets, having heard it insinuated that he 

"had too much wit to be a man of religion, and too much refine- 

ment to be that trifling thing called a Christian:" which Pope 

answers satisfactorily enough, sending him a "vindication of the 

Essay on Man from the aspersions and mistakes of Mr. Crousaz ; " 



PREFACE. xli 

and saying, for himself, that he " sincerely worships God, believes 
in his revelations, resigns to his dispensations, loves all his creatures, 
is in charity with all denominations of Christians, however violently 
they treat each other, and detests none so much as that profligate 
race who would loosen the bands of morality, either under the 
pretence of religion or free thinking. I hate no man as a man, 
but I hate vice in any man ; I hate no sect, but I hate unchari- 
tableness in any sect. This much I say, merely in compliance 
with your desire that I should say something of myself" a 
confession of faith which will not surprise the few who still consider 
(with Henry Brooke) the Essay on Man to be one of the noblest 
didactic poems in the English language. 

It is worth while to remark, in these letters, first the high terms 
in which Pope speaks of young Brooke ; of his " modesty unspoilt 
by applause," his "good qualities of the heart as well as of the 
head," his "always honourable ends:" and next, the absolute 
worship with which Brooke regards Pope apologizing to him, in 
one place, for having confessed that " Virgil gave me equal pleasure, 
Homer equal warmth, Shakspeare greater rapture, Milton more 
astonishment ; so ungrateful was I to refuse you your due praise, 
when it was not unknown to me that I got friends and reputation 
by your saying of me things which no one would have thought 
I merited, had not you said them. But I spoke without book 
at the time. I had not been entered into the spirit of your 
works, and I believe there are few who have. * * * * Any 
one of your original writings is indisputably a more finished 
piece than has been wrote by any other man. There is one 
consistent genius through the whole of your works, but that 
genius seems the smaller by being divided. * * * * Each 
distinct performance is the performance of a separate author, no 
one being large enough to contain you in your full dimensions " 
and much more, at which we may smile now; and possibly, if 
we be men of the world, hint that the young author did not 
worship the great literary star for nothing. Perhaps, nevertheless, 
"the whirligig of time may bring round its revenges," and 
Alexander Pope be rated, if not as high as young Brooke sets 
him, yet still far more highly than now. And mean while, is it 
not in the nature of all noble young souls to worship a great 
man, when they can find him? And ought it not to be in their 
nature? Is there any feeling more ennobling (there are few more 
delightful) than that of looking up in admiration (even though 
it be exaggerated) to a being nobler than oneself? Alas! for 
the man who has not felt that only through respect for others 
can true self-respect be gained; that he who worships nothing, 
will never be worshipful himself. Reverent, confiding loyalty 



xlii PREFACE. 

has been as yet the parent of all true freedom, and will be so 
to the end of time, to judge from the success of the Transatlantic 
attempt at liberty without loyalty. It is easy to boast of freedom 
and independence; but there are those who would question (as 
Henry Brooke would have done) whether there was not as much 
manly independence in the heart of the Englishman who kneels 
and trembles, he knows not why, before a certain lady in 
St. James's Palace, as in the heart of the Yankee lad who boasts 
that he is " as good as the President." So, at least, thought Henry 
Brooke. He had an intense capacity for worship. All his life he 
delighted to look up to beings better than himself, and, through 
them, to God, as the sum and substance of all their goodness : and 
not in spite of that, but because of that, he was, in the very best 
sense of the word, a Liberal. Against all tyranny, cruelty, and 
wrong ; against the chicaneries of the law and the chicaneries of 
politicians, his voice was always loud and earnest. He held 
political opinions which are now held or, at least, acted on by 
every rational Englishman, whether Whig or Tory, but which 
were then considered dangerous, destructive, immoral ; and he 
Buffered for his opinions, in fame and in pocket, and held them still. 
Never man lived a more original, self-determined, independent 
life ; but he knew how to give honour where honour was due. 

In London he studied law, and enjoyed such society as Pope, 
Lyttleton, and Swift could give him. But these studies, however, 
and this society were quaintly enough interrupted. He was re- 
called to Ireland by a dying aunt, to become guardian of her child, 
a beautiful little girl of twelveCatherine Meares of Meares Court, 
of a good old Westmeath house. He put her, wisely enough, to a 
boarding-school in Dublin ; and within two years, not quite so 
wisely, married her secretly. Yet. neither the heavens nor his 
family seem to have been very wroth with the folly. The marriage 
was as happy a one as this earth ever saw; the parents Irish 
people not holding the tenets of Malthus could not find it in their 
hearts to scold so pretty a pair of turtles, and simply re-married 
them, and left them to reap the awful fruits of their own folly in 
the form of a child per year. On which matter, doubtless, much 
unwisdom has been, and will be, talked in commonplaces which 
every one can supply for himself. But it is worth while to clear 
one's mind of cant, if it be only to judge Henry Brooke fairly for 
five minutes, and to disentangle from each other some of the many 
unsound objections which, as usual, are supposed to make one sound 
one. It is wrong to marry secretly. True. But which is worse? 
to marry secretly, or to be vicious secretly, with the vast majority 
of young men? If Brooke is to be judged for doing what his 
parents disapproved, then he is less, and not more guilty, than 






PREFACE. iliii 

three young men out of four unless parents would really prefer 
ten years of vice for their sons, to the evils of an early mar- 
riage. And the truth is, that parents the average religious 
parents, as well as others do prefer the vice to the marriage ; 
silence their consciences mean while (with an hypocrisy as sad as 
ludicrous) by asking no questions, lest they should discover what 
they perfectly well know of already ; and so lose, for the ten most 
important years of the youth's life, all moral influence, all mutual 
confidence, if not all mutual respect. 

"But early marriages are so imprudent." Which would have 
been most imprudent for Henry Brooke To run the chance, as 
three out of four run, of destroying both body and soul in hell, and 
bringing to a late marriage the dregs alike of his constitution and 
his heart, or of beginning life on a somewhat smaller yearly 
income? Of course, if a man's life consists in the abundance of 
the things which he possesses, Brooke was the more imprudent of 
the two ; but one strong authority, at least, may be quoted 
against that universally received canon. Henry Brooke's life con- 
sisted in his lofty moral standard, altogether heroical and godlike ; 
in his delicate sensibility (quite different from sensitiveness, child 
of vanity and ill-temper) ; in his chivalrous respect for woman ; in 
his strong trust in mankind ; in his pitiful yearning, as of a saving 
angel, over all sin and sorrow ; in his fresh and full manhood, most 
genial and yet most pure ; in those very virtues, to tell the ugly 
truth, which are most crushed and blunted in young men. Surely 
one has a right to look for somewhat of the cause of such, in the 
broad fact that those ten years which of all others are apt to be 
the most brutalizing, Brooke passed in pure and happy wedlock. 
What if the imprudence of his early marriage did cause the child- 
wife to have a few more children? One may boldly answer, firstly, 
"What matter?" and secondly, "I do not believe the fact, any 
more than I do certain Malthusian statements anent such matters, 
which require a complete re-examination, and that by men who 
know at least a little both of physiology and of human nature." 
Be that as it may, the beautiful little child-wife brought him three 
children before she was eighteen, and Brooke, in search of some 
more royal road to a competent income than the study of the law 
offered, went a second time to London and his great friends. 

There he wrote and published, under the eye of Pope, his 
poem of "Universal Beauty," a sort of "Bridgewater Treatise in 
rhyme," as it has been happily called. What sort of theodicy is to 
be expected from a young man of twenty-two, may be easily guessed. 
It is, as perhaps it should be, ambitious, dogmatic, troubling the 
reader much with anacolutha, and forced constructions, which 
darken the sense : a fault easily pardoned when one perceives that 



xliv PREFACE. 

it is caused not by haste or vagueness, but by too earnest attempts 
to compress more into words than words will carry, and to increase 
the specific gravity at the expense of transparency. Noticeable 
throughout is that Platonic and realist method of thought in which 
he persisted throughout life, almost alone in his generation, and 
which now and then leads him, young as he is, to very noble 
glimpses into the secrets of nature, as in these lines ; a fair 
specimen both of his style and his philosophy : 

"Emergent from the deep view nature's face, 
And o'er the surface deepest wisdom trace ; 
The verdurous beauties charm our cherished eyes 
But who'll unfold the root from whence they rise? 
Infinity within the sprouting bower ! 
Next to senigma in Almighty Power ; 
Who only could infinitude confine, 
And dwell immense within the minim shrine ; 
The eternal species in an instant mould, 
And endless worlds in seeming atoms hold. 
Plant within plant, and seed enfolding seed, 
For ever to end never still proceed ; 
In forms complete, essentially retain 
The future semen, alimental grain ; 
And these again, the tree, the trunk, the root, 
The plant, the leaf, the blossom, and the fruit ; 
Again the fruit and flower the seed enclose, 
Again the seed perpetuated grows, 
And beauty to perennial ages flows." 

Whatever opinion a public accustomed to a very different style of 
verse may form of these, yet they will find many noble passages 
both of poetry and of theology in this poem; passages which 
justify the high expectations which Pope had formed of his pupil 
and the honour which he is said to have done to Brooke, in 
retouching and even inserting many lines. Indeed, Pope's in- 
fluence is plain throughout, and the pupil has been imitating the 
manly terseness, though he has failed of the calm stateliness of his 
great, though now half-forgotten, master. 

Shortly after the publication of this poem, he seems to have 
returned to Ireland; and eight years, of which no record 
seems to remain, he spent in Dublin as a chamber counsel, not 
without success ; and to have worked for eight years at so uncon- 
genial a business, in the very heyday, too, of his youth and 
ambition, will redeem him somewhat from that imputation of want 
of perseverance which is often urged against him. Let him have 
the credit of having given the law a fair trial. His reasons for 
throwing up his profession are easily guessed. The delays and 
chicaneries of courts in the 18th century are well known. Henry 
Brooke's judgment of them may be read at large in the " Fool of 
Quality." The Irish Bar, too, was not in his days distinguished for 
morality ; and one may well conceive that Brooke, especially as a 









PREFACE. xlv 

professed Liberal, found it difficult enough to earn his bread, and 
yet remain an honest man. 

No wonder, then, that we find him in 1736 back again in London. 
He was welcomed there by Pope and Lord Lyttleton. Pitt (Lord 
Chatham) introduced him to the Prince of Wales, who " caressed 
him," say the biographers, " with great familiarity, and presented 
him with many elegant and valuable tokens of friendship china, 
books, paintings, &c." What more could man need, in days when 
nothing was to be gained without a patron? Unfortunately for 
Brooke's final success in the world, his patron, the Prince, was in 
opposition, and, as Brooke conceived, in his headlong chivalrous 
Irish way, an oppressed hero, the martyr of his own virtues ; and 
he therefore " must needs, if he has a chance, openly espouse his 
patron's quarrel, and thunder forth his wrongs to the world." 
Not so insane a purpose as it looks at first sight ; for while the 
Ministry practically consisted of Walpole, the Court, and the two 
Newcastles, the Opposition numbered in the House, Pitt, Chester- 
field, Carteret, Wyndham, Pultney, Argyle, and, in a word, the 
strongest men in England ; and outside the House, as skirmishers 
of the pen, Pope, Fielding, Johnson, and Glover. So that, even 
from a worldly point of view, it was no unwise step in young 
Brooke to bring out at Drury Lane his tragedy of Gustavus Vasa, 
full of patriotisms, heroisms, death to tyrants, indefeasible rights of 
freemen, and other commonplaces, at which we can afford to sneer 
now superciliously, it being not only the propensity but the right 
of humanity to kick down the stool by which it has climbed. 

The play itself is good enough ; its style that of the time ; its 
characters not so much human beings as vehicles for virtuous or 
vicious sentiments. If Trollio, the courtier Archbishop of Upsal, 
be really meant for Walpole, he will stand equally well for any 
ancient rascal. The only touch of what we now call human nature 
(in plain words, of casuistry) is to be found in the once famous 
scene in which the tyrant tries to treat Gustavus' resolve by the 
threat of murdering his mother and sister. In it there is real 
dramatic power, superior, I should say, to that of any English 
tragedian of the 18th century, and sufficient to redeem the play 
from utter dreariness, in the eyes of a generation which has learnt 
that old Swedes did not think, talk, and act half like Frenchmen, 
half like antique Komans. But the real worth of the play lay, and 
lies still, in the loftiness of its sentiments. Those were times in 
which men were coarser and more ignorant, but yet heartier and 
healthier than now. Those "intricacies of the human heart," 
which (as unravelled either by profligate Frenchmen or pious 
Englishwomen) are now in such high and all but sole demand, 
were then looked on chiefly as indigestions of the human stomach, 



T lvi PREFACE. 

or other physical organs ; and the public wanted, over and above 
the perennial subject of love, some talk at least about valour, 
patriotism, loyalty, chivalry, generosity, the protection of the 
oppressed, the vindication of the innocent, and other like matters, 
which are now banished alike from pulpit and from stage, and only 
call forth applause (so I am informed) from the sluts and roughs 
in the gallery of the Victoria theatre. In that theatre, but 
nowhere else in London, Gustavus Vasa (so do times change) might 
still be a taking play. 

It took in Brooke's time, but in a fashion very different from 
that which he expected. After being accepted at Drury Lane, 
rehearsed for five weeks, and carried safely through all the troubles 
of the green room, it was prohibited by the Lord Chamberlain, on 
account of its political tendency. 

Such silly tyranny bore such fruit as we have seen it bear in our 
own days. If the world might not see, at least the world could 
read. Brooke published the play in self-defence, and sold four 
thousand at five shillings each. The Prince sent him a hundred 
guineas. Chesterfield took forty copies, Dr. Johnson published (what 
I am ashamed to say I have not seen) an ironic " Complete Vindi- 
cation of the Licensers of the Stage, from the malicious aspersions 
of Mr. Brooke, author of Gustavus Vasa ; " and Brooke gained a 
complete triumph, and a thousand guineas into the bargain ; took 
a villa at Twickenham, close to Pope's, sent to Ireland for his 
family and his wife, who (so the Prince proposed) was to be foster- 
mother to the yet unborn George III., and set up in life, at the age 
of thirty-three, as a distinguished literary character, with all that 
he needed both of " praise and pudding." 

If the charming and successful Irishman had but prospered 
thenceforth, as most men prosper in the world, then we should 
have had another great literary personage, possibly another great 
parliamentary orator: but we should not have had "The Fool 
of Quality," and Ireland probably would not have had the man 
Henry Brooke. A course of chastening sorrow was appointed for 
this man, all the more long and bitter, perhaps, because he was so 
dear to Heaven. " Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth," was the 
law ages since, and will be, perhaps, until the end. At least, it 
was so with Henry Brooke. Far from poets and courtiers, and all 
that was beginning to intoxicate (as it must have intoxicated) his 
noble heart, he must sit through long years of ever-growing 
poverty and loneliness, watching the corpses of his dead children, 
dead joys, dead hopes, till he has learnt the golden secret, and 
literary fame, and all fame which men can give, lies far behind him 
and below him, for the glittering, poisonous earth-fog which it is, and 
his purified spirit rises into those pure heights which he only saw 



PREFACE. xlvil 

afar off, when he wrote his "Universal Beauty," as a lad of 
twenty-two. He shall return to his first love : but he shall return 
by a strait gate and a narrow way. 

In 1740, in the very heyday of his success, he is taken alarmingly 
ill. He must try his pure native air of Rantavan ; and he tries it, 
and recovers. Once well again, he will of course return to London ; 
all his great friends expect him. To their astonishment he sells 
off his furniture at Twickenham, rids himself of his villa, and stays 
at home. 

" His wife," say the biographers, " was afraid lest his zeal for the 
Prince should get him into trouble." That may have been the 
argument which she used in words : but what good woman has not 
dumb instincts and forecastings deeper and wider than her 
arguments? There may have been many reasons (and yet none 
of them dishonourable to Brooke) for withdrawing the most 
charming of husbands from a frivolous and profligate city, especially 
when that husband's purse had a perennial tendency to empty as 
fast as it filled. At least Henry Brooke was true lover and wise 
man enough to obey ; to give up London, fame and fashion ; and 
in the society of a woman whom he had loved from childhood, and 
at whose death, at last, he pined away, henceforth to " drink water 
out of his own spring ; " and a nobler act of self-renunciation one 
seldom meets with. It stamps the man at once as what he was ; 
pure, wise, and good. 

His great friends, and the Prince among them, wrote to him in 
his retirement, letters which are said to have perished in some fire. 
He published, too, from time to time, a paraphrase of " The Man 
of Law's Tale," for Ogle's Chaucer, which we shall not prefer to 
the original. The Earl of Westmoreland, a tragedy, was performed 
at Dublin, as good as other tragedies of the day. For several 
years, indeed, his hankering for the stage continued, to the scandal 
of some of his biographers ; one of whom, Mr. Richard Ryan, a 
Romish compiler of " Lives of Irish Worthies," thus vents his (or 
his Methodist informer's) respectability on the matter : 

"During the greater part of his life his religious opinions 
approached to what are called Methodistical, yet he uniformly 
supported the stage : nevertheless, it is certain he lived more 
consistently than he wrote. No day passed in which he did not 
collect his family to prayer, and read and expounded the Scriptures 
to them with a clearness and fervency edifying and interesting." A 
strange phenomenon must Henry Brooke have been, throughout 
his life, to bigots and precisians of all denominations. I have not 
had the pleasure of reading Mr. Richard Ryan's biography, a mis- 
fortune which is much softened to me by the perusal of this 
quotation from it. Doubtless Brooke's Methodist friends, had they, 



PREFACE. 

and not high heaven, had the making of Henry Brooke, would 
have treated him after the same Procrustean method as John 
Wesley treated the Fool of Quality, which he purged of such 
passages as were not to his mind, and then republished during the 
author's lifetime, as the " History of Harry, Earl of Moreland," a 
plan which was so completely successful, that country Wesleyans 
still believe their great prophet to have been himself the author of 
the book. 

In 1745, Chesterfield came to Ireland as Viceroy : and though 
Brooke (who was of an independence of spirit too rare in Ireland 
then) "was among the last to pay his respects to him," he was 
appointed barrack-master of Mullingar, with a salary worth a clear 
400 a year. A rational Irishman of those days would have 
pocketed his money, and held his tongue : but Brooke must needs, 
with that foolish honesty which always hampered him, thoroughly 
work out the history of these and other Irish barracks, their 
jobbery, peculation, and what not, and throw the whole into a 
satirical pamphlet, "The Secret History and Memoirs of the 
Barracks of Ireland ;" thereby putting a sufficiently wet blanket 
upon any chance of future government preferment. That year saw 
the publication of his " Farmer's Letters," written in the expecta- 
tion of a revolt of the Irish Koman Catholics. They excited 
much attention at the time, but were denounced by some for their 
supposed severity. Brooke's vindication of them, containing an anec- 
dote honourable to the Irish for his ill-founded expectation of a 
rebellion, may be found in Brookiana, vol. i. p. 85 a model of that 
English prose of which he was a perfect master, and a model too of 
good sense and humanity. In nothing, I may say here, does 
Brooke show more in advance of his generation, than in his 
opinions as to the right method of governing the Irish Catholics, 
opinions which have been since, when all but too late, universally 
accepted and acted on. 

In 1747, he wrote four poems for Moore's "Fables for the 
Female Sex," one at least of which, "The Sparrow and the 
Dove," is a beautiful reflection of his own pure wedded life : but, 
indeed, Henry Brooke is never more noble, not even when he talks 
theology, than when he speaks of woman. 

Two years after, we find him " solicited by a large body of the 
independent electors of Dublin to stand for that city," and de- 
cliningas one would have expected him because there was 
another candidate in the field, who was not only (what he was 
not) an excelling trader," but had " an acknowledged superiority 
in every other merit." 

Garrick, about this time, "offered him a shilling a line for 
everything he would write for the stage, provided he wrote for 



PREFACE. xlix 

him alone." Brooke refused, as a man who did not choose to sell 
his brains to any master; and a coolness ensued between them. 
Garrick was not the only man, it seems, whom he offended by that 
independence of spirit ; which, however softened by his natural 
sweetness, must have been galling to all greedy, vain, or super- 
cilious men. Johnson, though he tried to be fair to him, and 
vindicated his Gustavns Vasa in public, could not conceal his 
dislike of a man who was certainly his superior in intellect, who 
had no inclination to bow down and worship, when worship was 
rudely demanded; whose grace and courtesy must have seemed 
to the great bear mere foppishness; and whose liberal opinions 
(persisted in throughout life) must have been shocking to the 
Toryism of Johnson's later years. His silly parody on a fine line 
in Gustavus, 

" Who rules o'er freemen should himself be free," 

is well enough known : 

" "Who drives fat oxen should himself he fat," 

answered Johnson, laughing (he only knew why) at the sentiment. 
That here was a quarrel between them, there seems to be no 
doubt; and to it is attributed Johnson's omission of his name 
from the lives of the English poets. His descendant says (Dublin 
University Magazine) that the traditionary story in their family as 
to the cause of quarrel bears so heavily on Johnson's manner, 
and is so flattering to the courtesy of the poet, that he would 
prefer not to write it down. Why so ? One would be glad of any 
fresh anecdote, either of Brooke or Johnson: but, be the story 
true or false, there was most probably a natural antagonism 
between the two worthies; in character, as between a delicate 
and a coarse nature ; and in intellect, as between nominalist and 
realist, those two world-wide types of human brain which have 
quarrelled since the creation, and will quarrel till the day of 
judgment. 

Mean while all went smoothly at Kantavan. Henry's brother, 
Kobert, who was as fond of painting as he of poets, lived with 
him ; both of them in easy circumstances, and both with children 
(as is fit in the prolific air of Erin) innumerable. Strange to say, 
the two families did not quarrel. " The house," writes some one, 
" is a little paradise, the abode of peace and love." 

After a while, however, the storms began to burst. Henry's 
children began to die one after the other, and with death came 
(we are not told how) poverty. The family estate had to be 
mortgaged and sold. Henry, having paid his debts, hired Daisy 
Park, in County Kildare; his brother took a house near him. 
There the one lived by his paintings, the other by his barrack 



1 PREFACE. 

master's place, and by Whig political tracts, which, though they 
sold, seem to have satisfied neither party. The Catholics could 
not like an adorer of the "great and good King William;" the 
Protestants, one who preached common mercy and justice to the 
Catholics, and exposed the suicidal folly of preventing them, by 
penal laws, from improving their own lands, or developing the re- 
sources of their country. Of his " Trial of the Roman Catholics," 
all I can say is, that the extracts from it in Brookiana are full of 
sound wisdom, both moral and political ; and, as far as it goes, 
advocates nothing but the very policy which all are now agreed 
to pursue toward the Celtic race. 

About this time some of Brooke's relations were making large 
fortunes in India ; and one of them, Colonel Robert Brooke, who 
seems to have been a noble character, and a good soldier, sent 
home to his father and uncle 33,0001. especially to redeem the 
mortgage on the Cavan property. Brooke did so, and built a 
lodge thereon, calling it Longfield, or Corfoddy. Here he gave 
himself up to agricultural speculations; drained a lake, and got 
a bog instead; experimented on water-power and drainage, and 
sank a great deal of money ; as many another honest gentleman 
has done, who has dared to tamper with that stubborn dame, 
Mother Earth, without being bred to the manner. 

However, if he wasted much money, he wasted it honourably 
and usefully. " Vast sums of money must have passed through his 
hands," says one reporter in Brookiana. But they passed at least 
into the pockete of the starving Irish, in the form not only of alms, 
which he gave but too lavishly and carelessly, but of employment, 
of new cottages, new gardens, and a general increase of civiliza- 
tion, physical and moral. No doubt, his dreams were wider than 
his success. " Would you believe," asks one, " that Henry Brooke 
would quit the sweet vales of Daisy Park, to pass the evening of 
his life at the foot of a barren mountain in Corfoddy, or Longfield, 
as he calls it, in the wildest part of the county? Yet he is as 
philosophical as poetical, and as cheerful as ever. He was bom 
in a desert, and to a desert he has returned. And yet in his 
imagination, he has already ploughed the one-half of the land ; 
sprinkled the country all round with snug cottages ; already he 
thinks he hears the clack of the busy mill, and the sound of the 
anvil. To do him justice, however, he has already built a house 
of lime and stone, two stories high, with glass windows too, which 
never fail to attract the gaze and admiration of the solitary 
passenger." 

The secret charm of Longfield was, perhaps, that it was his own : 
but there is many a man in Ireland and elsewhere who would 
have rested in the mere sense of possession, without considering 






PREFACE. li 

himself bound to live on his own estate. But perhaps Brooke was 
too conscientious, as well as too kind-hearted a man, to leave the 
wild Irish of Corfoddy to shift for themselves, and so (though the 
place could not but be a sad and humbling one to him, for only 
half a mile oif was the old " House of Rantavan," where he was 
born, now passed into other hands) he would go and live and die 
among his own people, and see what could be done for them ; and 
not altogether in vain, to judge from another report written some 
ten years later : 

" When I came within six or seven miles of Mr. Brooke's, I was 
afraid I should mistake the way in such a wild part of the county, 
so that I asked almost every one I met, man, woman, and child, 
'Is this the way to Corfoddy?' Every one knew Mr. Brooke, 
every one praised him, and wished he might live for ever. 

"As I knew that the author of Gustavus Vasa had written a 
great deal in praise of agriculture, I expected of course, as I 
approached his house, that it would be bosomed high in tufted 
trees" (a most Irish expectation, seeing that the said house had 
only been built a dozen years). * * * " But I was never so 
disappointed in my life not a tree on the whole road, not a hedge 
to be seen, and the way so bad, that I am sure it must be im- 
passable in the winter. His house stands on a barren spot, and 
the only improvement I could see, a little garden in the front, 
shaded with a few half-starved elms, that seem rather to have been 
planted by chance than design." This hardly agrees with the 
account of the Dublin University Magazine, that the roofless ruins 
of his labourers' cottages still stand, and that his hydraulic works 
were at one time so extensive, as to frighten the millers on the 
Blackwater into a deputation to Lord Headfort, entreating that 
Mr. Brooke might not turn the course of the whole river; to 
which Lord Headfort answered, " That they had nothing to fear 
from Mr. Brooke. That he should be sorry to meddle with that 
gentleman." The disappointed tourist, however, finds hospitality 
and an excellent libraiy, and at last Mr. and Mrs. Brooke. His 
sketch of the old man has been already given; the child- wife, alas! 
worn out by bearing and losing children, is quite emaciated, and 
so feeble she can hardly walk across the room. " I never saw so 
affectionate a husband, and so tender a father. Our conversation 
at dinner turned on the manners and customs of the inhabitants 
of the neighbourhood. You would really think that Mr. Brooke 
was talking of his own children, they were all so dear to him. 
He prayed for them, and blessed them over and over again, with 
tears in his eyes." (He was so tender-hearted, they say, that 
Mrs. Brooke was always afraid to tell him of the death of a neigh- 
bouring cottager.) " That evening we walked into the garden. 

b 



m PREFACE. 

His favourite flowers were those that were planted by the hands 
of his wife and daughter. I was astonished at his skill m botany. 
He dwelt on the virtues of the meanest weeds, and then launched 
out into such a panegyric on vegetable diet, that he almost made 
me a Pythagorean. * We came to a little gurgling 
stream Mr. Brooke (who was from youth a fine Italian scholar) 
gazed on it for some moments, and then repeated these lines out 
of Metastasio : 

1 Copre in van le basse arena 
Picciol rio con velo ondoso, 
Che rivela in fondo algoso 
La chiarezza dell' umor.' " 

* * 

u And Noah was a just man, and perfect in his generations ; and 
Noah walked with God." Even such was Henry Brooke, though, 
like Noah, he saw cause to be deeply dissatisfied with the state of 
the world around him, and gave much excellent advice in his 
time, for which he was only laughed at. Surely the thousands 
(probably exaggerated by the ardent imagination of the Milesian,) 
which are said to have passed through his hands, were not alto- 
gether ill-spent (of squandering there is no proof), if they had 
bought that which is above all price, the love and prayers of every 
human being round ; if they had gone to soften and develop the 
humanity of those poor savage oppressed Celts. Had the money 
been invested in business, and lost (as men of business now-a-days 
are wont to lose), in the normal and respectable way of bankruptcy, 
no one would have thought the worse of him. And surely Henry 
Brooke, like every man in a free country, had a right to spend his 
money as seemed best to him. When he owed he paid, though it 
cost him great sacrifices ; he had to the last enough whereon to 
live honoured, and to die happy ; and what does man want more ? 
There always have been, and there always will be, those who 
having food and raiment, fitted at least for their station, are there- 
with content, because they prefer the making of human characters, 
their own and others, to the making of money ; and find that one 
human brain cannot attend to both occupations at once. Of such 
was Henry Brooke. 

Of his later publications I shall say but little : a clever political 
opera of his, "Jack the Giant-queller," was acted in Dublin as 
early as 1748, full if not of humour, still of fluent Irish wit, thrown 
into comic songs, of his usual lofty morality. The censor of the 
Dublin stage, to do him justice, must have been far more liberal 
than the English Lord Chamberlain, or the Giant-queller would 
have been a co-martyr with Gustavus Vasa. There are several 
more tragedies and comedies from his pen, seemingly first printed 



PREFACE. liii 

m 1778, when he had ceased to write, and a novel, " Juliet Gren- 
ville, or the History of the Human Heart," published 1774, in 
which his biographers only see " the ruins of genius." 

Of his last years, which were spent in Dublin with his only sur- 
viving daughter, no record remains. Mrs. Brooke died in 1772, 
and a very dear daughter just before her. His only surviving son, 
Arthur, was serving in the army in Canada, and he was left alone 
with Charlotte, now the only girl, an accomplished woman of 
genius, and author of the earliest translations of Irish poetry. From 
the time of his wife's death he shut himself up from the world, and 
was thought by many to be dead. He went after a while to Dublin, 
where (so Charlotte Brooke told Maria Edgeworth) he used, instead 
of walking up and down his room composing, to sit for hours 
gazing into vacancy ; and died peacefully in 1783, aged seventy- 
seven years as he lived, a philosopher, a gentleman, and a 
Christian. 

But of all his works, the "Fool of Quality" was the best, the 
most characteristic, and possibly the most precious in his eyes. 
He spent several years over it. The first volumes were published 
in 1766, when he was sixty years old ; the fifth not till 1770. In 
it we have the whole man : the education of an ideal nobleman 
by an ideal merchant-prince has given him room for all his specu- 
lations on theology, political economy, the relations of sex and 
family, and the training, moral and physical, of a Christian gen- 
tleman ; and to them plot and probability are too often sacrificed. 
Its pathos is, perhaps, of too healthy and simple a kind to be con- 
sidered very touching by a public whose taste has been palled by 
the "aesthetic brandy and cayenne" of French novels: John 
Wesley's opinion of it was, that it was " one of the most beautiful 
pictures that ever was drawn in the world ; the strokes are so 
delicately fine, the touches so easy, natural, and affecting, that I 
know not who can survey it with tearless eyes, unless he has a 
heart of stone." 

Nevertheless, overmuch striving for pathos is the defect of the 
book. The characters in it, in proportion as they are meant to 
be good, are gifted with a passionate and tearful sensibility, which 
is rather French or Irish than English, and which will irritate, if 
not disgust, many whose Teutonic temperament leads them to 
pride themselves rather on the repression than the expression of 
emotion, and to believe (and not untruly) that feelings are silent 
in proportion to their depth. But it should be recollected that 
this extreme sensibility was a part of Brooke's own character; 
that each man's ideal must be, more or less, the transfiguration of 
that which he finds in himself; and that he was honest and rational 
in believing that his sensibility, just as much as any other property 

b2 



U Y PREFACE. 

of his humanity, when purified from selfishiwess (which was in his 
ethics the only method of perfection), could be made as noble, fair, 
and useful, as any other faculty which God had given. 

The fifth volume, seemingly published in 1770, is certainly inferior 
to the rest, and without seeing in it, as some have done, only " the 
magnificent ruins of genius," one may judge from it that his noble 
intellect was failing rapidly, even before that loss of his wife which 
gave the death-blow alike to heart and brain. Nevertheless, even 
hi it are deep and beautiful thoughts, on theology and political 
economy ; and in his decadence, Henry Brooke is still in advance 
of his age, preaching truths which are now accepted by most 
educated Englishmen, and other truths which will be accepted by 
them ere long. 

Nevertheless, that " Good wine needs no bush," is an old proverb ; 
one so true, that the fact of this book needing a preface, will pos- 
sibly create a prejudice in the eyes of many. 

The book, it will be said, is not yet a hundred years old ; if 
therefore it had been of real value, it would not have so soon lost 
its popularity. Surely, some intrinsic defect in it has caused it 
to be not undeservedly forgotten. And if an average reader 
deigned to open the book, he would probably find in the first 
hundred pages quite enough to justify to himself his prejudice. 
The cause of its failure, he would say, is patent. The plot is 
extravagant as well as ill-woven, and broken, besides, by episodes 
as extravagant as itself. The morality is Quixotic, and practically 
impossible. The sermonizing, whether theological or social, is 
equally clumsy and obtrusive. Without artistic method, without 
knowledge of human nature and the real world, the book can never 
have touched many hearts, and can touch none now. 

To all which it may be answered, that if the form of fiction now 
popular is the only right form; if artistic method consists merely in 
dramatic unity of interest, in weaving a plot which shall keep the 
reader expectant and amused, without demanding of him even a 
moment's reflection ; if knowledge of human nature is to signify 
merely its everyday and pettiest passions, failings, motives ; if, in 
a word, the canons which are necessary for a successful stage play 
are also to limit fiction of eveiy kind : then this book, as a fiction, 
is a very bad one, and its editors must succumb to the too probable 
verdict of an age which seems determined that art shall confine 
itself more and more exclusively to the trivial, the temporary, and 
the vulgar; which has made up its mind to have its novels written 
by young ladies, and its pictures painted by pre-Raphaelites ; and 
in which ideal art, whether in fiction or hi painting, seems steadily 
dying out perhaps for want of that very realistic tone of thought 
which is to be found in Henry Brooke. 



PREFACE. Iv 

If, again, theology, properly so called, is to be henceforth an 
extinct science ; if nothing can be known of God's character, even 
from the person of Jesus Christ, save that he will doom to endless 
torture the vast majority of the human race, while he has made, 
for the purpose of delivering a very small minority, a certain highly 
artificial arrangement, to be explained by no human notions of 
justice or of love ; if the divine morality be utterly different from 
the ideal of human morality ; if generosity, magnanimity, chivalry 
all which seems most divine in man is to have no likeness in 
God, no place in the service of God ; if the motives of religion 
are to be confined henceforth to the most selfish of human hopes, 
and the basest of human fears; if, in a word, Spurgeonism, 
whether Protestant or Catholic, is the only fit creed for mankind ; 
then, indeed, all the seemingly noble teaching of this book, however 
much it may seem to reflect the life of Christ, or the teaching of 
St. Paul, is superfluous ; and its diatribes may be passed over as 
impertinent interferences with the dramatic unity of the plot. 

But if an ideal does exist of the human soul as of the human 
body ; if it be good to recollect that ideal now and then, and to 
compare what man is with what man might be ; if the heroic 
literature of every nation, and above all these, the New Testament 
itself, are witnesses for that spiritual ideal, just as Greek statuary 
and the paintings of the great Italian masters are witnesses for 
the physical ideal ; if that ideal, though impossible with man, be 
possible with God, and therefore the goal toward which every man 
should tend, even though he come short of it : then it may be 
allowable for some at least among the writers of fiction to set 
forth that ideal, and the author of the "Fool of Quality" may be 
just as truly a novelist in his own way, as the authoress of 
"Queechy" and the "Wide Wide World." There are those, in- 
deed, still left on earth who believe the contemplation of the actual 
(easy and amusing as it is) to be pernicious to most men without 
a continual remembrance of the ideal ; who would not put into 
young hands even that Shakspeare who tells them what men are, 
without giving them, as a corrective, the Spenser and the Milton 
who tell them what men might be ; who would even (theological 
questions apart) recommend to the philosophical student of mere 
human nature the four Gospels rather than Balzac. But such are, 
doubtless, as Henry Brooke was, dreamers and idealists. 

And if, again, a theology be possible, and an anthropology not 
contradictory to, but founded on, that theology; if the old 
Catholic dogma that the Son of Man was the likeness of his 
Father's glory, and the express image of his person, may be believed 
still (as it is by a lingering few among Christians), hi any honest 
and literal practical sense ; if that be true which Mr. J. Stuart 



}vi PREFACE. 

Mill says in his late grand Essay upon Liberty, that "our popular 
religious ethics, by holding out the hope of heaven and the threat 
of hell, as the appointed and appropriate motives to a virtuous life, 
fall far below the best of the ancients, and do what they can to 
give to human morality an essentially selfish character ;" if by (as 
Mr. Mill says) " discarding those so-called secular standards, derived 
from Greek and Koman writers, which heretofore co-existed with 
and supplemented ethics " (which should be called not Christian, 
but monastic, and the " secular " correctives of which still remain, 
thank God, in the teaching of our public schools, and of our two great 
universities), " receiving some of its spirit, and infusing into it some 
of theirs, there is even now resulting a low, abject, servile type of 
character, which, submit itself as it may to what it deems the 
Supreme will, is incapable of rising to or sympathizing in the con- 
ception of Supreme goodness :" if this, or half of this, be true, 
then it may be worth while for earnest men to consider well if these 
seemingly impertinent sermonizings of Henry Brooke be not needed 
now-a-days : even though he dares to tell his reader, and indeed to 
take as his text throughout the book, that " all virtues, even justice 
itself, are merely different forms of benevolence," and that " bene- 
volence produces and constitutes the heaven or beatitude of God 
himself. He is no other than an infinite and eternal GOOD WILL. 
Benevolence must, therefore, constitute the beatitude or heaven of 
all dependent beings." 

It may be well, too, to see how, in his eyes, it was not only right 
and useful, but possible likewise for a British nobleman of the 17th 
century to copy God who made him ; how, in enforcing that dream 
of hig, he did not disdain to use those apologues and maxims of 
wise old heathens, which will live, we may hope, as long as an 
English school and an English scholar exist on earth; how his 
conception of the ideal of humanity, because it is founded on the 
belief that that ideal is the very image of God, is neither " low, 
abject, nor servile," but altogether chivalrous and heroic; and 
lastly how, in his eyes, the humblest resignation and the loftiest 
aspiration are so far from being contradictory virtues, that it is 
only (so he holds) by rising to the " conception of the Supreme 
goodness " that man can attain " submission to the Supreme will." 
And when the reader has considered this, and more which he may 
find in this book, he will irritate himself no more about defects of 
outward method, but will be content to let the author teach his 
own lesson in his own way, trusting (and he will not trust in vain) 
that each seeming interruption is but a step forward in the moral 
process at which the author aims ; and that there is full and conscious 
consistency in Mr. Brooke's method, whether or not there be dramatic 
unity in his plot. By that time also one may hope the earnest 



PREFACE. Ivii 

reader will have begun to guess at the causes which have made 
this book forgotten for a while ; and perhaps to find them not in 
its defects but in its excellencies ; in its deep and grand ethics, in 
its broad and genial humanity, in the divine value which it 
attaches to the relations of husband and wife, father and child ; 
and to the utter absence both of that sentimentalism and that 
superstition which have been alternately debauching of late 
years the minds of the young. And if he shall have arrived at this 
discovery, he will be able possibly to regard at least with patience 
those who are rash enough to affirm that they have learnt from this 
book more which is pure, sacred, and eternal, than from any which 
has been published since Spenser's Fairy Queen. 

So go forth once more, brave book, as God shall speed thee; 
and wherever thou meetest, whether in peasant or in peer, with a 
royal heart, tender and true, magnanimous and chivalrous, enter in 
and dwell there ; and help its owner to become (as thou canst 
help him) a Man, a Christian, and a Gentleman, as Henry Brooke 
was before him. 

C. KINGSLEY. 




DRAMATIS PERSONS 



RICHARD, EARL OF MORELAND, a dissolute nobleman. 

LADY MOK ELAND, a citizen's daughter, whom he marries and settles 

down with, after he has made up his mind to reform. 
RICHARD, ' Lord Dickie,' their eldest son. 
HENRY CLINTON, their second son, whom they neglect. 
HENRY CLINTON, otherwise Mr. Fenton, the earl's brother, a wealthy 

merchant, Harry's self-appointed guardian and instructor. 
Mr. MEEKLY, a respected friend of the Morelands. 
TOMMY TRUCK, a village urchin, who thrashes Lord Dickie and is 

thrashed by Harry. 

NED, a poor boy, befriended by Harry and Mr. Fenton. 
Mr. VINDEX, a brutal schoolmaster [probably the original of Kingsley's 

Vindex Brimblecombe]. 
HAMMEL CLEMENT, the persecuted son of a rich tradesman, rescued from 

starvation by Mr. Fenton. 
ARABELLA, his wife. 
EDWARD LONGFIELD, a chivalrous young man, who defends Arabella 

from the charge of murder, and afterwards falls in love with her. 
Mr. SNARK, victim of Ned's practical joke. 
Mr. and Mrs. FIELDING, Ned's long-lost parents. 
THE EARL OF MANSFIELD, a sagacious nobleman. 
LORD BOTTOM, his conceited and arrogant son. 
LADY MANSFIELD, Lord Bottom's doting mother. 
THE COUNTESS OF MAITLAND, otherwise Fanny Goodall, Marchioness 

d'Aubigny, Duchess de Bouillon ; Henry Clinton the elder's cousin. 
Mr. GOLDING, a wealthy merchant. 

Miss GOLDING, his daughter, who marries Henry Clinton the elder. 
Mrs. SUSAN, her favourite maid. 
ELEANOR DAMER, a farmer's daughter. 
BARNABY TIRREL, a chandler, her husband, who nearly kills her brother 

Tom. 

TOMMY DAMER, left for dead by Barnaby. 
Mr. and Mrs. RUTH, prisoners for debt. 
Mr. NIGGARD, a debtor, freed by Harry, but afterwards caught treating a 

poor man unmercifully. 
GIFFARD HOMELY, an unfortunate surety, formerly the saviour of Mr. 

Fenton's life. 

SIR WILLIAM THORNHILL, Homely's landlord and protector. 
KING WILLIAM THE THIRD. 
QUEEN MARY. 
THE PRINCESS OF HESSE. 
THE EARL OF PORTLAND. 
GAFFER DOBSON, Harry's foster-father. 
Mrs. DOBSON, Harry's nurse. 
MARIA DE LAUSANNE, alias ' Pierre,' a girl who falls in love with Harry, 

and follows him disguised as a youth. 
ABENAMIN, otherwise Abenaide, daughter of Eloisa (Fanny GoodalPs 

cousin) and the Emperor of Morocco ; Harry's bride. 

lix 



THE 

FOOL OF QUALITY; 

OR, 

THE HISTORY OF HENRY EARL OF MORELAND. 



CHAPTER I. 

RICHARD, the grandfather of our hero, was ennobled by James 
the First. He married a lovely girl of the ancient family of the 
Goodalls, in the county of Surrey, and at seven years' distance had 
two sons, Richard and Henry ; but, dying early in the reign of 
Charles the First, he bequeathed 12,000 to his youngest, and near 
20,000 annual income to his eldest son not in any personal pre- 
ference to his brother, but as one who was to support the name 
and honours of the family. He appointed his brother-in-law ex- 
ecutor and guardian, who, educating the children agreeable to 
their different fortunes and prospects in life, in about seven years 
after the death of their father, sent Richard with a tutor to take 
the tour of Europe, and bound Henry apprentice to a considerable 
London merchant. 

During the travels of the one and the apprenticeship of the other, 
the troubles happened ; and Cromwell assumed the regency, before 
the fortune of the Morelands could be forfeited or endangered, by 
siding with the crown or the commonwealth. 

Richard returned to England a short time before the Restoration ; 
and, being too gay and too dissolute for the plodding and hypocrisy 
of Cromwell and his fanatics, he withdrew to the mansion-house of 
his forefathers. 

On his landing, he had inquired for his brother Henry; but 
hearing that he was lately married, and wholly absorbed in matters 
of merchandise, as he had the utmost contempt for all cits and 
traders, he took no further notice of him. 

In the country, he amused himself with his bottle, hounds, 
hawks, and race-horses ; but, on the restoration of his majesty, of 
pleasurable memory, he hastened to court, where he rolled away 
and shone as in his native sphere. He was always of the party 

B 



2 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

of the king, Rochester, &c., where virtue was laughed out of 
countenance and where all manner of dissoluteness became at- 
tractive and recommendable by the bursts of merriment and zest of 
wit. But toward the latter end of this droll reign, Earl Richard, 
being advanced in age, and being still older in constitution than 
years, began to think of providing an heir to his estate : and, as he 
had taken vast pains to impair it, he married a citizen's daughter 
who wanted a title, and with her got a portion of 100,000, which 
was equally wanting on his part. 

With his lady, he again retreated to the country, where, in less 
than a year, she made him the exulting father of a fine boy, whom 
he called Richard. 

Richard speedily became the sole centre of all his mother's so- 
licitudes and affections. And though within the space of the two 
succeeding years she was delivered of a second boy, yet, as his 
infant aspect was less promising and more uninformed than his 
brother's, she sent him forth to be nursed by the robust wife of 
a neighbouring farmer, where, for the space of upwards of four 
years, he was honoured with no token from father or mother, save 
some casual messages to know from time to time if the child was 
in health. 

This boy was called Henry, after his uncle by the father's side. 
The earl had lately sent to London to make inquiry after his 
brother, but could learn no manner of tidings concerning him. 

Meanwhile, the education of the two children was extremely 
contrasted. Richard, who was already entitled my little lord, was 
not permitted to breathe the rudeness of the wind. On his slight- 
est indisposition, the whole house was in alarms ; his passions had 
full scope in all their infant irregularities; his genius was put 
into a hotbed, by the warmth of applauses given to every flight 
of his opening fancy; and the whole family conspired, from the 
highest to the lowest, to the ruin of promising talents and a 
benevolent heart. 

Young Harry, on the other hand, had every member as well as 
feature exposed to all weathers ; would run about, mother naked, 
for near an hour, in a frosty morning; was neither physicked 
into deh'cacy, nor flattered into pride ; scarce felt the convenience, 
and much less understood the vanity of clothing; and was daily 
occupied in playing and wrestling with the pigs and two mon- 
grel spaniels on the common ; or in kissing, scratching, or boxing 
with the children of the village. 

When Harry had passed his fifth year, his father, on a festival 
day, humbly proposed to send for him to his nurse, in order to 
observe how the boy might turn out; and my lady, in a fit of 
good-humour, assented. Nurse, accordingly, decked him out in 
his holiday petticoats, and walked with our hero to the great 
house, as they called it. 

A brilliant concourse of the neighbouring gentry were met in 
a vast parlour, that appeared to be executed after the model of 
Westminster Hall. 

There -syas Sir Christopher Cloudy, who knew much but said 
nothing, with his very conversable lady, who scarce knew by halves, 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 3 

but spoke by wholesale. In the same range was Sir Standish 
Stately, who in all companies held the first place in his own esteem. 
Next to him sat Lady Childish ; it was, at least, thirty years since 
these follies might have become her, which appeared so very 
ridiculous at the age of fifty-five. By her side were the two 
Stiltons; a blind man would swear that the one was a clown 
and the other a gentleman, by the tones of their voices. Next to 
these were two pair of very ill-mated turtles Mr. Gentle, who 
sacrificed his fine sense and affluent fortune to the vanity and 
bad temper of a silly and turbulent wife ; and Squire Sulky, a 
brutal fool, who tyrannized over the most sensible and most ami- 
able of her sex. 

On the opposite side was Lord Prim, who evidently laboured 
hard to be easy in conversation ; and next to him was Lord 
Flippant, who spoke nonsense with great facility. By his side 
sat the fair but dejected Miss Willow ; she had lately discovered 
what a misfortune it was to be born to wit, beauty, and affluence, 
the three capital qualifications that lead the sex to calamity. Next 
to her was Colonel Jolly, with a heart ever tuned to merriment, 
and lungs to laughter. Had he known how to time his fits, the 
laugh might have grown catching. Below him was seated Mrs. 
Mirror, a widow lady, industriously accomplished in the faults of 
people of fashion. And below her sat the beloved and respected 
Mr. Meekly, who always sought to hide behind the merits of the 
company. Next to him was Major Settle no one spoke with more 
importance on things of no signification. And beside him sat Miss 
Lovely, who looked sentiment, and, while she was silent, inspired 
others with sense and virtue. 

These were the principal characters. The rest could not be said 
to be of any character at all. The cloth had been lately removed, 
and a host of glasses and decanters glowed on the table, when in 
comes young Harry, escorted by his nurse. 

All the eyes of the company were instantly drawn upon him; 
but he advanced, with a vacant and unobserving physiognomy, and 
thought no higher of the assembly than as of so many peasants 
at a country wake. 

Dicky, my dear, says my lady, go and welcome your brother; 
whereat Dick went up, took Harry by the hand, and kissed him 
with much affection. Harry, thereupon, having eyed his brother 
I don't know you, said he, bluntly, but at the same time held up 
his little mouth to kiss him again. 

Dick, says my lady, put your laced hat upon Harry, that we may 
see how it becomes him, which he immediately did; but Harry, 
feeling an unusual encumbrance on his head, took off the hat, and, 
having for some time looked contemptuously at it, he cast it from 
him with a sudden and agile jerk, as he used to cast flat stones 
to make ducks and drakes in the mill-pond. The hat took the 
glasses and decanters in full career ; smash go the glasses, abroad 
pours the wine on circling laces, Dresden aprons, silvered silks, 
and rich brocades ; female screams filled the parlour ; the rout is 
equal to the uproar ; and it was long ere most of them could be 
composed to their places. 

B2 



4 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

In the meanwhile, Harry took no kind of interest in their out- 
cries or distresses ; but spying a larsre Spanish pointer, that just 
then came from under the table, he sprung at him like lightning, 
seized him by the collar, and vaulted on his back with inconceivable 
agility. The dog, wholly disconcerted by so unaccustomed a bur- 
den, capered and plunged about in a violent manner ; but Harry 
was a better horseman than to be so easily dismounted : whereon 
the dog grew outrageous, and, rushing into a group of little misses 
and masters, the children of the visitants, he overthrew them like 
nine-pins; thence proceeding with equal rapidity between the 
legs of Mrs. Dowdy, a very fat and elderly lady, she instantly fell 
back with a violent shriek, and, in her fall, unfortunately overthrew 
Frank the foxhunter, who overthrew Andrew the angler, who over- 
threw Bob the beau, who closed the catastrophe. 

Our hero, meantime, was happily dismounted by the intercepting 
petticoats, and fairly laid, without damage, in the fallen lady's 
lap. From thence he arose at his leisure, and strolled about the 
room with as unconcerned an aspect as if nothing had happened 
amiss, and as though he had neither art nor part in this frightful 
discomfiture. 

When matters were once more, in some measure, set to rights 
My heavens ! exclaimed my lady, I shall faint ! The boy is posi- 
tively an idiot; he has no apprehension or conception of places 
or things. Come hither, sirrah, she cried, with an angry tone; 
but, instead of complying, Harry cast on her a look of resentment, 
and sidled over toward his nurse. Dicky, my dear, said my lady, 
go and pretend to beat his foster-mother, that we may try if the 
child has any kind of ideas. Here her ladyship, by ill fortune, 
was as much unadvised as her favourite was unhappy in the exe- 
cution of her orders ; for while Dick struck at the nurse with 
a counterfeited passion, Harry instantly reddened, and gave his 
brother such a sudden push in the face, that his nose and mouth 
gushed out with blood- Dick set up the roar ; my lady screamed 
out, and, rising and running at Harry with all imaginable fury, 
she caught him up as a falcon woukl truss a robin, turned over 
his petticoats, and chastised him with all the violence of which 
her delicacy was capable. Our hero, however, neither uttered cry 
nor dropped a tear; but, being set down, he turned round on 
the company an eye of indignation, then cried Come away, 
mammy, and issued from the assembly. 

Harry had scarce made his exit when his mother exclaimed 
after him Ay, ay, take him away, nurse! take him away, the 
little wretch, and never let me see his face more ! 

I shall not detain my reader with a tedious detail of the many 
and differing opinions that the remaining company expressed with 
regard to our hero ; let it suffice to observe, that they generally 
agreed that, though the boy did not appear to be endowed by na- 
ture with a single faculty of the animal rationale, he might, never- 
theless, be rendered capable, hi time, of many places of very 
honourable and lucrative employment. 

Mr. Meekly alone, though so gentle and complying at other 
times, now presumed to dissent from the sense of the company. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY 5 

I rather hold, said he, that this infant is the promise of the greatest 
philosopher and hero that our age is likely to produce. By refus- 
ing his respect to those superficial distinctions which fashion has 
inadequately substituted as expressions of human greatness, he 
approves himself the philosopher; arid by the quickness of his 
feelings for injured innocence, and his boldness in defending those 
to whom his heart is attached, he approves himself at once the 
hero and the man. 

Harry had now remained six months more with his nurse, en- 
gaged in his customary exercises and occupations. He was already, 
by his courage, his strength, and action, become tremendous to all 
the little boys of the village they had all things to fear from his 
sudden resentment, but nothing from his memory or recollection 
of a wrong; and this, also, was imputed to his native stupidity. 
The two mongrel dogs were his inseparable playfellows ; they 
were all tied together in the strictest bonds of friendship, and 
caressed each other with the most warm and unfeigned aifection. 

On a summer's day, as he strolled forth with these, his faithful 
attendants, and rambled into a park whose gate he saw open, he 
perceived, in a little copse that bordered on a fishpond, a stranger 
seated on a bench of turf. Harry drew near with his usual intre- 
pidity, till he observed that the man had a reverend beard that spread 
over his breast ; that he held something in his hand on which he 
gazed with a fixed attention ; and that the tears rolled down his 
cheeks without ceasing, and in silence, except the half-suppressed 
sobs that often broke from his bosom. Harry stood a while im- 
moveable his little heart was affected he approached the old 
man with a gentle reverence, and looking up in his face, and seat- 
ing himself by his side, the muscles of his infant aspect began to 
relax, and he wept and sobbed as fast as his companion. 



CHAPTEE II. 

THE old gentleman turned and gazed at the child, as on some 
sudden apparition. His tears stopped. He returned the picture 
which he held into his bosom; and, lifting up his eyes Great 
Power, he cried, is this the one, of all the world, who has any 
feelings for me? Is it this babe, this suckling, whom thou has 
sent to be a partaker in my griefs, and the sharer of my afflictions ? 
Welcome, then, my little friend, said he, tenderly turning and ca- 
ressing the child ; I will live the longer for thy sake, and endeavour 
to repay the tears thou hast shed in my behalf. 

The language of true love is understood by all creatures, and 
was that of which Harry had, almost, the only perception. He 
returned his friend's caresses with unaffected ardour, and no two 
could be more highly gratified in the endearments of each other. 

What is your name, my dear? said the old gentleman. Harry 
Clinton, sir. Harry Clinton! repeated the old man, and started. 
And, pray, who is your father? The child then, looking tenderly 
at him, replied I'll have you for a father, if you please, sir. The 



6 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

stranger then caught him up in his arms, and passionately ex- 
claimed You shall, you shall, my darling, for the tenderest of 
fathers, never to be torn asunder till death shall part us ! 

Then asking him where he lived, and Harry pointing to the 
town before them, they both got up and went towards it. Our 
hero was now again all glee, all action ; he sprung from and to 
his friend, and played and gamboled about him, like a young 
spaniel in a morning just loosed from his chain, and admitted to 
accompany his master to the field. As his two dogs frisked about 
him, he would now mount upon one, then bound upon the other, 
and each pranced and paraded under him as delighted with the 
burden. The old gentleman beheld all with a pleasure that had 
long been a stranger to his breast, and shared in the joys of his 
young associate. 

Being arrived near the farm-house, nurse, who stood at the door, 
saw them approaching, and cried out Gaffer, Gaffer, here comes 
our Harry with the dumb gentleman ! When they were come up 
Good people, says the stranger, is this your child ? No, no, sir, an- 
swered the nurse, we are but his fosterers. And, pray, who is his 
father? He is second son, sir, to the Earl of Moreland. The Earl 
of Moreland ! you amaze me greatly ; is this all the notice and care 
they take of such a treasure ? Sir, replied the nurse, they never 
sent for him but once ; they don't mind him they take him for a 
fool For a fool ! cried he, and shook his head in token of dissent ; 
I am sure he has the wisest of all human hearts. I wish it may be 
so, sir, said the nurse, but he behaved very sadly, some time ago, at 
the great house. She then made a recital of all our young hero's 
adventures in the mansion parlour ; whereat the old gentleman in- 
wardly chuckled, and for the first time, of some years, permitted his 
features to relax into a smile of cheerfulness. 

Nurse, said he, every thing that I hear and see of this child, serves 
the more to endear and bind me to him. Pray, be so good as to 
accompany us to my house : we will try to equip him better both 
as to person and understanding. 

As this stranger's seat made part of the village, they were soon 
there. He first whispered his old domestic, who then looked upon 
the child with surprise and pleasure. The footman was next sent 
to bring the tailor, and some light stuffs from the town shop. Mat- 
ters being thus despatched with respect to our hero's first coat and 
breeches, nurse was kept to dinner ; and after this gentleman had 
entertained his young guest with a variety of little tricks, childish 
plays, and other fooleries, toward evening he dismissed him and his 
nurse, with a request that she would send him every day, and a 
promise that he should be returned every night if she desired it. 

Harry, being thus furnished with the external tokens of a man- 
child having been born into the world, became an inseparable friend 
and playfellow to his patron. At times of relaxation, the old gentle- 
man, with the most winning and insinuating address, endeavoured 
to open his mind and cultivate his morals, by a thousand little 
fables ; such as of bold sparrows and naughty kids that were carried 
away by the hawk, or devoured by the wolf, and of good robins and 
innocent lambs that the very hawks and wolves themselves were 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 7 

fond of; for he never proposed any encouragement or reward to the 
heart of our hero, save that of the love and approbation of others. 
At the times of such instruction, Harry, who knew no other de- 
pendence, and beheld his patron as his father and his God, would 
hang upon his knee, look up to his face delighted, and greedily 
imbibe the sweetness of those lessons whose impressions, neither 
age, nor any occurrence, could ever after erase ; so prevalent are 
the dictates of lips that are beloved ! 

At other times, the stranger would enter with our hero into all 
his little frolics and childish vagaries, would run and wrestle with 
him, ride the rods, roll down the slope, and never felt such sweet 
sensations and inward delight as when he was engaged in such 
recreations. 

There was a cock at Harry's nurse's the lord of the dunghill 
between whom and our hero a very particular intimacy and friend- 
ship had been contracted. Harry's hand was his daily caterer; 
and Dick, for the cock was so called, would hop into the child's 
lap and pick his clothes, and rub his feathers against him, and 
court Harry to tickle and stroke and play with him. 

Upon Shrove Tuesday, while Harry was on his road from his 
patron's, intending a short visit to his nurse and foster-father, a lad 
came to the door and offered Gaffer a double price for Dick ; the 
bargain was quickly made and the lad bore off his prize in triumph, 
and Gaffer withdrew to the manuring of a back field. Just at this 
crisis Harry came up, and inquired of the maid for his daddy and 
mammy, but was answered that neither of them was within. He 
then asked after his favourite cock, but was told that his daddj 
had, that minute, sold him to yonder man, who was almost out o* 
sight. 

Away sprung our hero like an arrow from a bow, and held tha 
man in view till he saw him enter a great crowd at the upper end 
of the street. Up he comes at last, quite out of breath, and, mak 
ing way through the assembly, perceived his cock, at some distance 
tied to a short stake, and a lad preparing to throw at him with a 
stick. Forward he rushed again, and stopped resolutely before his 
bird to ward the blow with his own person, at the instant that the 
stick had taken its flight, and that all the people cried out, Hold ! 
hold ! One end of the stick took Harry on the left shoulder, and 
bruised him sorely ; but not regarding that, he instantly stooped, 
delivered his captive favourite, whipt him under his arm, caught 
up the stick, flourished it as in defiance of all opponents, made 
homeward through the crowd, and was followed by the acclama- 
tions of the whole assembly. 

The old gentleman was standing before his court door when his 
favourite arrived all in a sweat. What's the matter, my dear, 
says he ? What made you put yourself into such a heat ? What 
cock is that you have under your arm ? In answer to these seve- 
ral questions, Harry ingenuously confessed the whole affair ; and 
when his patron with some warmth cried Why, my love, did 
you venture your life for a silly cock ? Why did I ? repeated the 
child ! why, sir, because he loved me. The stranger then, stepping 
back, and gazing upon him with eyes of tender admiration May 



8 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

heaven for ever bless thee, my little angel, he exclaimed, and 
continue to utter from thy lips the sentiments that it inspires! 
Then, catching him up in his arms, he bathed him with his tears, 
and almost stifled him with his caresses. 

In a few days our hero was again restored, by frequent fomenta- 
tions, to the use of his arm, and his dada, as he called him, and 
he, returned to their old recreations. 

As Harry's ideas began to open and expand, he grew ambitious 
of greater power and knowledge. He wished for the strength of 
that bull, and for the swiftness of yonder horse ; and on the close 
of a solemn and serene summer's evening, while he and his patron 
walked in the garden, he wished for wings, that he might fly up 
and see what the sky, and the stars, and the rising moon, were 
made of. 

In order to reform this inordinancy of his desires, his patron ad- 
dressed him in the following manner : 

I will tell you a story, my Harry. On the other side of yonder 
hill there runs a mighty clear river, and in that river, on a time, 
there lived three silver trouts the prettiest little fishes that any 
one ever saw. Now, God took a great liking and love to these 
pretty silver trouts, and he let them want for nothing that such 
little fishes could have occasion for ; but two of them grew sad and 
discontented, and the one wished for this thing, and the other 
wished for that thing, and neither of them could take pleasure in 
any thing that they had, because they were always longing for 
something that they had not. 

Now, Harry, you must know that all this was very naughty in 
those two little trouts, for God had been exceedingly kind to them : 
he had given them every thing that was fittest for them, and he 
never grudged them any thing that was for their good; but, in- 
stead of thanking him for all his care and his kindness, they blamed 
him in their own minds for refusing them any thing that their 
silly fancies were set upon ; in short, there was no end of their 
wishing, and longing, and quarrelling in their hearts, for this thing 
and the other. 

At last God was so provoked, that he resolved to punish their 
naughtiness by granting their desires, and to make the folly of 
those two little stubborn trouts an example to all the foolish fish 
in the whole world. 

For this purpose, he called out to the three little silver trouts, 
and told them they should have whatever they wished for. 

Now the eldest of these trouts was a very proud little fish, and 
wanted, forsooth, to be set up above all other little fishes. May 
it please your greatness, says he, I must be free to tell you that 
I do not, at all, like the way in which you have placed me. Here 

?ou have put me into a poor, narrow, and troublesome river, where 
am straitened on the right side, and straitened on the left side, 
and can neither get down into the ground, nor up into the air, nor 
go where, nor do any thing I have a mind to do. I am not so 
blind, for all, but that I can see well enough how mighty kind and 
bountiful you can be to others. There are your favourite little 
birds, who fly this way and that way, and mount up to the very 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 9 

heavens, and do whatever they please, and have every thing at 
command, because you have given them wings. Give me such 
wings also as you have given to them, and then I shall have some- 
thing for which I ought to thank you. 

No sooner ask than have. He felt the wings he wished for 
growing from either side, and, in a minute, he spread them abroad, 
and rose out of the water. At first he felt a wonderful pleasure 
in finding himself able to fly. He mounted high into the air, above 
the very clouds, and he looked down with scorn on all the fishes 
in the world. 

He now resolved to travel, and to take his diversion far and 
wide. He flew over rivers and meadows, and woods and moun- 
tains ; till, growing faint with hunger and thirst, his wings began 
to fail him, and he thought it best to come down to get some re- 
freshment. 

The little fool did not consider that he was now in a strange 
country, and many a mile from the sweet river where he was born 
and bred, and had received all his nourishment. So, when he 
came down, he happened to alight among dry sands and rocks, 
where there was not a bit to eat, nor a drop of water to drink ; 
and so there he lay faint and tired, and unable to rise, gasping 
and fluttering and beating himself against the stones, till at length 
he died in great pain and misery. 

Now the second silver trout, though he was not so high-minded 
as the first little proud trout, yet he did not want for conceit 
enough ; and he was, moreover, a narrow-hearted and very selfish 
little trout, and, provided he himself was snug and safe, he did 
not care what became of all the fishes in the world. So he says 
to God- 
May it please your honour, I don't wish, not I, for wings to fly 
out of the water, and to ramble into strange places, where I don't 
know what may become of me. I lived contented and happy 
enough till the other day, when, as I got under a cool bank from 
the heat of the sun, I saw a great rope coming down into the 
water, and it fastened itself, I don't know how, about the gills 
of a little fish that was basking beside me, and he was lifted out 
of the water, struggling and working in great pain, till he was 
carried, I know not where, quite out of my sight ; so I thought in 
my own mind, that this evil some time or other may happen to 
myself, and my heart trembled within me, and I have been very 
sad and discontented ever since. Now, all I desire of you is, that 
you would tell me the meaning of this, and of all the other dangers 
to which you have subjected us, poor little mortal fishes ; for then 
I shall have sense enough to take care of my own safety, and 
I am very well able to provide for my own living, I warrant you. 

No sooner said than clone. God immediately opened his under- 
standing ; and he knew the nature and meaning of snares, nets, 
hooks, and lines, and of all the dangers to which such little trouts 
could be liable. 

At first he greatly rejoiced in this his knowledge ; and he said 
to himself Now surely I shall be the happiest of all fishes; for 
as I understand and am forewarned of every mischief that can 



10 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

come near me, I'm sure I love myself too well not to keep out 
of harm's way. 

From this time forward he took care not to go into any deep 
holes, for fear that a pike or some other huge fish might be 
there, who would make nothing of swallowing him up at one 

He also kept away from the shallow places, especially in hot 
weather, lest the sun should dry them up, and not leave him 
water enough to swim in. When he saw the shadow of a cloud 
coming and moving upon the river Aha ! said he to himself, here 
are the fishermen with their nets ; and immediately he got on one 
side and skulked under the banks, where he kept trembling in his 
skin till the cloud was past. Again, when he saw a fly skimming 
on the water, or a worm coming down the stream, he did riot dare 
to bite, however hungry he might be No, no, said he to them, 
my honest friends, I am not such a fool as that comes to neither ; 
go your ways and tempt those who know no better, who are not 
aware that you may serve as baits to some treacherous hook that 
lies hid for the destruction of those ignorant and silly trouts that 
are not on their guard. 

Thus this over-careful trout kept himself in continual frights 
and alarms, and could neither eat, nor drink, nor sleep in peace, 
lest some mischief should be at hand, or that he might be taken 
napping. He daily grew poorer and poorer, and sadder and 
sadder, for he pined away with hunger, and sighed himself to skin 
and bone ; till, wasted almost to nothing with care and melan- 
choly, he at last died, for fear of dying, the most miserable of all 
deaths. 

Now, when God came to the youngest silver trout, and asked 
him what he wished for Alas ! said this darling little trout, you 
know, may it please your worship, that I am but a very foolish 
and good for nothing little fish ; and I don't know, not I, what is 
good for me or what is bad for me ; and I wonder how I came to 
be worth bringing into the world, or what you could see in me 
to take any thought about me. But, if I must wish for something, 
it is that you would do with me whatsoever you think best ; and 
that I should be pleased to live or die, even just as you would 
have me. 

Now, as soon as this precious trout made this prayer hi his good 
and humble little heart, God took such a liking and a love to him 
as the like was never known. And God found it in his own heart, 
that he could not but take great care of this sweet little trout, 
who had trusted himself so wholly to his love and good pleasure ; 
and God went wheresoever he went, and was always with him and 
about him, and was to him as a father, and friend, and companion : 
and he put contentment into his mind, and joy into his heart; 
and so this little trout slept always in peace, and wakened in glad- 
ness ; and, whether he was full or hungry, or whatever happened 
to him, he was still pleased and thankful ; and he was the happiest 
of all fishes that ever swam in any water. 

Harry, at the close of this fable, looked down and grew thought- 
ful, and his patron left him to himself to ruminate on what he had 



TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 11 

heard. Now, Harry had often heard talk of God, and had some 
general though confused notions of his power. 

The next day he requested his patron to repeat the story of the 
three little silver trouts. When he had ended Dada, says Harry, 
I believe I begin to guess a little at what you mean. You would 
not have me wish for any thing, but leave every thing to God; 
and if I thought that God loved me half as well as you love me, 
I would leave every thing to himself, like the good little trout. 
He does, my Harry; he loves you a thousand times better than 
I love you, nay, a thousand times better than you love yourself. 
God is all love ; it is he who made every thing, and he loves every 
thing that he has made. Ay, but dada, 1 can't, for the heart of 
me, help pitying the two poor little naughty trouts. If God loves 
every thing, why did he make any thing to die? You begin to 
think too deeply, Harry; we will speak more of these matters 
another time. For the present, let it suffice to know, that as he 
can kill, he can also make alive again, at his own pleasure. 

Harry had now remained about twelve months with his patron, 
when it was intimated to the earl and his lady that the dumb man 
had taken a fancy to their child, and that he was almost constantly 
resident at his house. Alarmed at this news, and apprehending 
that this man might be some impostor or kidnapper, they once 
more sent orders to the nurse to bring the boy home. 

Nurse ran in a hurry to the stranger's, and, having informed 
him of the necessity she was under to take away the child, many 
mutual tears were shed at parting; but Harry was the sooner 
pacified when nurse told him that it was but for a short visit, as 
before. 

When they came to the castle, there was no company in the 
parlour but the earl and his lady, with Lord Eichard and some 
other masters of quality, about his age and size, Harry, however, 
looked about with a brow of disgust ; and when my lady desired 
him to come and kiss her May be you'll whip me, he answered 
suddenly. No, she replied, if you don't strike your brother Dicky 
any more. I won't beat him, says Harry, if he won't beat mammy. 
Come then and kiss me, my dear, said my lady; whereon Harry 
advanced with a slow caution, and held up his little mouth to 
receive her salute. He was then kissed by his father, his brother, 
and the little masters, and all things promised future reconcilement 
and amity. 

A number of glittering toys were then presented to Harry on 
all sides; he received them, indeed, in good part, but laid them 
all aside again, as things of whose use he yet was not wise enough 
to be apprehensive. 

Friend. Is it not too early for your hero to shew a contempt 
of toys? 

^ Author. My lady, as you will see, imputed it to his folly, not to 
his philosophy. 

Friend. But children have a natural fondness for fine things. 

Author. How so? is there a natural value in them? 

Friend. No. But 



12 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

Author. Education, inrleed, has made the fondness next to na- 
tural; the coral and bells teach infants on the breasts to be de- 
lighted with sound and glitter. Has the child of an inhabitant of 
Monomotapa a natural fondness for garbage ? 

Friend. I think not. 

Author. But when he is instructed to prize them, and sees it to be 
the fashion to be adorned with such things, he prefers them to the 
glitter of gold and pearl. Tell me, was it the folly, or philosophy, 
of the cock in the fable, that spurned the diamond, and wished 
for the barley-corn? 

Friend. The moral says that it was his folly, that did not know 
how to make a right estimate of things. 

Author. A wiser moral would say it was his philosophy, that did 
know how to make a right estimate of things ; for of what use 
could the diamond be to the cock ? In the age of acorns, antecedent 
to Ceres and the royal ploughman Triptolemus, a single barley-corn 
had been of more value to mankind than all the diamonds that 
glowed in the mines of India. 

Friend. You see, however, that age, reflection, and philosophy, 
can hardly wean people from their early fondness for show. 

Author. I see, on the contrary, that the older they grow, and the 
wiser they think themselves, the more they become attached to 
trifles. What would you think of a sage minister of state, who 
should make it the utmost height of his wishes and ambition to 
be mounted on a hobby-horse ? 

Friend. You can't be serious for the soul of you. 

Author. It has been seriously, and truly, and literally the fact : 
for Haman being asked by the greatest monarch upon earth, what 
should be done most desirable for the man whom the king delighted 
to honour ? he answered (in the persuasion that he himself was the 
person), " Let the royal apparel be brought, and let him be arrayed 
therewith, and let him be put upon the horse that the king us'eth 
to ride, and let him be brought through the street, and have it 
proclaimed before him, Thus shall it be done to the man whom 
the king delighteth to honour." What shall we say here ? could 
the sage and ambitious Haman think of nothing better than what 
would have suited the request of a child of five years old ? or was 
it that the Emperor of Asia, or this world itself, had nothing more 
valuable to bestow than a fine coat and a hobby-horse ? 

Friend. How many volumes do you expect this work will 
contain ? 

Author. Sir, a book may be compared to the life of your neigh- 
bour. If it be good it cannot last too long ; if bad, you cannot 
get rid of it too early. 

Friend. But how long, I say, do you propose to make your 
story ? 

Author. My good friend, the reader may make it as short as he 
pleases. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 13 



CHAPTER III. 

MY lady, piqued thereat, told the earl that she resolved once more 
to prove the wits of the youngster ; and, whispering to Dicky, he 
immediately went out and took with him his companions. Soon 
after, Dick returns without his shoes, and with a pitiful face, cries 
Brother Harry, I want a pair of shoes sadly, will you give me 
yours ? Yes, I will, said Harry, and instantly strips, and presents 
them to him. Then entered another boy, and demanded his stockings 
in the like petitioning manner ; another begged his hat, another 
his coat, another his waistcoat, all of which he bestowed without 
hesitation ; but when the last boy came in and petitioned for his 
shirt No, I won't, said Harry, a little moody, I want a shirt 
myself. My lady then exclaimed, Upon my honour, there is but 
the thickness of a bit of linen between this child and a downright 
fool. But my lord rose up, took Harry in his arms, and having 
tenderly embraced him God bless thee, my boy, he cried, and 
make thee an honour to Old England! 

Dinner, soon after, was ordered up, and Harry permitted his 
nurse to retire peaceably to the kitchen during the interval, as 
he and all the masters were then on terms of amity. 

My lady placed Harry next herself at table, but no peer ever 

Eaid such a price at Pontac's as our distressed hero did that day 
>r his ordinary : for he must sit up just so, and hold his knife and 
fork just so, and cut his meat, and open his mouth, and swallow his 
victuals, just so and so and so. And then between every two words 
there were to be so many my lords and my ladies, and I thank you, 
sir, and I thank you, madam, and master this, and master that, that 
poor Harry, no longer able to contain himself, cried I wish I was 
with my mammy in the kitchen. 

After dinner the children were set to questions and commands ; 
but here our hero was beaten hollow, as he was afterward at draw- 

g'ove and shuffle the slipper. They next came to hot cockles, and 
arry being first down, had his left hand well-warmed for near a 
quarter of an hour, till, more by good-luck than any good policy, 
he fixed upon a delicate little gentleman, the son and heir of 
Lord and Lady Toilet, who lay down accordingly; when Harry, 
endeavouring to sum all the favours he had received in one pay- 
ment, gave master such a whirrick, that his cries instantly sounded 
the ne plus ultra to such kind of diversions. But Harry being 
chidden for his rudeness, and obliged to ask pardon, all was soon 
whole again. 

Now, throughout these several amusements, though this group of 
little quality behaved themselves with great good manners towards 
our hero : yet, as my lady's judgment of his intellects became 
current through the country, and that all took him to be little 
removed from a natural, these small gentry also held him in the 
lowest contempt, and gave themselves secret credit for the decency 
of their conduct in his behalf. 

Two or three of them, however, having maliciously contrived to 



14 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

set him in a ridiculous light, prevailed upon his brother to join in 
the plot. They accordingly proposed a play, wherein Harry was 
enjoined to stand in the centre for so many minutes, without motion 
or resentment, let his companions do what they would about him. 

Our hero, consequently, fixed himself to a posture and counte- 
nance altogether determined, when the attack instantly began; 
some grinned, some pointed, some jeered and shouted at him, some 
twitched him by the hair, some pinched him by the arm, one 
tweaked him by the nose, and another spirted water full in his 
face ; but Harry bore all with the firmness and resignation of a 
stoic philosopher, till my lady, quite impatient, cried out Did you 
ever see the like ? such a stock of a child, such a statue ! Why, 
he has no kind of feeling either of body or mind. 

While she was pronouncing these words, young Skinker, eldest 
son to a wealthy squire, a chubbed unlucky boy, about the age of 
Lord Richard, put one hand within the other, and desired Harry 
to strike thereon, which he did accordingly ; but feeling unusual 
smart, and fired at the treachery that he, justly, conceived was in 
the case, Harry gave him such a sudden fist in the temple as drove 
him staggering backward several steps. Skinker, wholly enraged, 
and conscious of superior strength, immediately returned, and with 
all his might gave Harry a stroke on the head, which compliment he 
returned by a punch in the eye, as rapid as lightning. All the boys 
stood aloof and amazed at the combat. My lady vehemently cried 
out to part them ; but my lord rose and peremptorily commanded 
fair-play. Meanwhile young Skinker, wholly desperate to be foiled 
by one so much his inferior in strength and understanding, flew on 
Harry like a fury, and fastened the nails of both his hands on his 
face, from which gripe our hero as quickly disengaged himself by 
darting his head into the nose and mouth of his adversary, who 
was instantly covered with blood, though his passion would not 
permit him to attend to the pain ; for, exerting his last effort, he 
closed in on our little champion, and determined at once to finish 
the combat by lifting and dashing him against the ground ; but 
Harry, finding himself going, nimbly put one foot behind, and hit 
Skinker in the ham, and at the same time pushing forward with 
all his force, prone fell the unfortunate Skinker, precipitated by 
the double weight of himself and his antagonist, and his head re- 
bounded against the floor, while up sprung Harry, and, with a 
punch in the stomach of Skinker, put a period to the fray. 

All dismayed and wholly discomforted, Skinker slowly arose, and 
began to cry most piteously. His companions then gathered about 
him, and, compassionating his plight, turned an eye of indignation 
upon the victor ; all promiscuously exclaimed O fie, Master Harry, 
1 am quite ashamed ; Master Harry, you gave the first blow ; it 
was you that gave the first blow, Master Harry ! To all which re- 
proaches Harry surlily replied If I gave first blow he gave first 
hurt. 

Come, come, said my lord, there must be something more in 
this affair than we are yet acquainted with. Come hither, Master 
Skinker, tell me the truth, my dear; what was it you did to 
Harry that provoked him to strike you? Indeed, sir, said Skinker, 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 15 

I did not intend to hurt him so much. When I gave him one 
hand to strike, I held a pin within side in the other, but the pin 
run up farther than I thought for. Go, go, said my lord, you 
deserve what you have got. You are an ill-hearted boy, and shall 
not come here to play any more. 

My lady then called Harry, desired to look at his hand, and found 
the palm covered with blood. This she w r ashed away, and, having 
found the wound, she put a small bit of black sticking silk to the 
orifice, and Harry instantly held himself as sound a man as ever. 

It was then that, instead of exulting or crowing over his adver- 
sary, he began to relax into melancholy and dejection, and sideling 
over toward Skinker, and looking wistfully in his face If, said 
Harry, with a trembling lip, if you will kiss and be friends with 
me, I'll never beat you any more. To this overture Skinker was, 
with a sullen reluctance, persuaded by his companions ; and from 
that moment the victor began to gain ground in the heart and 
good graces both of father and mother. 

Night now approached, the candles were lighted up, and the 
children took a short and slight repast. Master Dicky then pri- 
vately whispering to his mamma, desired her not to be frightened 
at what she might see, and immediately withdrew. In a short 
time he returned, and, gathering all his little companions into a 
group in the centre of the parlour, held them a while in chat; 
when, O tremendous! a back door flew open, and in glided a 
most terrifying and horrible apparition ; the body and limbs from 
the neck downwards were wrapt in a winding sheet ; and the head, 
though fear could not attend to its form, appeared wholly illu- 
minated with flames, that glared through the eyes, mouth, and 
nostrils. 

At sight hereof, Master Dicky, appearing the first to be fright- 
ened, screamed out, and ran behind his mamma's chair, as it were 
for protection: the panic grew instantly contagious, and all this 
host of little gentry, who were hereafter to form our senates, and 
to lead our armies, ran shrieking and. shivering to hide themselves 
in holes and to tremble in corners. 

Our hero, alone, stood undaunted, though concerned ; and like 
an astronomer, who with equal dread and attention contemplates 
some sudden phenomenon in the heavens, which he apprehends 
to be sent as an ensign or forerunner to the fall of mighty states, 
or dispeopling of nations, so Harry, with bent and apprehensive 
brows, beheld and considered the approaching spectre. 

He had never heard nor formed any idea of ghosts or hob- 
goblins ; he therefore stood to deliberate what he had to fear 
from it. It still advanced upon him, nor had he yet budged ; 
when his brother cried out, from behind my lady's chair Beat it, 
Harry ; beat it ! On the instant, Harry flew back to the corner 
next the hall, and catching up his staff, the trophy of Shrove 
Tuesday, he returned upon the spectre, and aiming a noble blow 
at the illuminated sconce, he at once smashed the outward lan- 
tern, drove the candle, flame and all, into the mouth of him who 
held it, and opened his upper lip from the nose to the teeth. Out 
spouted the blood as from a spigot. The ghost clapped all the 



16 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

} lands that he had to his mouth, and slunk away, to shew to his 
friends in the kitchen how he had been baffled and mauled by an 
infant of seven summers. 

Heaven preserve us! cried my lady; we shall have nothing 
but broils and bloodshed in the house while this child is among 
us. Indeed, my dear, replied the earl, if there was any thing 
more than mere accident in this business, it was the fault of your 
favourite Dicky, who desired the boy to strike. 

By this time, the little gentry came all from their lurking-holes, 
though yet pale and unassured; and, whatever contempt they 
might have for the intellects of Harry, they had now a very sin- 
cere veneration for his prowess. 

Bed-time now approaching, and all being again settled Harry, 
says my lord, you have been a very good boy to-day, and have 
joined with your companions in all their little plays ; now, if you 
have any plays to shew them, I am sure they will have the good 
manners to do as you desire. What say you, Harry? have you 
any play to shew them ? Yes, sir, said Harry, I have a many of 
them ; there's, first, leap-frog, and thrush-a-thrush. To it, then, 
Harry, says my lord; and pray, all you little gentlemen, do you 
observe his directions. 

No sooner said than done. Harry took his companions one by 
one, and causing them to stoop, with their heads toward the 
ground in a long line, and at certain distances each before the other, 
he returned to the tail, and, taking the advantage of a short run 
to quicken his motion, he laid his hands on the back of the hind- 
most, and vaulting lightly over him, he, with amazing rapidity, 
flew along the whole line, clearing a man at every motion, till he 
alighted before the foremost, and down he popped in the posture 
of those behind. 

My lady, in utter astonishment, lifting up her hands and eyes, 
exclaimed the fine creature ! O the graceful creature ! if there 
was but a mind to match that body, there would not be such 
another boy in the universe. 

Lord Kichard, being now hindmost, was the next who adven- 
tured, and, with action enough, cleared his two first men ; but 
then, having lost the advantage of his run, and his foreman being 
of more than ordinary size, he first stuck upon his back, and pitch- 
ing thence, broke his forehead against the floor. He got up, how- 
ever, with a pleasant countenance, and, running alongside the line, 
set himself in his former posture before his brother. The hind- 
most then, and then the next, and the next, and so onward, took 
their turns in succession, without any better success. The one 
bruised his shoulder, another sprained his finger, another bumped 
his head, another broke his nose, &c. &c. So that in less than five 
minutes my lady had got an hospital of her own, though not alto- 
gether consisting of incurables. 

Now, spirits and vinegar, brown paper, black plaster, &c., were 
called for in a hurry, and the several stupes and dressings being 
skilfully applied, the children were ordered to their respective 
beds ; and nurse was prevailed upon to continue with Harry till 
he should be reconciled to his new friends and associates. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 17 

Harry was now become a favourite, especially among the ser- 
vants, who, in a manner, adored him since the adventure of the 
box and the hobgoblin. 

Friend. Hobgoblin : in good time. Nothing amazes me so much 
as the terrifying apprehensions that the world, from the beginning, 
has universally entertained of ghosts and spectres. 

Author. Do you fear them? 

Friend. No I can't say not much something of this for- 
merly. I should not like, even now, to lie alone, in a remote 
chamber of a ruinous castle said to be haunted, and have my cur- 
tains, at midnight, opened suddenly upon me by a death's-head 
and bloody bones. All nonsense I know it, the early prejudices of 
a dastardly fancy I fear, while I am convinced there is nothing to 
be feared. Do you think there is any such thing in nature as 
a spirit? 

Author. I know not that there is any such thing in nature as 
matter. 

Friend. Not know there is any such thing as matter ? You love 
to puzzle to throw lets into the road of common-sense. What 
else do you know? From what else can you form any kind of 
idea ? 

Author. The room is warm enough, more heat is needless. I 
know that thoughts and conceptions are raised in my mind ; but 
how they are raised, or that they are adequate images of things 
supposed to be represented, I know not. What if this something, 
or this nothing, called matter, should be a shadow, a vacuum in 
respect of spirit, wholly resistless to it and pervadable by it ? Or 
what if it be no other than a various manifestation of the several 
good and evil qualities of spirit ? If one infinite spirit, as is said, 
fills the universe, all other existence must be but as the space 
wherein he essentially abides and exists; indeed, they could not 
be produced, or continued for a moment, but by his existing omni- 
potently, indivisibly, entirely, in and throughout every part. 

Friend. This is new, very new ; but I will not batter my brains 
against your castle. According to your thesis, when a man is ap- 
prehensive of a spirit or spectre, it is not of shadow but of sub- 
stance that he is afraid. 

Author. Certainly ; his principal apprehension arises from his 
believing it more sufficient, more powerful, and more formidable, 
than himself. 

Friend. Excuse me, there are more tremendous reasons. On the 
supposition of an engagement, those sort of invisible gentry have 
many advantages over us. They give a man no manner of fair- 
play. They have you here, and have you there, and your best 
watch and ward is no better than fencing against an invisible 
flail. But, seriously, do you think we have any innate fears of 
these matters? 

Author. All our fears arise from the sense of our own weakness, 
and of the power and inclination that others may have to hurt us. 

Friend. If our horror of apparitions is not innate, how comes it 
to pass that soldiers, that general officers, who dare all other 

c 



18 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

danger ; that heroes, who, like Brutus, have given death to them- 
selves, or who have been led to execution without a changing 
cheek have yet dreaded to lie alone, or to be left in the dark ? 

Author. We all see that a spirit has vast power. Nothing else, 
in truth, can have any power at alL We perceive, by ourselves 
and others, with what ease it can act upon what we call matter ; 
how it moves, how it lifts it. Perhaps, were our spirits detached 
from this distempered prison, to which the degeneracy of our 
fallen nature has confined them, they might more easily whirl 
a mountain through the atmosphere, than they can now cast a 
pebble into the air. The consideration of this power, when joined 
to malevolence, as is generally the case, becomes very tremendous. 
The stories told by nurses and gossips about a winter's fire, when 
the young auditors crouch closer and closer together, and dare not 
look atxmt for fear of what may be behind them, leave impressions 
that no subsequent reason or religion can efface. The ideas of 
an apparition, on these occasions, are connected with all the horror 
of wliich infant imaginations can be susceptible ; fangs, horns, a 
threatening mien, saucer eyes, a flaming breath, and a deadly 
aspect. When children are told of fairies who carry off people to 
dwell with them under ground; and of evil spirits who snatch 
away soul and body together, to be their associates in regions of 
darkness and woe the fear of such evils greatly surpasses those 
of death, as it weds misery to existence beyond the grave. On 
the contrary side, had spirits been originally represented to infants 
as beings of an amiable appearance, and as guardians benevolent 
and beneficent to man ; had they further deigned to visit us under 
such representations; and, had we experienced the advantage of 
their instructions and good offices we should have met them with 
transport, and have parted with regret 

Friend. I observe that, as our female antiquarians drop off, our 
faith in spectres perceptibly decays. We have not the fiftieth 
story, either propagated or believed, that was credited as gospel 
when I was a boy. What think you, is it for, or against religion, 
that such fables should get footing amongst mankind ? 

Author. I never could think it for the interest of religion, that 
the providence of God should be elbowed, as it were, quite out of 
the world by a system of demonism. On the other hand, I take 
the devil to be a personage of much more prudence than to 
frighten his favourites from him, by assuming such horrid and 
disgustful appearances. He rather chooses to lurk behind tempta- 
tion, in the allurement of beauty, the deceitfulness of smiles, the 
glozing of compliments, in revel and banqueting, in titles and 
honours, in the glitter of ornament, and in the pomp of state. 
When God sends his spirits on messages to man, there is a mean- 
ing of importance in the errand. Such was that of his angel to 
Manoah, for the delivery of a people ; and to Zacharias and the 
blessed virgin, for the redemption of human-kind. But when the 
devil is said to send his emissaries throughout the earth, on what 
errands does this arch politician employ them? Even such as 
could suit no other than a dunce or a driveller. I never yet heard 
of one of these missions that could be construed to any intention 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 19 

of cunning or common-sense. I therefore hold the legends of his 
ghostly visitation to be altogether apocryphal. 

Friend. Every man of common-sense must be of the same opinion. 
And yet, have you known any person wholly free from such pre- 
judices, who made no distinction, on this fantastical article, between 
darkness and mid-day, between a lonely charnel-house and a full 
assembly ? 

Author. I have ; but they were men of exceeding strong nerves, 
as also of exceeding clear, or exceeding callous consciences, which, 
coming from opposite points, equally met for the same purpose on 
this occasion. 

Two travellers, the one a man of piety, the other a profligate, 
met at a country inn just as night came upon them. It was 
Hallowtide-Eve, the season, in those days, wherein the devil was 
said to keep high carnival, and when all the inhabitants of the 
visionary regions were supposed to revel and range throughout 
the earth at pleasure. 

For want of better company our travellers made up an acquaint- 
ance, and further cemented it by a jug of good liquor. The night 
was dark- The girls of the house had new-washed their smocks, 
to be hung to the fire, and turned by the ghostly resemblances of 
their sweethearts: and the conversation, in the kitchen, ran on 
many an authentic narrative of spectres, and particularly on the 
man in gibbets who hung by the road, and who was reported, 
between twelve and one at midnight, to descend from the gallows, 
and take just three turns about the old barn. 

Do you believe any of this droll stuff? said the profligate. I 
know not what to think, answered his pious companion ; I find all 
the world in the same story, and yet, as the saying is, I never saw 
any thing more frightful than myself. As for my share, said the 
profligate, I think I should not fear the great devil himself; and 
indeed I should be glad to have a little chat with the old gentle- 
man. Stout as you are, rejoined his companion, I will lay you 
a bet of five crowns that you dare not warm a porringer of broth, 
and go, and offer it without there, to the man in the gibbets. I 
will depend on your honour for performance of articles. 'Tis done, 
cried the other. The bets were produced, and respectively de- 
posited in the hands of my landlady. 

Our pious traveller, who now began to be alarmed for his wager, 
stole slily out, while his companion was busied in heating the 
broth. He made up to the place where the deceased malefactor 
was taking the fresh air. The gallows was low, and, by the ad- 
vantage of a bank behind and his own agility, he leaped up, and 
fastened his arms about the shoulders of the corpse, so that they 
both appeared but as one body. 

He had just fixed himself to his mind, when up comes his com- 
panion with the porringer and a stool. He directly mounted the 
stool, and reaching up a spoonful of broth to the mouth of the 
dead, with a firm and bold voice he cried Sup man! why don't 
you sup? 

Scarce had these words been uttered, when, fearful to hear! 
with a tone deep as hell and dismal as the grave, the man in 

C2 



20 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

gibbets replied Tt i is too ho t. And, confound you, why don't 
you blow it then ? rejoined the other. 

Friend. My nerves will not admit of this for fact. The tale in- 
deed is good, though such an instance of intrepidity in any mortal 
may be disputable. But, shall we never return to our story again ? 

Author. It matters not how far we travel from it, since the magic 
of a wish can bring us back in a twinkling. 



CHAPTER IV. 

RUFFLED linen, laced hat, silk stockings, &c., had now been 
ordered for Harry, with a new suit of clothes, trimmed like those 
of your beau-insects, vulgarly called butterflies. They were tried 
on in the presence of his parents, and highly approved by all except 
Harry himself, who seemed by his fidgetings to be somewhat 
disgusted at this new kind of encumbrance. Harry, says my lord, 
puts me in mind of the son of Jesse in the armour of Saul, he has 
not yet proved them. Well, Harry, how do you like yourself? 
I don't know, not I, says Harry. But, papa, can you tell me what 
these things are for? In truth, Harry, you pose me. Won't 
people love me better, sir? Not a whit, indeed, Harry, replied 
my lord. Lord help that little fool's head of thine ! interposed my 
lady; if people won't love thee, they'll respect thee the more. 
Fool's head ! repeated my lord, upon my word the child has more 
sense than half our nobility. 

Harry had been now near a month with his parents, and as his 
nurse had not yet parted, he was tolerably amenable to quality 
government. However, he pined in the absence of his dada, as he 
called him, and daily importuned my lord and lady to be permitted 
to go and see him : for, as Harry's heart told him that his bearded 
dada loved him better than all the world, so Harry loved him 
better than three worlds ; for he was ever desirous of going three 
times as far, in affection and good offices, as any one went for him. 

At length he obtained consent, and was conducted by his nurse, 
in all his finery, on a visit to his dear dada. 

Their meeting was accompanied by tears of joy on both sides ; 
when the old gentleman, struck with concern at the garb in which 
he saw his darling, cried out And who, rny clear, put this fool's 
coat upon my child ? Fool's coat, sir ! says Harry. Yes, my love, 
it is worse than all that; they were very naughty doctors who 
have endeavoured to poison my boy. There is not a bit of all this 
lace and ruffling that is not full of rank poisons. I will tell you 
a story, my Harry. 

There was once upon a time, a very good and very clever boy 
called Hercules. As he grew up, besides his prayers and his book, 
he was taught to run and leap ; to ride, wrestle, and cudgel ; and, 
though he was able to beat all the boys in the parish, he never 
used to hurt or quarrel with any of them. He did not matter 
cold, nor hunger, nor what he eat, nor what he drank ; nor how, 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 21 

nor where he lay ; and he went always dressed in the skin of a 
wil 1 beast, that could bear all winds and weathers, and that he 
could put on or off at pleasure ; for he knew that his dress was no 
part of himself, and could neither add to him nor take away any 
thing from him. 

When this brave boy came to man's estate, he went about the 
world doing good in all places ; helping the weak, and feeding the 
hungry, and clothing the naked, and comforting those that cried, 
and beating all those who did hurt or wrong to others; and all 
good people loved him with their whole heart, and all naughty 
people feared him terribly. 

But, O sad and dismal ! A lady whom he had saved from great 
hurt and shame, made him a present of a new coat, which was 
called a shirt in those days, as they wore it next the skin. And 
now, my Harry, take notice. The lady had covered his coat all 
over with laces, and with rufflings, and with beads of glass, and 
such other fooleries ; so that poor Hercules looked just as fine as 
you do now. And he turned him to this side, and he turned him 
to that side, and he began to think more and better of himself, 
because he had got this fool's coat upon him. And the poison of 
it entered into his body and into his mind, and brought weakness 
and distempers upon the one and the other. And he grew so fond 
of it, that he could not bear to have it put off : for he thought that, 
to part with it, would be to part with his flesh from the bones. 
Neither would he venture out in the rain any more ; nor box nor 
wrestle with any body, for fear of spoiling his fine coat. So that 
in time he lost the love and the praises of every body; and all 
people scorned him, and pointed at him for a fool and a coxcomb 
as he went by. 

For some time after the old gentleman had finished his story, 
the child continued to gaze up at him, with fixed eyes and open 
mouth, as fearful of losing any syllable that he might utter ; till, 
recollecting himself, he cried out, O, this is a very sad case, indeed ! 
I wish my coat \vas burnt, so I do ; but don't fear for me, dada. 
Why, how then, Harry ? replied his patron. Why, I may find a 
trick for all this, dada ; I warrant you never see me in this ugly 
coat again. 

After this, and some other instructions and mutual endearments, 
nurse pressed to be gone ; and these two fond friends were com- 
pelled to sunder, with a promise on Harry's part of a speedy 
return. 

For some time after his arrival at the mansion-house, Harry 
appeared thoughtful and greatly dejected, which they ascribed to 
his parting with his old friend ; but Harry had schemes in his head 
that they were little able to fathom or guess at. Having peeped 
about for some time, he found a knife in a window, which he 
instantly seized upon, and then stole up, with all possible privacy, 
to his apartment. 

There he stripped himself in a hurry, and falling as quickly to 
work, began to cut and rip and rend away the lacings of his suit, 
without sparing cloth or seam. While lie was thus in the heat 
and very middle of his business, he heard himself repeatedly called 



22 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

on the stairs, .and hurrying on his clothes to obey the summons, he 
ran down to the parlour, with half the trimmings hanging in 
fritters and tatters about him. 

The droll and very extraordinary figure that he cut, struck all 
the company into utter amazement. Having gazed on him for 
some time in a kind of silent stupor Why, Harry, cries my lady, 
what's all this for? Who abused you, my child who put you in 
this pickle? Come hither, and tell me who spoiled your clothes. 
I did, madam. You did, sirrah, cried my lady, giving him a shake ; 
and how dare you spoil them ? Why, because they wanted to spoil 
me, said Harry. And who told you they would spoil you, sirrah? 
I won't tell, said Harry. I'll lay a wager, cried my lady, it 
was that old rogue with the beard; but I'll have him whipped 
for a fool and a knave out of the parish. Pray, my dear, be patient 
a little, said his lordship. Come here, Harry, and tell me the truth 
stoutly, and no harm shall happen to you, or your dada with the 
beard. Come, speak, what fault did he find with your clothes? 
Why, sir, he said they would poison me. Poison you, my dear ; 
pray, how was that? Why, sir, he told me there was a little 
master called Hercules, and he was a mighty good boy, and was 
cold and hungry, and almost naked, and did not matter so as he 
could do good to every body ; and every body loved him with 
all their heart. And then, he told me, he got a mighty fine coat, 
and looked here and looked there, and minded nothing but his 
coat ; and how his coat poisoned him, and would not let him do any 
more good, and how all the boys then hated him, and scorned him, 
sir and how I believe that's all, sir ! 

Here my lord and lady took such a chink of laughing, that it 
was some time before they could recover; while Harry looked 
abashed and disconcerted. But my lord recollecting himself, took 
the child on his knee, and warmly pressing him to his bosom I 
must tell you, my Harry, said he, how you are a mighty good boy, 
and how your dada with a beard is a mighty good dada, and has 
told you all that is right and true ; and that I will go myself, one 
of these days, and thank him in person. Thank you, sir, says 
Harry. 

Well, Harry, said my lord, I promise that no one shall poison 
you any more with my consent. Whereupon another new suit was 
immediately appointed, of a kind that should fear no weather ; nor, 
in case of dirt or damage, draw upon Harry the resentment or 
admonitions of his mamma. 

Just as dinner was served up, Mr. Meekly entered and took his 
seat. He came in order to conciliate a late difference between the 
earl and Sir Standish Stately ; and in this he found no manner of 
difficulty, as my lord was by nature of a kindly disposition, and 
required no more than a first advance to be reconciled to any man. 

During the entertainment. Harry kept his eyes fixed on Mr. 
Meekly; and, as soon as the cloth was off, he rose, went over to 
him, looked fondly in his face, and took hold of his hand with the 
familiarity of an old acquaintance. 

e Mr. Meekly, said my lord, my son Harry pays you a very par- 
ticular and very deserved compliment ; he puts me in mind of that 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 23 

sort of instinct by which a strange dog is always sure to discover, 
and to apply to the most benevolent person at table. Indeed, my 
lord, said Mr. Meekly (caressing the child), I know not whether by 
instinct, or by what other name, to call my own feelings; but 
certain it is, that the first moment I saw him in his little peasant 
petticoats, I found my heart strongly affected toward him. 

In a short time my lady retired with the children, and left the 
earl and Mr. Meekly over a temperate bottle. Mr. Meekly, said 
my lord (taking him cordially by the hand), I rejoice at the ad- 
vantage of our late acquaintance, or rather I repine that it was 
not earlier. I am greatly interested, sir, in asking you a few 
questions, if I thought I might do it without offence. Are you any 
way straitened in your circumstances? No, my lord. But would 
you not wish them more affluent would you not wish, that your 
power of doing good were more extensive, more answerable to the 
benevolence of your own inclinations ? I cannot say that I would, 
my lord. I have upwards of seven hundred a-year clear income : 
and that is considerably more than I have occasion to expend. It 
would be indelicate, replied the earl, very indelicate to own, that 
I am sorry for your prosperity ; and yet I find that I should have 
been happy in your distress, in the power it would have given me 
to serve, to oblige you. I want a friend I want just such a friend 
as Mr. Meekly : and I know of no price at which I would not gladly 
purchase him. My lord, I am yours, freely, affectionately yours, 
without fee or condition. Sir, rejoined my lord, as I find that I 
cannot make out a title to your particular attachment, I am content 
to be taken into the general circle of your benevolence. 

The world, Mr. Meekly, think me the happiest of men ; blessed 
in my family, in my friends ; with health, honours, affluence ; with 
the power of gratifying every wish that human fancy can form. 
But, alas ! my sensations are very far from affirming their judg- 
ment of these matters ; and I will deserve your advice, your con- 
solation, if you can afford it, by unbosoming myself to you without 
reserve. 

When I reflect on my past life, I look on many parts of it with 
repentance, and on the whole with regret. Not that I wish the 
return of pleasures that I now despise, or of years spent in a 
manner that virtue and common-sense must equally disapprove; 
but I am arrived at my evening of life, like a sportsman who, 
having been in pursuit of game all the day, returns homeward, 
sorrowful, fatigued, and disappointed. With every advantage that 
could gratify either my vanity or my appetites, I cannot affirm 
that I ever tasted of true enjoyment ; and I now well perceive 
that I was kept from being miserable, merely by amusement and 
dissipation. 

As I had the misfortune to be born to a title and a vast estate, 
all people respected in me the possession of those objects which 
they themselves were in pursuit of. I was consequently beset with 
sycophants and deceivers of all sorts, and thereby trained from my 
infancy to unavoidable prejudices, errors, and false estimates of 
every thing. I was not naturally ill-disposed, but I was perpetually 
seduced from all my better tendencies. 



24 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

Both my parents died before I arrived at those years wherein our 
laws allow of any title to discretion. I had but one brother. Oh, 
that dear brother, how many sighs he has cost me ! I was older 
than him by about seven years; and this disparity of our age, 
together with the elevating notion of my birthright, gave me the 
authoritative airs of a father without a father's tenderness towards 
him. This mutually prevented that cordiality, that sympathy, I 
may say, by which brothers should be cemented during their mi- 
nority. And when our guardian, as I then judged, had so far 
betrayed his trust as to bind my brother apprentice to a trader, 
and thereby to deprive him of all title to gentility, I looked upon 
him as a branch cut off from the family-tree ; and, as my thoughts 
about him were accompanied by coldness or disgust, I forbore to 
make any inquiry concerning him. 

I am apt to think, however, that he was not equally unnatural 
on his part ; but, hearing of the dissolute life I led on my return 
from travel, he might justly deem me unworthy of his acquaintance 
or notice. 

During the time of my intimacy with his late majesty, and the 
ministers of his pleasures and policy, a servant brought me word 
that a gentleman, attended by a number of the principal citizens, 
waited for me in my antechamber ; whereupon I gave orders for 
their immediate introduction. On their entrance, I was awfully 
struck with the presence of their principal, with the elegance of 
his figure, the nobleness of his aspect, and the ease of his address ; 
and I felt myself drawn to him by a sudden kind of instinctive 
attachment. 

My lord, says he, we come to wait upon you in the name of the 
very respectable body of the citizens of London: some infringe- 
ments have been lately made on their city-charter, and their first 
application is to your lordship, as they wish, above all others, to 
be obliged to you for their redress. 

They have been very discreet, said I, in their choice of an ad- 
vocate. Their demands must be exorbitant if they fail of success 
while you are their solicitor. 

This paper, proceeded he, contains a clear detail of their rights, 
and encroachments that have been made thereon. They are sen- 
sible of your lordship's interest with his majesty and the ministry, 
and they humbly petition for your favour and happy influence in 
their behalf. 

Without papers, I replied, or any inducement save that of your 
own request, let me but know what I am to do, and I shall think 
myself truly honoured and obliged by your commands. 

My lord, he rejoined, I do not wish to betray you into any mis- 
taken or unmerited complaisance. I am but a trader, a citizen 
of the lower order. 

I now felt myself blush with shame and disappointment; 1 
resented my being deceived by the dignity of his appearance ; and 
I was more particularly piqued by the sarcastical kind of smile with 
which he closed his declaration. All confused, I looked down, and 
pretended to cast my eyes over the paper, in order to gain time 
for recollection. Having, at intervals, muttered a few words, such 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 25 

as charters, grants, privileges, immunities, and so forth I am not, 
said I, an enemy to the lower ranks of men ; poor people must live, 
and their service, as well as subordination, is necessary to society ; 
but I confess I was always fond of those sumptuary laws that con- 
fined the degrees of men to their respective departments, and pre- 
vented mechanics from confounding themselves with gentlemen. 

My lord, says he, with the most easy and provoking unconcern, 
when you shall be pleased to look down from the superiority of 
your station, and to consider things and persons according to their 
merits, you will not despise some merely for being of use to others. 
The wealth, prosperity, and importance of all this world are founded 
and erected on three living pillars, the TILLER of the ground, 
the MANUFACTURER, and the MERCHANT. Of these, the tiller is 
supposed to be the least respectable, as he requires the least of 
genius, invention, or address ; and yet the ploughman Triptolemus 
was worshipped as a god, and the ploughman Cincinnatus is still 
held in as high esteem as any peer of any realm, save that of 
Great Britain. 

I have known, said I, a mob of such gods and dictators some- 
what dangerous at times. I must be free to tell you, mister, that 
matters are much changed since princesses kept sheep, and the 
sons of kings were cowherds. 

The ranks and orders of men are now appointed and known, 
and one department must not presume to break in upon another. 
My baker, barber, brewer, butcher, hatter, hosier, and tailor, are 
unquestionably of use, though I have not the honour of being ac- 
quainted with one of them ; and hitherto I have deemed it sufficient 
to send my servants to entertain and pay them their bills, without 
admitting them to a tete-a-tete, as at present. 

He now rejoined, with a little warmth My lord, we pardon your 
indelicacy in consideration of your error. The venerable body now 
present might be admitted to a tete-a-tete with the first estate of 
this kingdom, without any condescension on the part of majesty. 
And, would you allow yourself to be duly informed, I should soon 
make you sensible that we have actually done you the honour 
which we intended by this visit. 

Permit me to repeat, that the wealth, prosperity, and importance 
of every thing upon earth, arises from the TILLER, the MANUFAC- 
TURER, and the MERCHANT ; and that, as nothing is truly estimable 
save in proportion to its utility, these are consequently very far 
from being contemptible characters. The tiller supplies the manu- 
facturer, the manufacturer supplies the merchant, and the merchant 
supplies the world with all its wealth. It is thus that industry is 
promoted, arts invented and improved, commerce extended, super- 
fluities mutually vended,, wants mutually supplied ; that each man 
becomes a useful member of society; that societies become further 
of advantage to each other ; and that states are enabled to pay and 
dignify their upper servants with titles, rich revenues, principalities, 
and crowns. 

The merchant, above all, is extensive, considerable, and re- 
spectable, by his occupation. It is he who furnishes every comfort, 
convenience, and elegance of life ; who carries off every redundance, 






26 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

who fills up every want ; who ties country to country, and clime to 
clime, and brings the remotest regions to neighbourhood and con- 
verse ; who makes man to be literally the lord of the creation, and 
gives him an interest in whatever is done upon earth ; who furnishes 
to each the product of all lands, and the labours of all nations ; 
and thus knits into one family, and weaves into one web, the 
affinity and brotherhood of all mankind. 

I have no quarrel, I cried, to the high and mighty my lords, the 
merchants, if each could be humbly content with the profits of his 
profession, without forming themselves into companies, exclusive of 
their brethren, our itinerant merchants and pedlars. I confess my- 
self an enemy to the monopolies of your chartered companies 
and city corporations ; and I can perceive no evil consequence to 
the public or the state, if all such associations were this instant 
dissolved. 

Permit me, he mildly replied, once for all, to set your lordship 
right in this matter. I am sensible that the gentlemen of large 
landed properties are apt to look upon themselves as the pillars 
of the state, and to consider their interests, and the interests of the 
nation, as very little beholden to or dependent on trade ; though 
the fact is, that those very gentlemen would lose nine parts in ten 
of their returns, and the nation nine-tenths of her yearly revenues, 
if industry and the arts (promoted, as I said, by commerce) did not 
raise the products of lands to tenfold their natural value. The 
manufacturer, on the other hand, depends on the landed interest 
for nothing save the materials of his craft ; and the merchant is 
wholly independent of all lands, or, rather, he is the general patron 
thereof. I must further observe to your lordship, that this bene- 
ficent profession is by no means confined to individuals, as you 
would have it. Large societies of men, nay, mighty nations, may 
and have been merchants. When societies incorporate for such a 
worthy purpose, they are formed as a foetus within the womb of 
the mother, a constitution within the general state or constitution ; 
their particular laws and regulations ought always to be con- 
formable to those of the national system ; and, in that case, such 
corporations greatly conduce to the peace and good order of 
cities and large towns, and to the general power and prosperity 
of the nation. 

A nation that is a merchant has no need of an extent of lands, 
as it can derive to itself subsistence from all parts of the globe. 
Tyre was situated in a small island on the coast of Phoenicia, and 
yet that single city contained the most flourishing, opulent, and 
powerful nation in the universe ; a nation that long withstood the 
united forces of the three first monarchies, brought against her by 
Nebuchadnezzar and Alexander the Great. The Seven United 
Provinces dp not contain land sufficient for the subsistence of one- 
third of their inhabitants ; but they are a nation of merchants ; the 
world furnishes them with an abundance of all good things ; by 
commerce, they have arrived at empire; they have assumed to 
themselves the principality of the ocean ; and, by being lords of the 
ocean, are in a measure become the proprietors of all lands. 

Should England ever open her eyes to her own interest, she will 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 27 

follow the same prosperous and ennobling profession ; she will 
conform to the consequences of her situation. She will see that, 
without a naval pre-eminence, she cannot be safe ; and that, with- 
out trade, her naval power cannot be supported. Her glory will 
also flow from this source of her interests, and a sail-yard will be- 
come the highest sceptre of her dignity. She will then find that a 
single triumph of her flag will be more available for her prosperity 
than the conquest of the four continents ; that her pre-eminence by 
sea will carry and diffuse her influence over all lands ; and that 
universal influence is universal dominion. 

Avarice, my lord, may pile ; robbery may plunder ; new mines 
may be opened hidden treasures may be discovered ; gamesters 
may win cash ; conquerors may win kingdoms ; but all such means 
of acquiring riches are transient and determinate : while industry 
and commerce are the natural, the living, the never-failing foun- 
tain, from whence the wealth of this world can alone be taught 
to flow. 

And can you, cried T, have the effrontery to insinuate a preference 
of yourself, and your fellow-cits, to our British nobles and princes, 
who derive their powers and dignities from the steadfast extent of 
their landed possessions? Was it by barter and bargain that our 
Edwards and Henrys achieved their conquests on the continent? 
or was it by pedlars and mechanics, think you, that the fields of 
Cressi, Poictiers, and Agincourt are rendered immortal ? Go, I con- 
tinued, seek elsewhere for redress of your insignificant grievances ; 
we give little to sturdy beggars, but nothing to saucy rivals. 

Wholly kindled by this invective, he cast on me a fierce and 
menacing regard ; and with a severe accent, and a side glance that 
shot fire When courtiers (said he) acquire common-sense, and 
lords shall have learned to behave themselves like gentlemen, I may 
do such a one the honour to acknowledge him for a brother. 

Your brother ! exclaimed Mr. Meekly your brother, my lord ! 

Yes, Mr. Meekly, my brother my amiable, my very amiable 

and honourable brother, indeed ! But, turning contemptuously 
from me, he instantly departed with his attending citizens. 

I ought to have followed I ought to have stayed him. I should 
have fallen upon his neck; with my tears and caresses I should 
have wrung a pardon from him, and not have suffered him to leave 
me till, by my submissions, I had obtained full forgiveness. This, 
indeed, was my first emotion ; but the recollection of my long and 
unnatural neglect, my utter disregard of his person and concerns, 
now aggravated by my late insults, persuaded me that a recon- 
ciliation on his part was impossible. 

I remained disconcerted, and greatly disturbed. I felt with what 
pride and transport I should now have acknowledged, have courted, 
have clasped this brother to my bosom ; but my fancy represented 
him as ice in my arms, as shrinking and turning from me with dis- 
gust and disdain. At times I formed a hundred schemes toward 
recovering his affections ; but, again rejecting these as ineffectual, 
I endeavoured to console myself for his loss, by considering his late 
demeanour as exceeding faulty, and expressive of a disposition in- 
sufferably proud and overbearing. My heart, indeed, acknowledged 



28 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

how very lovely he was in his person : but the superiority of his 
talents, and the refinement of his manners, gave him a distinction 
that was not altogether so grateful. 

All day I kept my apartment, in displeasure at my brother, my- 
self, and the world. The next morning I was informed, that the 
moment he left me he went to the minister, who engaged, at his 
instance, to have every grievance that he complained of redressed 
to its extent ; that the minister had afterwards introduced him to 
his majesty in full leve*e, that the king held him in long and fami- 
liar conversation, and that all the court was profuse of their ad- 
miration and praises of Mr. Clinton. 

This also was fresh matter of triumph to him, and mortification 
to me. It was now evident that my brother's application to me 
was intended merely to do me peculiar honour ; and in return, said 
I to myself, I have endeavoured to cover him with confusion and 
disgrace. Yet, when I understood that he had disdained to men- 
tion me as his brother, or of his blood, I also scorned to derive 
lustre from any claim of affinity with him; and I further felt 
that I could not forgive him the reproaches which he constrained 
me to give myself in his behalf. 

From that time I took great pains to dissipate or suppress those 
uneasy sensations which the remembrance of him gave me. But 
after I had married and retired from the glare and bustle of the 
world ; and more particularly on the birth of my first child, when 
my heart had entered into a new sphere of domestic feelings, this 
dear brother returned with double weight upon my mind. Yet 
his idea was no longer accompanied by envy or resentment, but by 
an affectionate and sweet, though paining, remorse. 

I wrote him a letter full of penitential submissions, and of tender 
and atoning prayers for pardon and reconcilement. But, alas ! 
my messenger returned with tidings that, some years past, he had 
withdrawn from trade, had retired to France or Holland, had 
dropped all correspondence, and that no one in England knew 
whether he was dead or alive. 

Ah, my brother! my dear brother! (I would often repeat to 
myself,) has any reverse of fortune happened to you, my brother? 
some domestic calamity, some heavy distress, perhaps? and no 
brother at hand to console or share your afflictions. Return to 
me, divide my heart, divide my fortune, with me and mine ! 
Alas, wretch that I am ! you know not that you have a brother, 
one deserving of that name. You know not that this bosom of 
flint is now humanized, and melted down in the fervour of affec- 
tion towards you. You hate me, you despise me, my amiable 
brother ! How, now, shall I make you sensible that my heart is 
full of your image, of esteem, of tenderest love, for my lovely 
Harry Clinton ! 

I again sent other messengers in search of intelligence, and pro- 
cured letters to the bankers and merchants of principal note 
abroad ; but all my solicitudes and inquiries were equally fruitless. 

The grief that this occasioned first taught me to reflect, and 
cast a shade over the lustre of every object about me. The world 
no more appeared as that world which, formerly, had held out 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 29 

happiness to either hand. I no longer beheld it through the per- 
spectives of curiosity or youthful desire ; I had worn out all its 
gaieties ; I had exhausted all its delights ; for me it had nothing 
more to promise or bestow ; and yet I saw no better prospect, 
no other resource. 

Should I turn to religion, a little observation taught me, that 
the devotees themselves were warm in pursuit of objects of which 
I was tired ; that they were still subject to the passions and 
desires of the world ; and were no way to be distinguished from 
other men, save by an unsociable reserve, or gloomy cast of 
countenance. 

May I venture to confess to you, Mr. Meekly, that, at times of 
my despondence, I dared to call the justice and wisdom of Omni- 
potence into question. Take this world (said I to myself), con- 
sider it as it seems to stand, independent of any other, and no 
one living can assign a single end or purpose for which it could be 
made. Men are even as their fellow insects; they rise to life, 
exert their lineaments, and flutter abroad during the summer of 
their little seasons ; then droop, die away, and are succeeded, and 
succeeded in insignificant rotation. Even the firmest human esta- 
blishments, the best laboured systems of policy, can scarce boast 
a nobler fate or a longer duration : the mightiest states and 
nations perish like individuals ; in one leaf we read their his- 
tory, we admire their achievements, we are interested in their 
successes, but, proceed to the next, and no more than a name is 
left: the Ninevehs and Babylons of Asia are fallen, the Sparta 
and Athens of Greece are no more; and the monuments that 
promised to endure to eternity, are erased like the mount of sand, 
which yesterday the children cast up on the shore. 

When I behold this stupendous expanse, so sumptuously fur- 
nished with a profusion of planets and luminaries, revolving in 
appointed courses, and diversifying the seasons, I see a work that 
is altogether worthy of a God. Again, when I descend to earth, 
and look abroad upon the infinite productions of nature, upon 
provisions so amply answering to the wants of every living being, 
and on objects and organs so finely fitted to each other, I trace 
a complicated maze of wisdom, bounty, and benevolence. But 
when I see all these beauties and benefits counteracted by some 
adverse and destructive principle ; when the heavens gather their 
clouds and roll their thunders above, and the earth begins to quake 
and open beneath us ; when the air, that seemed so late to be the 
breath and balm of life, grows pregnant with a variety of pests, 
plagues, and poisons ; when life itself is found to be no other than 
the storehouse or habitation of death, and that all vegetable and 
animal systems include, within their frame, the principles of in- 
evitable distemper and dissolution; when, additional to all these 
natural mischiefs, I consider the extent and empire of moral evil 
upon earth; when I behold the wretched perishable short-lived 
animal, called man, for the value of some matter of property as 
transient as himself, industrious and studious of the destruction of 
his species ; when, not content Avith the evils that nature has en- 
tailed upon him, man exerts all his talents for multiplying and 






30 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

speeding the means of perdition to man ; when I see half the 
world employed in pushing the other half from the verge of exist- 
ence, and then dropping after in an endless succession of male- 
volence and misery, I cannot possibly reconcile such contrasts 
and contradictions to the agency, or even permission, of the one 
over-ruling principle of goodness called God. 

Could not Omniscience foresee such consequences at creation? 
Unquestionably, said Mr. Meekly. 

Might he not have ordered matters so, as to have prevented 
the possibility of any degree of natural or moral evil in his uni- 
verse? I think he might, my lord. Why did he not then pre- 
vent them? to what end could he permit such multiplied male- 
volence and misery among his creatures? For ends, certainly, 
my lord, infinitely worthy both of his wisdom and his goodness. 
I am desirous it should be so ; but cannot conceive, cannot reach 
the way or means of compassing such an intention. 

Can you not suppose, said Mr. Meekly, that evil may be admitted 
for accomplishing the greater and more abundant good? May 
not partial and temporary malevolence and misery be finally pro- 
ductive of universal, durable, and unchangeable beatitude ? May 
not the universe, even now, be in the pangs of travail, of labour 
for such a birth, such a blessed consummation ? 

It were, rejoined the earl, as our Shakespeare says it were 
indeed a consummation devoutly to be wished ! But might not 
Omnipotence have brought about a consummation equally good 
without any intervention of preceding evil? Had that been pos- 
sible, my lord, it would unquestionably have been effected. But 
if certain relations arise between God and his creatures, and be- 
tween man and man, which could not arise save on the previous 
supposition of evil, without which, indeed, neither the attributes of 
God himself, nor the insufficiency, dependence, or obligation of the 
creature, could have been duly discoverable throughout eternity; 
then temporary evil becomes indispensably necessary to the con- 
sequence and consummation of the greatest good. 

Your notion, exclaimed the earl, is great, amazing, truly glorious, 
and every way worthy of a God who, in such a case, would be in- 
finitely worthy of all worship! Is this the reason, Mr. Meekly, 
that what we all so earnestly seek for is nowhere to be found; 
that no portion or taste of happiness is to be had upon earth ? 

I do not say so, my lord. I think that a man, even on earth, 
may be occasionally, nay, durably and exceedingly happy. 

What, happy durably, exceedingly happy? repeated the earl. 
I was told that the experience of ages, that philosophy, and even 
divinity, ^ had agreed with Solomon in this that all upon earth 
was vanity and vexation of spirit. If any may enjoy happiness 
on this side of the great consummation that you speak of, I am 
persuaded, Mr. Meekly, that you yourself are the man. Your 
lips, indeed, say nothing of the matter ; but neither your eyes nor 
your aspect can restrain the expression of some extraordinary peace 
that abides within. O! say then, my dear, my estimable friend, 
whence, how, by what means, may a man arrive at happiness? By 
getting out of himself, my lord. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 31 

Out of himself, Mr. Meekly? You astonish me greatly. A con- 
tradiction in terms, unnatural, impossible! God himself, my lord, 
cannot make a man happy in any other way, either here or here- 
after. 

It is, said the earl, an established maxim among all thinking 
men, whether divines or philosophers, that SELF-LOVE is the 
motive to all human actions. Virtue forbid! exclaimed Mr. 
Meekly. All actions are justly held good or evil, base or honour- 
able, detestable or amiable, merely according to their motives; 
but if the motive is the same to all, there is an end, at once, to 
the possibility of virtue the cruel and the kind, the faithful and 
the perfidious, the prostitute and the patriot, are confounded 
together. 

Do not all men, retained the earl, act agreeably to their 
own propensities and inclinations? Do they not act so or so, 
merely because it pleases them so to act? And is not this pleasure 
the same motive to all ? By no means, my lord ; it never was nor 
can be the motive in any. We must go a question deeper to 
discover the secret principle or spring of action. One man is 
pleased to do good, another is pleased to do evil ; now, whence 
is it that each is pleased with purposes in their nature so opposite 
and irreconcilable ? Because, my lord, the propensities or motives 
to action in each are as opposite and as irreconcilable as the ac- 
tions themselves ; the one is prompted, and therefore pleased, 
with his purpose of doing evil to others through some base pro- 
spect of interest redounding to himself ; the other is prompted and 
spurred, and therefore pleased, with his purpose of endangering 
his person, or suffering in his fortune, through the benevolent 
prospect of the good that shall thereby redound to others. 

Pleasure is itself an effect, and cannot be the cause, or prin- 
ciple, or motive, to any thing ; it is an agreeable sensation that 
arises, in any animal, on its meeting or contemplating an object 
that is suited to its nature. As far as the nature of such an animal 
is evil, evil objects can alone effect it with pleasure ! as far as the 
nature of such an animal is good, the objects must be good whereby 
its pleasures are excited. 

When Damon was sentenced, by Dionysius of Syracuse, to die 
on such a day, he prayed permission, in the interim, to retire to 
his own country to set the affairs of his disconsolate family in order. 
This the tyrant intended most peremptorily to refuse, by granting 
it, as he conceived, on the impossible condition of his procuring 
some one to remain as hostage for his return, under equal forfeiture 
of life. Pythias heard the condition, and did not wait for an ap- 
plication on the part of Damon; he instantly offered himself to 
durance in place of his friend, and Damon was accordingly set 
at liberty. 

The king and all his courtiers were astonished at this action, 
as they could not account for it on any allowed principles. Self- 
interest, in their judgment, was the sole mover of human affairs ; 
and they looked on virtue, friendship, benevolence, love of country, 
and the like, as terms invented by the wise to impose upon the 
weak. They, therefore, imputed this act of Pythias to the ex- 



32 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

travagance of his folly, to the defect of head merely, and no way 
to any virtue or good quality of heart. 

When the day of the destined execution drew near, the tyrant 
had the curiosity to visit Pythias in his dungeon. Having re- 
proached him for the romantic stupidity of his conduct, and rallied 
him for some time on his madness in presuming that Damon, by 
his return, would prove as great a fool as himself My lord, said 
Pythias, with a firm voice and noble aspect, I would it were possible 
that I might suffer a thousand deaths rather than my friend should 
fail in any article of his honour. He cannot fail therein, my lord. 
I am as confident of his virtue as I am of my own existence. But 
I pray, I beseech the gods, to preserve the life and integrity of 
my Damon together. Oppose him, ye winds prevent the eager- 
ness and impatience of his honourable endeavours and suffer him 
not to arrive till, by my death, I have redeemed a life a thousand 
times of more consequence, more estimation, than my own ; more 
estimable to his lovely wife, to his precious little innocents, to his 
friends, to his country ! leave me not to die the worst of deaths 
in my Damon ! 

Dionysius was confounded and awed by the dignity of these 
sentiments, and by the manner (still more sentimental) in which 
they were uttered. He felt his heart struck by a slight sense of 
invading truth ; but it served rather to perplex than to undeceive 
him. He hesitated he would have spoken ; but he looked down 
and retired in silence. 

The fatal day arrived. Pythias was brought forth, and walked 
amidst the guard, with a serious but satisfied air, to the place of 
execution. 

Dionysius was already there. He was exalted on a moving throne 
that was drawn by six white horses, and sat pensive and attentive 
to the demeanour of the prisoner. 

Pythias came. He vaulted lightly on the scaffold; and be- 
holding, for some time, the apparatus of his death, he turned 
with a pleased countenance and addressed the assembly. 

My prayers are heard, he cried ; the gods are propitious ! You 
know, my friends, that the winds have been contrary till yesterday. 
Damon could not come he could not conquer impossibilities; he 
will be here to-morrow, and the blood which is shed to-day shall 
have ransomed the life of my friend, O ! could I erase from your 
bosoms every doubt, every mean suspicion of the honour of the 
man for whom I am about to suffer, I should go to my death even 
as I would to my bridal ! Be it sufficient, in the mean time, that 
my friend will be found noble ; that his truth is unimpeachable ; 
that he will speedily approve it ; that he is now on his way, hurry- 
ing on, accusing himself, the adverse elements, and the gods. But 
I haste to prevent his speed ; executioner, to your office ! 

As he pronounced the last words, a buzz began to arise among 
the remotest of the people. A distant voice was heard. The 
crowd caught the words ; and Stop, stop the execution ! was re- 
peated by the whole assembly. 

A man came at full speed. The throng gave way to his ap- 
proach. He was mounted on a steed of foam. In an instant 



THE FOOL OF QVALITY. 83 

he was off his horse, on the scaffold, and held Pythias straitly 
embraced. 

You are safe, he cried you are safe, my friend, my beloved ! 
The gods be praised, you are safe ! I now have nothing but death 
to suffer ; and I am delivered from the anguish of those reproaches 
which I gave myself, for having endangered a life so much dearer 
than my own. 

Pale, cold, and half- speechless in the arms of his Damon, Pythias 
replied in broken accents Fatal haste ! cruel impatience ! what 
envious powers have wrought impossibilities in your favour? But 
I will not be wholly disappointed: since I cannot die to save, I 
will not survive you. 

Dionysius heard, beheld, and considered all with astonishment. 
His heart was touched ; his eyes were opened ; and he could no 
longer refuse his assent to truths so incontestably approved by 
their facts. 

He descended from his throne. He ascended the scaffold. Live, 
live, ye incomparable pair ! he exclaimed. Ye have borne un- 
questionable testimony to the existence of virtue ; and that virtue 
equally evinces the certainty of the existence of a God to reward 
it. Live happy, live renowned ! andi O form me by your precepts, 
as you have invited me by your example, to be worthy of the 
participation of so sacred a friendship. 

You bring your arguments quite home, Mr. Meekly, said the 
earl ; the understanding cannot reject what the heart so sensibly 
feels. My soul deeply acknowledges the existence of virtue, with 
its essential and inherent difference from vice ; and this difference, 
I acknowledge, must as necessarily be founded in the difference 
of the principles from whence they proceed : but what those prin- 
ciples are I know not : and I am equally a stranger to what you 
intend by a man's getting out of himself in order to happiness. 
What am I to understand by the term SELF, Mr. Meekly ? 

Every particle of matter, my lord, has a SELF, or distinct identity, 
inasmuch as it cannot be any other particle of matter. Now, while 
it continues in this state of SELFISHNESS, or absolute distinction, 
it is utterly useless and insignificant, and is to the universe as 
though it were not. It has, however, a principle of attraction 
(analogous or answerable to desire in the mind), whereby it en- 
deavours to derive to itself the powers and advantages of all other 
portions of matter. But when the divine intelligence hath har- 
monized certain qualities of such distinct particles into certain 
animal or vegetable systems, this principle of attraction in each 
is overcome, for each becomes attracted and drawn as it were from 
SELF ; each yields up its powers to the benefit of the whole ; and 
then, and then only, becomes capable and productive of shape, 
colouring, beauty, flowers, fragrance, and fruits. 

Be pleased now to observe, my lord, that this operation in matter 
is no other than a manifestation of the like process in mind ; ana 
that no soul was ever capable of any degree of virtue or happiness, 
save so far as it is drawn away in its affections from self ; save so 
far as it is engaged in wishing, contriving, endeavouring, promoting, 
and rejoicing in the welfare and happiness of others. 

D 



34 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

It is, therefore, that the kingdom of heaven is most aptly, and 
most beautifully, compared to a tree bearing fruit and diffusing 
odours, whose root is the principle of infinite benevolence, and 
whose branches are the blessed members, receiving consummate 
beatitude from the act of communication. 

I think, indeed, said the earl, that I can form some sort of a 
notion of such a society in heaven. But it would pose you, Mr. 
Meekly, to exemplify your position from any body of men that ever 
were upon earth. 

Pray, pardon me, my lord ; the states of Sparta and Eome de- 
rived their lustre and power, their whole pre-eminence and praise, 
from this principle of communication., which, in them, was called 
love of country. But this beautifying principle was still more 
eminently instanced hi the society of the church of Jerusalem, who 
had all things in common; who imparted their possessions to all 
men, as every man had need; and thence did eat their common 
bread with gladness and singleness of heart, praising God, and 
having favour with all people. 

You say, my lord, that you can form a notion of some such ex- 
cellence in heaven ; but I can form no notion of any excellence 
more admirable in heaven itself, than when a man, in his present 
state of frail and depraved nature, overbears his personal fears of 
pain and mortality, and yields up his body to assured perdition for 
public good, or for the sake of those whom it delighteth him to 
preserve. 

I shall pass over the instances of the Koman Regulus and the 
Decii, as also that of Leonidas and his three hundred Spartans, who 
devoted their lives for the liberties of Greece. Was that candidate 
less a hero, who, being rejected from being one of these self- 
devoted, exclaimed The gods be praised, there are three hundred 
in Sparta better men than myself! But I come nearer our own 
times and our own nation, to exemplify this disregard of self, the 
vital source and principle of every virtue, in six mechanics or 
craftsmen of the city of Calais. 

Edward the Third, after the battle of Cressi, laid siege to Calais. 
He had fortified his camp in so impregnable a manner, that all the 
efforts of France proved ineffectual to raise the siege, or throw 
succours into the city. The citizens, however, under the conduct 
of Count Vienne, their gallant governor, made an admirable de- 
fence. Day after day the English effected many a breach, which 
they repeatedly expected to storm by morning ; but when morning 
appeared, they wondered to behold new ramparts raised, nightly 
erected out of the ruins which the day had made. 

France had now put the sickle into her second harvest, since 
Edward with his victorious army sat down before the town. The 
eyes of all Europe were intent on the issue. The English made 
their approaches and attacks without remission; but the citizens 
were as obstinate in repelling all their efforts. 
_ At length famine did more for Edward than arms. After the 
citizens had devoured the lean carcasses of their starved cattle, 
they tore up old foundations and rubbish in search of vermin. 
They fed on boiled leather and the weeds of exhausted gar- 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 35 

dens, and a morsel of damaged corn was accounted matter of 
luxury. 

In this extremity they resolved to attempt the enemy's camp. 
They boldly sallied forth ; the English joined battle ; and, after 
a long and desperate engagement, Count Vienne was taken prisoner, 
and the citizens who survived the slaughter retired within their 
gates. 

On the captivity of the governor, the command devolved upon 
Eustace St. Pierre, the mayor of the town, a man of mean birth 
but of exalted virtue. 

Eustace now found himself under the necessity of capitulating, 
and offered to deliver to Edward the city, with all the possessions 
and wealth of the inhabitants, provided he permitted them to 
depart with life and liberty. 

As Edward had long since expected to ascend the throne of 
France, he was exasperated to the last degree against these people, 
whose sole valour had defeated his warmest hopes ; he therefore 
determined to take an exemplary revenge, though he wished to 
avoid the imputation of cruelty. He answered, by Sir Walter 
Mauny, that they all deserved capital punishment, as obstinate 
traitors to him, their true and natural sovereign; that, however, 
in his wonted clemency, he consented to pardon the bulk of the 
plebeians, provided they would deliver up to him six of their prin- 
cipal citizens, with halters about their necks, as victims of due 
atonement for that spirit of rebellion with which they had inflamed 
the vulgar herd. 

All the remains of this desolate city were convened in the great 
square, and, like men arraigned at a tribunal from whence there 
was no appeal, expected with beating hearts the sentence of the 
conqueror. 

When Sir Walter had declared his message, consternation and 
pale dismay was impressed on every face. Each looked upon death 
as his own inevitable lot ; for how should they desire to be saved 
at the price proposed? whom had they to deliver, save parents, 
brothers, kindred, or valiant neighbours who had so often exposed 
their lives in their defence? To a long and dead silence deep 
sighs and groans succeeded, till Eustace St. Pierre, getting up to 
a little eminence, thu^ addressed the assembly : 

"My friends, we are brought to great straits this day. We 
must either submit to the terms of our cruel and ensnaring con- 
queror, or yield up our tender infants, our wives, and chaste 
daughters, to the bloody and brutal lusts of the violating soldiery. 
We well know what the tyrant intends by his specious offers of 
mercy. It will not satiate his vengeance to make us merely 
miserable ; he would also make us criminal, he would make us 
contemptible ; he will grant us life on no condition save that of 
our being unworthy of it. 

" Look about you, my friends, and fix your eyes on the persons 
whom you wish to deliver up as the victims of your own safety. 
Which of these would ye appoint to the rack, the axe, or the 
halter? Is there any here who has not watched for you, who 
has not fought for you, who has not bled for you ? who, through 

D 2 



56 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

the length of this inveterate siege, has not suffered fatigues and 
miseries a thousand times worse than death, that you and yours 
might survive to days of peace and prosperity? Is it your pre- 
servers, then, whom you would destine to destruction? You will 
not, you cannot do it. Justice, honour, humanity, make such a 
treason impossible. 

"Where, then, is our resource? Is there any expedient left 
whereby we may avoid guilt and infamy on the one hand, or the 
desolation and horrors of a sacked city on the other ? There is, 
my friends there is one expedient left ; a gracious, an excellent, 
a godlike expedient ! Is there any here to whom virtue is dearer 
than life ? Let him offer himself an oblation for the safety of his 
people ! He shall not fail of a blessed approbation from that Power 
who offered up his only Son for the salvation of mankind." 

He spoke but an universal silence ensued. Each man looked 
around for the example of that virtue and magnanimity in others, 
which all wished to approve in themselves, though they wanted 
the resolution. 

At length St. Pierre resumed "It had been base in me, my 
fellow-citizens, to propose any matter of damage to others, which 
I myself had not been willing to undergo in my own person. But 
I held it ungenerous to deprive any man of that preference and 
estimation which might attend a first offer on so signal an occasion. 
For I doubt not but there are many here as ready, nay, more 
zealous of this martyrdom, than I can be, however modesty and 
the fear of imputed ostentation may withhold them from being 
foremost in exhibiting their merits. 

" Indeed, the station to which the captivity of Lord Vienne has 
unhappily raised me, imparts a right to be the first in giving my 
life for your sakes. I give it freely, I give it cheerfully who 
comes next ?" 

Your son ! exclaimed a youth, not yet come to maturity. " Ah, 
my child," cried St. Pierre, " I am then twee sacrificed. But no, 
I had rather begotten thee a second time. Thy years are few but 
full, my son ; the victim of virtue has reached the utmost purpose 
and goal of mortality. Who next, my friends? This is the hour 
of heroes ! " Your kinsman, cried John de Aire ! Your kinsman, 
cried James Wissant ! Your kinsman, cried Peter Wissant ! Ah, 
exclaimed Sir Walter Mauny, bursting into tears, why was not 1 a 
citizen of Calais ? 

The sixth victim was still wanting, but was quickly supplied, 
by lot, from numbers who were now emulous of so ennobling an 
example. 

The keys of the city were then delivered to Sir Walter. He 
took the six prisoners into his custody. He ordered the gates to be 
opened, and gave charge to his attendants to conduct the remaining 
citizens, with their families, through the camp of the English. 

Before they departed, however, they desired permission to take 
their last adieu of their deliverers. What a parting what a scene ! 
They crowded with their wives and children about St. Pierre and 
his fellow-prisoners : they embraced they clung around they fell 
prostrate before them ; they groaned they wept aloud ; and the 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 37 

joint clamour of their mourning passed the gates of the city, and 
was heard throughout the camp. 

The English, by this time, were apprised of what passed within 
Calais. They heard the voice of lamentation, and their souls were 
touched with compassion : each of the soldiers prepared a portion 
of his own victuals to welcome and entertain the half-famished in- 
habitants; and they loaded them with as much as their present 
weakness was able to bear, in order to supply them with sustenance 
by the way. 

At length St. Pierre and his fellow victims appeared under 
the conduct of Sir Walter and a guard. All the tents of the 
English were instantly emptied. The soldiers poured from all 
parts and arranged themselves on each side, to behold, to con- 
template, to admire this little band of patriots as they passed. 
They bowed down to them on all sides ; they murmured their 
applause of that virtue which they could not but revere, even 
in enemies ; and they regarded those ropes, which they had 
voluntarily assumed about their necks, as ensigns of greater dignity 
than that of the British garter. 

As soon as they had reached the presence Mauny! says the 
monarch, are these the principal inhabitants of Calais ? They are, 
says Mauny : They are not only the principal men of Calais, they 
are the principal men of France, my lord, if virtue has any share 
in the act of ennobling. "Were they delivered peaceably? says Ed- 
ward : was there no resistance, no commotion among the people ? 
Not in the least, my lord ; the people would all have perished 
rather than have delivered the least of these to your majesty. 
They are self-delivered, self-devoted, and come to offer up their 
inestimable heads as an ample equivalent for the ransom of 
thousands. 

Edward was secretly piqued at this reply of Sir Walter ; but 
he knew the privilege of a British subject, and suppressed his re- 
sentment. Experience, says he, hath ever shewn that lenity only 
serves to invite people to new crimes. Severity, at times, is indis- 
pensably necessary, to deter subjects into submission by punish- 
ment and example. Go, he cried, to an officer, lead these men 
to execution! Your rebellion, continued he, addressing himself 
to St. Pierre your rebellion against me, the natural heir of the 
crown, is highly aggravated by your present presumption and 
affront of my power. We have nothing to ask of your majesty, said 
Eustace, save what you cannot refuse us. What is that ? Your 
esteem, my lord, said Eustace, and went out with his companions. 

At this instant, a sound of triumph was heard throughout the 
camp. The queen had just arrived, with a powerful reinforcement 
of those gallant soldiers, at the head of whom she had conquered 
Scotland, and taken the king captive. 

Sir Walter Mauny flew to receive her majesty, and briefly in- 
formed her of the particulars respecting the six victims. 

As soon as she had been welcomed by Edward and his court, 
she desired a private audience. My lord, said she, the question 
I am to enter upon is not touching the lives of a few mechanics it 
respects a matter more estimable than the lives of all the natives 



38 TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

of France it respects the honour of the English nation it respects 
the glory of my Edward, my husband, my king. 

You think you have sentenced six of your enemies to death. 
No, my lord, they have sentenced themselves ; and their execution 
would be the execution of their own orders, not the orders of 
Edward. 

They have behaved themselves worthily they have behaved them- 
selves greatly ; I cannot but respect, while I envy, while I hate 
them, for leaving us no share in the honour of this action, save 
that of granting a poor, and indispensable pardon. 

I admit they have deserved every thing that is evil at your 
hands. They have proved the most inveterate and efficacious of 
your enemies. They alone have withstood the rapid course of 
your conquests, and have withheld from you the crown to which 
you were born. Is it therefore that you would reward them? 
that you would gratify their desires that you would indulge their 
ambition, and en wreath them with everlasting glory and applause ? 

But if such a death would exalt mechanics over the fame of the 
most illustrious heroes, how would the name of my Edward, with 
all his triumphs and honours, be tarnished thereby? Would it 
not be said that magnanimity and virtue are grown odious in the 
eyes of the monarch of Britain? and that the objects whom he 
destines to the punishment of felons, are the very men who deserve 
the praise and esteem of mankind? The stage on which they 
would suffer would be to them a stage of honour ; but a stage 
of shame to Edward a reproach to his conquests a dark and 
indelible disgrace to his name ! 

No, my lord; let us rather disappoint the saucy ambition of 
these burghers, who wish to invest themselves with glory at our 
expense. We cannot, indeed, wholly deprive them of the merit 
of a sacrifice so nobly intended ; but we may cut them short of 
their desires: in the place of that death by which their glory 
would be consummated, let us bury them under gifts, let us put 
them to shame with praises; we shall thereby defeat them of 
that popular opinion which never fails to attend those who suffer 
in the cause of virtue. 

I am convinced you have prevailed be it so, cried Edward 
prevent the execution have them instantly before us ! 

They came ; when the queen, with an aspect and accents diffusing 
sweetness, thus bespoke them : 

Natives of France, and inhabitants of Calais ! Ye have put us 
to vast expense of blood and treasure in the recovery of our 
just and natural inheritance ; but you acted up to the best of 
an erroneous judgment, and we admire and honour in you that 
valour and virtue by which we are so long kept out of our 
rightful possessions. 

You noble burghers you excellent citizens! though you were 
tenfold the enemies of our person and our throne, we can feel 
nothing on our part save respect and affection for you. You 
have been sufficiently tested. We loose your chains, we snatch 
you from the scaffold ; and we thank you for that lesson of humilia- 
tion which you teach us, when you shew us that excellence is not 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 



39 



of blood, of title, or station that virtue gives a dignity superior 
to that of kings; and that those whom the Almighty informs 
with sentiments like yours, are justly and eminently raised above 
all human distinctions. 

You are now free to depart to your kinsfolk, your countrymen 
to all those whose lives and liberties you have so nobly redeemed 
provided you refuse not to carry with you the due tokens of 
our esteem. 

Yet we would rather bind you to ourselves by every endearing 
obligation ; and, for this purpose, we offer to you your choice of 
the gifts and honours that Edward has to bestow. Kivals for 
fame, but always friends to virtue, we wish that England were 
entitled to call you her sons. 

Ah, my country ! exclaimed St. Pierre, it is now that I tremble 
for you. Edward could only win your cities, but Philippa con- 
quers hearts. 

Brave St. Pierre, said the queen, wherefore look ye so dejected ? 
Ah, madam ! replied St. Pierre, when I meet with such another 
opportunity of dying, I shall not regret that I survived this day. 

Here a long pause ensued. At length the earl recollected 
himself. Mr. Meekly, said he, you have now proved to me your 
position more effectually, more convincingly, than all the powers 
of ratiocination could possibly do. While you related the story 
of these divine citizens, I was imperceptibly stolen away, and won 
entirely from self. I entered into all their interest, their passions, 
and affections ; and was wrapped, as it were, into a new world of 
delightful sensibilities. Is this what you call virtue what you 
call happiness ? 

A good deal of it, my lord. There are in nature but two kinds 
of self; in other words, there are but two sorts of will in the 
universe, the will of infinite wisdom, of infinite benevolence, going 
forth in beauty and beatitude on all creatures; and the will of 
the creature, desiring, attracting, envying, coveting, and rending 
all things from all, to its own interest and advantage. In the 
first will subsists all possible good; from the second arises all 
possible evil : and did not the first will, in some measure, inform 
and meliorate the second, the will of every creature would be 
an Ishmael his hand would be against every one, and every 
one's hand against him ; and there would be nothing but strife and 
distraction, hatred, horror, and misery, throughout the creation. 

Hence it follows that, as there is but one will from eternity, 
infinitely wise to discern what is best throughout the universe, 
infinitely good to desire the accomplishment of what is best, and 
infinitely powerful to put what is best in execution ; every will 
that is not informed by this ONE WILL, must of necessity act in 
ignorance, in blindness, and error. I will further affirm, that every 
act of every will, that is not informed by the ONE WILL of GOOD- 
NESS, must, of equal necessity, be the act of malevolence. 

I do not see the necessity of that, replied the earl. I well per- 
ceive that God can give to intelligent beings an existence or 
identity distinct from himself, for I see that he has done it. What 
should therefore prevent him from giving qualities as distinct from 



40 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

himself as the essence ? why might he not impart, to any limited 
degree, capacity, discernment, power, wisdom, and goodness? 
Might not such a being instantly perceive, to a vast extent, the 
relations of things, with their several fitnesses and disagreements? 
would he not consequently be enamoured of what was right and 
beautiful? would he not act agreeable to such a just appro- 
bation? and would not such acts be fitly accounted the acts of 
virtue? 

At this instant a messenger arrived on the spur. He brought 
word to Mr. Meekly that his friend Mr. Husbands was taken sud- 
denly ill, and earnestly requested to see him directly ; whereupon 
Mr. Meekly, who preferred any matter of charity to all other con- 
siderations, immediately got up, made a silent bow, and vanished. 

To return to our hero. As soon as he was new rigged, he pressed 
for another visit to his patron, who received him with accustomed 
tenderness, but greatly wondered at his peasant dress. Nurse 
then recited to him the whole adventure of the frittered robings ; 
whereat the old gentleman in a manner devoured him with the 
eagerness of his caresses. 

When nurse and Harry were departed, he called to him his old 
domestic. James, said he, with a tear yet standing in his eye, 
I can no longer live without the company of this dear child ; hasten, 
therefore, the orders I have already given you, and let all things 
be in readiness for the first opportunity. The domestic, who had 
caught the silent habit of his master, with a bow assented, and 
retired. 

Autumn was now advanced, and Lord Dicky, with his brother, 
a number of little associates, and an attending footman, got leave 
to go to the copse a nutting. As the children were perfectly 
acquainted with the way, the servant desired to stay behind a while, 
in order to provide hooks for pulling down the branches. This was 
granted, and forth they all issued in high chat and spirits, 

The copse lay at some distance, on one side of the park behind 
the mansion-house ; but when they had nearly approached the 
place of their destination, Harry missed a garter, and, promising 
speedily to rejoin his companions, went back to seek it. 

In the mean time his associates, on entering the wood, met with 
another little posse of the village fry, who were on their return, one 
of whom carried a bag of nuts that seemed bulkier than the bearer. 
So, gentlemen, says Lord Dicky, where are you going? Why, 
home where should we go? says a little boor sullenly. And, 
pray, what have you been doing? says the lord. Guess, says the 
boor. Is it nuts that you have got in that bag ? demanded the lord. 
Ask to-morrow, answered the boor. Sirrah, says Dicky, a little 

E revoked, how dare you to come and pull nuts here, without our 
jave ? Why, as for that, Mr. Dicky, replied the other, I know you 
well enough, and I wouldn't ask your leave an' you were twenty 
lords, not I. Sirrah, says Dicky, I have a great mind to take 
your nuts from you, and to give you as good a beating, into the 
bargain, as ever you got in your life. As for that, Mr. Dicky, 
coolly answered the villager, you must do both or neither. Here 
I lay down my nuts between us ; and now come any two of your 



THE FOOL OF QVALITY. 41 

water-gruel regiment, one down, t'other come on ; and if I don't 
give ye your bellies full, why, then, take my nuts and welcome, 
to make up the want. 

This gallant invitation was accepted on the spot. Lord Richard 
chose his companion in arms, and both appeared quite flush and 
confident of victory : for, though neither of them had been versed in 
the gymnastic exercises, they did not want courage, and they knew 
that their challenger was their inferior in strength and in years. 

But, unhappily for these two champions of quality, Tommy Truck, 
their adversary, had, like Harry, been a bruiser from two years old 
and upward, and was held in veneration, as their leader and their 
chief, by many who were his superiors in age and stature. 

Lord Richard began the assault, but was down in a twinkling. 
To him his friend succeeded, but with no better fortune. A swing 
or trip of Tommy's sent them instantly, as Alcides sent Antseus, 
to gather strength from their mother earth. And though these 
summer heroes, like the young Roman nobility at the battle of 
Pharsalia, were solely intent on defending their pretty faces from 
annoyance, yet Tommy, at the third turn, had bloodied them both. 

Harry, who was now on his return, perceived the engagement ; 
and running up, and rushing hi between the combatants, interposed 
with a voice of authority, and parted the fray. 

Having inquired, and duly informed himself of the merits of the 
case, he first turned him to Lord Richard, and said O brother 
Dicky, brother Dicky, you ought not to hinder poor boys from 
pulling a few dirty nuts what signifies 'em ? Then turning to the 
challenger, his old acquaintance Tommy, says he, did you know 
that Dicky was my brother? Yes, says Tommy rudely; and what 
though if I did? O nothing at all, says Harry; but I want to 
speak with you, Tommy. Whereupon he took the conqueror under 
the arm, and walked away with him, very lovingly in all ap- 
pearance, looking about to take care that none of the boys 
followed him. 

Meantime the little gentry threw out their invectives in profusion 
against our departed hero. I think, says one, that Master Harry 
had as much to blame in Tommy as Lord Dicky. Ay, says another, 
one would think he might as well have taken his brother's part as 
that blackguard's. Indeed, it was very naughty of him, says a 
third. For my part, says a fourth, I will never have any thing 
more to say to him. 

While thus they vilified their late friend, he and his fellow cham- 
pion walked arm-in-arm in a sullen and uninterrupted silence, till 
coming to a small opening, in a secret part of the wood, Harry 
quitted his companion, desired him to strip, and instantly cast 
aside his own hat, coat, and waistcoat. Why should I strip ? says 
Tommy. To box, says Harry. Why should you box with me, 
Harry? sure I did'nt strike you, says Tom. Yes, sir, replied our 
hero, you struck me when you struck Dicky, and knew that he 
was my brother. Nay, Harry, cried Tom, if it's fight you are for, 
I'll give you enough of it, I warrant you. 

Tom was about eight months older than Harry, his equal in the 
practice of arms, and much the stronger. But Harry was full as 



42 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

tall, and his motions, quicker than thought, prevented the ward 
of the most experienced adversary. 

Together they rushed like two little tigers. At once they struck 
and parried, and, watching every opening, they darted their little 
fists like engines at each other. But Tom, marking the quickness, 
and feeling the smart of Harry's strokes, suddenly leaped within 
his arms, bore him down to the earth, and triumphantly gave him 
the first rising blow. 

Harry rose indignant, but warned by the strength of his adversary 
to better caution. He now fought more aloof; and, as Tom pressed 
upon him, he at once guarded, struck, and wheeled like an ex- 
perienced cock, without quitting the pit of honour. 

Tom, finding himself wholly foiled by this Parthian method of 
combat, again rushed upon his enemy, who was now aware of the 
shock. They closed, they grappled, they caught each other by the 
shoulders, joined head to head, and breast to breast, and stood like 
two pillars, merely supported by their bearing against one another. 
Again they shifted the left arm, caught each other about the neck, 
and cuffed and punched at face and stomach, without mercy or re- 
mission, till Tom, impatient of this length of battle, gave Harry 
a side-swing, and Harry, giving Tom a trip at the same time, they 
fell side by side together upon the earth. 

They rose and retreated to draw breath, as by mutual consent. 
They glared on one another with an eye of vindictive apprehen- 
sion. For neither of them could now boast of more optics than 
Polyphemus; and from their foreheads to their shoes they were 
in one gore of blood. 

Again they flew upon each other, again they struck, foined, and 
defended, and alternately pressed on and retreated in turns, till 
Harry, spying an opening, darted his fist like a shot into the re- 
maining eye of his enemy. Tom, finding himself in utter dark- 
ness, instantly sprung upon his foe, and endeavoured to grapple ; 
but Harry with equal agility avoided the shock, and traversing here 
and there, beat his adversary at pleasure ; till Tom cried out I 
yield, I yield, Harry, for I can't see to fight any more. 

Then Harry took Tom by the hand, and led him to his clothes, 
and, having assisted him to dress, he next did the same friendly office 
to himself. Then, arm-in-arm, they returned much more loving in 
reality than they set out, having been beaten into a true respect 
and affection for each other. 

Some time before this the footman had joined his young lord, with 
the several implements required for nutting. They had already 
pulled down great quantities ; the young quality had stuffed their 
pockets ; and the little plebeians who had assisted were now per- 
mitted to be busy in gathering up the refuse. When all turning 
at the cry of There is Harry, there is Tom ; they perceived our 
two champions advancing leisurely, but hand in hand, as friends 
and brothers. 

They had left their clothes unbuttoned for the benefit of the 
cooling air ; and, as they approached, their companions were frozen 
into astonishment at the sight of their two friends all covered 
with crimson. 



TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 43 

They were neither able to advance to meet them, nor to speak 
when they arrived. Till Lord Dicky first inquired into this bloody 
catastrophe, and Harry remaining wholly silent on the subject, 
blind Tommy cried out Why, Master Dicky, the truth is, that 
Harry beat me because I beat you. Then Dicky, feeling a sudden 
gush of gratitude and affection rising up in his bosom, looked wist- 
fully on his brother, and said with a plaintive voice O brother 
Harry, brother Harry, you are sadly hurt ; and, turning about, he 
began to weep most bitterly. But Harry said Pshaw! brother 
Dicky, don't cry man, I don't matter it of the head of a brass pin. 
Then turning to the footman with Tom still in his hand, he 
cried Here, John, take that bag of nuts and poor blind Tommy 
to my mammy's, and tell dada that I desire him to see them both 
safe home. 

Friend. Sir, your hero is indeed a hero ; he must be every 
body's hero. 

Author. Sir, you do me a vast honour ; and I should be proud 
of your further instructions toward his supporting the dignity of 
the character you give him. Pray, what are the ingredient quali- 
ties of which a hero is compounded? what idea have you formed 
of such a personage? tell me, I beseech you, what is a hero, my 
good friend? 

Friend. Pshaw what a question! every fool knows that. A 
hero is as though one should say a man of high achievement 
who performs famous exploits who does things that are heroical 
and in all his actions and demeanour is a hero indeed. Why do 
you laugh? I will give you the instances approved throughout the 
world ; recorded and duly celebrated by poets, painters, sculptors, 
statuaries, and historians. There was the Assyrian Ninus, the Se- 
sostris of Egypt, the Cyrus of Persia, the Alexander of Greece, the 
Csesar of Eome, and partly in our own days, there was the Cond6 of 

France, the Charles of Sweden, and Persia's Kouli Kan. What 

the plague does the fellow laugh at? 

Author. I am laughing to think what a blockhead Themistocles 
was. Being asked whom he considered as the greatest of heroes 
Not him who conquers but who saves, replied Themistocles ; not 
the man who ruins but the man who erects ; who of a village can 
make a city, or turn a despicable people into a great nation. 

Friend. According to your notion of heroism, that boor and bar- 
barian, Peter Alexiowitz of Russia, was the greatest hero that ever 
lived. 

Author. True, my friend ; for, of a numerous people, he disem- 
bruted every one except himself. But then, in all equity, he ought 
to divide his glory with Kate the washerwoman, who humanized 
the man that humanized a nation. 

Friend. Whom do you take to have been the greatest hero of 
antiquity? 

Author. Lycurgus, without comparison the greatest of heroes and 
the greatest of legislators. In those very early days, the people of 
Lacedrcmon were extremely rude and ignorant ; they acknowledged 
no laws save the dictates of their own will, or the will of their 



44 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

rulers. Lycurgus might have assumed the sceptre, but his ambi- 
tion aspired to a much more elevated and durable dominion over the 
souls, manners, and conduct of this people and their posterity. He 
framed a body of the most extraordinary institutions that ever 
entered into the heart or head of man. Next to those of our 
Divine Legislator, they were intended to form a new creature. 
He prevailed upon the rich to make an equal distribution of their 
lands with the poor. He prohibited the use of all such money as 
was current among other nations, and thereby prohibited the im- 
portation of the means and materials of pomp and luxury. He 
enjoined them to feed in common, on simple and frugal fare. He 
forbid all gorgeousness of furniture and apparel. In short, he 
endeavoured to suppress every sensual and selfish desire, by in- 
junctions of daily exercise, toil, and hardship, a patient endurance 
of pain, and a noble contempt of death. At length, feigning some 
occasion of being abroad for a season, he exacted an oath from the 
Lacedaemonians, that they should strictly observe his laws, without 
the smallest infringement, till his return. Thus, for the love of his 
country he went into perpetual banishment from it. And he took 
measures at his death, that his body should never be found, lest it 
should be carried back to Sparta, and give his countrymen a colour 
for dissolving their oath. 

Friend. Laying Peter aside, who think you was the greatest hero 
among the moderns ? 

Author. To confess the truth, among all that I have heard or 
read of, the hero whom I most affect was a madman, and the 
lawgiver whom I most affect was a fool. 

Friend. Troth, I believe you never would have been the writer, 
you are at this day, if you had not adopted somewhat of both the 
said qualities. But come, unriddle, I beseech you ; where may this 
favourite hero and legislator be found? 

Author. In a fragment of the Spanish history, bequeathed to 
the world by one Signior Cervantes. 

Friend. O ! have you led me to my old acquaintance ? pray, has 
not your Pegasus some smatch of the qualities of the famous 
liosinante ? 

Author. Quite as chaste, I assure you. But I perceive that you 
think I am drolling ; you do not suppose that you can ever be 
seriously of the same opinion. Yet, if you demand of your own 
memory, for what have the great heroes throughout history been 
renowned ? it must answer, for mischief merely, for spreading deso- 
lation and calamity among men. How greatly, how gloriously, how 
divinely superior was our hero of the Mancha, who went about 
righting of wrongs, and redressing of injuries, lifting up the fallen, 
and pulling down those whom iniquity had exalted! In this his 
marvellous undertaking, what buffetings, what bruisings, what 
trampling of ribs, what pounding of packstaves did his bones not 
endure! (Mine ached at the recital.) But toil was his bed of 
down, and the house of pain was to him a bower of delight, w r hile 
he considered himself as engaged in giving ease, advantage, and 
happiness to others. If events did not answer to the enterprises 
of his heart, it is not to be imputed to the man but to his malady ; 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 45 

for, had his power and success been as extensive as his benevolence, 
all things awry upon earth would instantly have been set as straight 
as a cedar. 

But let me turn, with reverence, to kiss the hem of the robes of 
the most respectable of all governors and legislators, Sancho Pansa. 
What judgments ! what institutions ! how are Minos, and Solon, and 
the inspired of the goddess ^Egeria here eclipsed ! Sancho, thou 
wast a peasant, thou wast illiterate, thou wast a dunce for a man, 
but an angel for a governor ; inasmuch as, contrary to the custom 
of all other governors, thou didst not desire any thing, thou didst 
not wish for any thing, thine eye was not bent to any thing save the 
good of thy people ! therefore, thou could st not stray, thou hadst 
no other way to travel. Could ^Esop's log have been moved to 
action upon the same principle, the regency of storks had not pre- 
vailed among men. How am I provoked, Pansa, when I see thee 
insulted ! How am I grieved when I find thee deposed ! Saving 
the realms of a certain majesty, I say, and sigh to myself that 
the whole earth were as thine island of Barataria, and thou, Sancho, 
the legislator and the ruler thereof! 

Friend. I feel conviction ; I confess it. But tell me, I pray you, 
why has the world, through all ages and nations, universally as- 
cribed heroism and glory to conquest? 

Author. Through the respect, as I take it, that they have for 
power. Man is by nature weak ; he is born in and to a state of 
dependence ; he therefore naturally seeks and looks about for help ; 
and where he observes the greatest power, it is there that he 
applies and prays for protection. Now, though this power should 
be exerted to his damage instead of defence, it makes no alteration 
in his reverence for it ; he bows while he trembles, and while he 
detests he worships. In the present case, it is with man as it is 
with God ; he is not so awful and striking ; he is not so much 
attended to in the sunshine and gentle dews of his providence and 
benignity, as in his lightnings and thunders, his clouds and his 
tempests. 

Hero, heros, and ijpws, in the three languages, signify a demigod, 
or one who is superior to mere man. But how can this superiority 
or distinction be shewn ? The serene acts of beneficence, the small 
and still voice of goodness, are neither accompanied by noise nor 
ostentation. It is uproar, and tumult rather, the tumbling of 
sacked cities, the shrieks of outraged matrons, and the groans of 
dying nations, that fill the trump of fame. Men of power and 
ambition find distinction and glory very readily attainable in this 
way; as it is incomparably more easy to destroy than to create, to 
give death than to give life, to pull down than to build up, to bring 
devastation and misery rather than plenty and peace and prosperity 
upon earth. 

Friend. Were not mankind, in this instance, as blind to their 
own interests, as they were iniquitous in giving glory where shame 
alone was due? 

Author. In so doing, they proved at once the dupes and victims 
of their own folly. Praise a child for his genius in pranks of 
mischief and malevolence, and you quicken him in the direct road 



46 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

to the gallows. It is just so that this wise world has bred up its 
heroic reprobates, by ascribing honour and acclamation to deeds 
that called loudly for infamy and the gibbet ; for the world was an 
ass from its very commencement, and it will continue a dunderhead 
to the end. 

From the beginning of things (a long time ago) the joint invention 
of mankind has discovered but two methods of procuring sustenance 
on earth : the first by the labour of their own hands, the second by 
employing the hands of others. 

All therefore are excluded, or at least ought to be excluded, from 
such a world, who refuse to labour, or, what is still worse, who 
disturb and prevent the labour of others. 

Among those who will not labour, we may number all who have 
the happiness of being born to no manner of end ; such as the 
Monks of every country, the Dervises of Persia, the Brahmins of 
India, the Mandarins of China, and the Gentlemen of these free and 
polished nations. 

These have nothing to do but to sleep it, to wake it ; to eat it, 
to drink it ; to dance it, to doze it ; to riot it, to roar it ; and to 
rejoice in the happy earnest which this world has given them of the 
jollities of the next. 

Among those who disturb the labour of others, I reckon all your 
rascally Alexanders and Caesars, whether ancient or modern, who in 
their fits of frenzy and folly scamper about, breaking the lanterns 
and beating the watch of this world, to the great amazement of 
women and terror of little children ; and who seem to think that 
Heaven gave noses and heads for no end in nature but to be 
blooded and cracked. In short, I have no patience when I hear 
talk of these fellows. I am not half so fretted when I hear my 
own works read. Go on, I request you, it may happen to put me 
in temper. 

CHAPTER V. 

THE young gentlemen were now upon their return, and as they 
approached the house they crowded about Harry to keep him from 
being seen, till he took an opportunity of slipping away and stealing 
up to his chamber. He now grew stiff and sore ; and his nurse, 
having got an intimation of what had happened, hurried up to him, 
and wept over him with abundant tears of cordial affection. She 
straight undressed and put him to bed ; and having ordered some 
white-wine whey, of which she made him drink plentifully, she 
also undressed and went to bed to him ; and Harry, casting his 
little arm about her neck, and putting his head in her bosom, was 
fast asleep in a twinkling. 

By this time John had returned from the execution of his com- 
mission. He had been fully apprized by Tommy, on the road, of 
all the circumstances relating to this bloody business ; and, going 
to his lord and lady, he gave them the whole detail, occasionally 
dwelling and expatiating on Harry's courage, his prowess, his 
honour, and his generosity. They could now no longer forbear 
indulging themselves with the sight of a child in whom they held 






THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 47 

themselves honoured above all titles. They stole gently up-stairs, 
and having got a peep at Harry and observing that he was fast 
asleep, they stole as softly back again, each inwardly exulting in 
their glorious boy. 

Our hero was scarce recovered from his wounds and bruises, 
when on a clay he met a little beggar-boy at the hall-door, half 
naked, and whining and shivering with cold. His heart was in- 
stantly touched with wonted compassion, and taking him by the 
hand What is your name, my poor little boy? says Harry. 
Neddy, sir, says the child. And where 's your daddy and mammy? 
0, sir ! answered Ned, I have no daddy nor mammy in the world 
wide. Don't cry, don't cry! says Harry. I have several daddies 
and mammies, and I will give you one or two of them. But where 
did you leave your clothes, Neddy? I have not any, sir, reph'ed 
the child in a piteous accent. Well, well, it don't matter, Neddy, 
for I have more clothes too, says Harry. So, taking him again by 
the hand, he led him up to his apartment without being perceived of 
any; and, helping him to strip, he ran to his closet for the shirt which 
he had last thrown off, and put it on the new-comer with equal haste 
and delight. He next ran for the entire suit that his bearded dada 
had given him ; and having helped and shewn him how to put on 
the breeches, he drew on the stockings and shoes with his own 
hands. To these succeeded the coat and waistcoat ; and Ned was 
now full as well rigged as his benefactor. 

Never had our hero enjoyed himself so highly as while he was 
thus employed. When he had finished his operations, he chuckled 
and smiled, turned Ned round and round, walked here and there 
about him, and was as proud of him as if he had been wholly of 
his own making. 

He now again became thoughtful, forecasting in his mind the 
particulars that might further be requisite for the accommodation 
of his guest ; for he was grown too fond of him to think of parting 
suddenly. He then recollected an adjoining lumber-room, and 
taking Ned with him, they found a little old mattress, which, with 
united strength, they dragged forth, and lodged in a convenient 
corner of the closet. To this they added a pair of old blankets ; 
and Harry, having spread them for Ned's repose in the best manner 
be was able, asked his dependant if he was not hungry. Yes very, 
very hungry, indeed, sir! cried Ned. No sooner said than Harry 
flew down to the kitchen, and looking about, and spying a large 
porringer of milk and a luncheon of bread, that one of the servants 
had provided for a young favourite of their own, he seized upon 
them like a hawk, and, hastening again to his chamber, delivered 
them to Neddy, who already had half-devoured them with his 
eyes. Ned instantly fell to with the rapture of a cormorant, or 
any rapture that can be supposed less than that of his friend Harry, 
who stood over him with the feelings of a parent turtle that feeds 
his young with the meat derived from his own bowels. 

For a few days Harry kept his dependant shut up in his chamber, 
or closet, without the privity of any of the family, except nurse, 
to whom he had revealed the affair under the seal of the strictest 
secrecy. 



48 TttE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

But on a cross-day, Susy, the housemaid, having entered with a 
new broom into our hero's apartment, perceived in a comer the 
tattered deposit of Ned's original robings, and lifting them at a 
cautious distance with a finger and thumb, she perceived also, as 
many other philosophers have done, that there is no part of this 
globe which is not peopled with nations of animals, if man had but 
attention and optics duly accommodated to the vision. She dropped 
the living garment as though she had taken up a burning horse- 
shoe ; and was instantly peopled, by her prolific imagination, with 
tribes of the same species from head to foot. 

In this fit of disgust, Susy happened, unfortunately, to step into 
the closet, and spied Ned in a dark corner, where he had squatted 
and drawn himself up to the size of a hedgehog. 

She immediately flew at him, like one of the Eumenides, and 
dragged him forth to the light, as Hercules is said to have hauled 
Cacus from his den. She questioned him with a voice of implacable 
authority, and Ned, with humble and ingenuous tears, confessed 
the whole adventure. But Susy, no way melted, exclaimed 
What, sirrah! have you and your master Harry a mind to 
breed an affection in the house? I will remit of no such doings, 
for I have an utter conversion to beggars'-brats and vermin. She 
then commanded him to bundle up his old rags, and, driving him 
down-stairs before her, she dismissed him from the hall-door with 
a pair of smart boxes on the side of his head, and ordered him 
never more to defend her sight. 

Poor Ned went weeping and wailing from the door, when who 
should he see, at about fifty paces distant, but his beloved patron 
Harry, who had been cutting a switch from the next hedge. To 
him he ran with precipitation. Harry, touched with a compassion, 
not free from resentment, to see his favourite in tears, demanded 
the cause of his apparent distress, which Ned truly related. Our 
hero thereupon became thoughtful and moody; and, judging that 
Susy had not acted thus without authority, he conceived a general 
disgust at a family who had treated him so injuriously in the 
person of his Neddy; but, comforting his dependant the best he 
could Come, Neddy, says he, don't cry, my man. I will bring 
you, that I will, to my own dear dada, and he will welcome and 
love you for my sake. Then, making his way through a small 
breach in the neighbouring hedge, he ordered Ned to follow him, 
and flew across the field like a bird of passage, in a direct line to 
his patron's. 

The old gentleman saw him approaching, and gave sign to his 
ancient domestic, who withdrew with precipitation. He received 
and caressed our hero with more than usual transport And who, 
my dear, says he, is this pretty little boy that you have got with 
you ? Harry then, like the Grecian Demosthenes, taking time to 
warm himself with the recollection of his own ideas, and setting his 
person forth with an action and ardour that determined to prevail, 
made the following oration 

Why, dada, I must tell you how this poor little boy, for he is 
a very poor little boy, and his name is Neddy, sir, and he has no 
friend in the wide world but you and I, sir ; and so, sir, as I was 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 49 

telling you, he comes to the door, crying sadly for cold and hunger, 
for he had no clothes, no daddy nor mammy at all, sir, and I had 
a many of them, and that was not fair you know, sir ; and I was 
in the humour to give him all the dadas and mammas I had in the 
world except you, sir, and mammy nurse. And so I took him up- 
stairs, and I put the clothes upon him that you gave me when 
I was a poor little boy, sir ; for nobody had to say to them but you 
and I, sir ; and I knew that you would pity poor little Neddy more 
than I pitied him myself, sir. And so, dada, they took my poor 
little Neddy to-day, and boxed him, and beat him sadly, and turned 
him out of doors ; and so I met him crying and roaring, and so you 
know, sir, how I had nothing to do but to bring him to you, sir, 
or to stay and cry with him for company, sir. 

Here orator Harry ceased to speak, except by his tears, which 
he could no longer restrain, and which proceeded to plead most 
emphatically for him. But his patron took him in his arms, and 
kissed the drops from both eyes, and said Do not cry, my darling, 
for I am yours, my Harry, and all that I have is yours ; and if you 
had brought a whole regiment of poor little Neddies with you, 
they should be all welcome to me, for your sake, my Harry. 

Then Harry sprung up and caught his patron about the neck, 
so that it was some time before the old gentleman could get loose. 
But Harry, says he, I am going just now to leave this country ; 
will you and your man Neddy come along with me? Over the 
world wide, dada! says Harry; but where are you going, sir? 
I am going a-begging, Harry. O that will be brave sport! says 
Harry. I will tell you what you shall do, dada. "What's that, my 
love? Why, sir, says Harry, you must get a great bag, like the 
old man and little child that was at door t'other day ; and Neddy 
and I will beg for you, sir ; and we will put all that we get into 
your great bag, as that good little child did for his daddy, without 
touching a bit ; though he was hungry enough himself, poor fellow, 
I warrant. But don't let us go to beg to papa's door, sir ; for if 
you do, they will box and beat us, and drive us away, as they did 
to poor little Neddy to-day, sir. 

The old gentleman, thereat, had his countenance divided betwixt 
the rising tear and the bursting laugh. But, taking Harry by the 
hand, he said No, no, my heavenly creature, I am not going to 
beg of any man living, but to beg of God to pour down his full 
weight of blessings upon my Harry, and to endeavour to confirm 
them to him, both here and hereafter, by my care and instructions. 

Having thus spoken, he put a large cake into the hand of each 
of the children, and causing them to drink a full glass of small 
white wine, he took them into a back-yard, where a light coach 
with six horses, and three servants ready mounted, attended ; and 
having placed his young companions, and seated himself between 
them, away the coach drove at a sweeping gallop. 

About the time that our hero and his patron set out, nurse went 
up-stairs with a most bountiful cut of home-baked bread and butter, 
for the amusement of the young caitiff whom she had left in the 
closet ; but not finding him there, she hastily dropped her pro- 
vender on the first window she met, and, hurrying down to the 

E 



50 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

kitchen, earnestly inquired for the little beggar-boy whom Master 
Harry had taken into his service. At this question all the servants 
stood in silent amazement except Susy, who bridling up, and as- 
suming the whole importance of her station Why, nurse, sa; 
you must not oppose that I am come here to sweep and to clean 
after lousy little flagrants; it was enough to breed an antacrion, 
that it was, hi the house ; so what magnifies many words, I took 
the little dirty brat, and cuflTd him out of doors. You did, hussy, 
says nurse ; you dare to affront and vex my child my little man 
the honour and pride of all the family! And so saying, she ups 
with her brawny arm, and gave Susy such a douse on the side of 
the head, as left her fast asleep for an hour and upward. Then, 
running up-stairs again, she went searching and clamouring for 
Harry about the house, in order to comfort and condole with him 
for his loss. 

Dinner was now served up, and the company seated, and all the 
servants ran severally here and there, repeatedly summoning Master 
Harry to attend ; but Harry was out of hearing by many a mile. 
When the cloth was removed, nurse entered with an aspect, half 
in tears and half distracted, and exclaimed that her child was not 
to be found. And what, nurse, says the earl, do you think is be- 
come of him ? I hope, my lord, says she, that he is either strayed 
to his daddy or to the dumb gentleman's. Then messengers were 
instantly despatched to both houses, who speedily returned with 
tidings that Master Harry had not been seen at his foster-father's, 
and that no one was at home at the house of the dumb gentleman. 

The business now became serious and alarming ; the whole house 
was in commotion, and all the domestics, and our hero's loving 
nurse, with Lord Dicky in her hand, ran searching through the 
gardens, the fields, and the groves, that resounded on all sides with 
the name of the absentee. 

On their return from a disquisition, as fruitless as solicitous, 
nurse declared her apprehensions that Harry had gone off with a 
little favourite boy whom he had taken into service, and whom the 
housemaid that morning had beaten out of doors. Susy, being 
nearly recovered, and now called and questioned hereon, was com- 
pelled to confess the fact, though in terms less haughty and less 
elegant than usual ; when my lord, looking sternly at her And 
who, you impudent slut, he cried, gave you authority to turn any 
one out of my house whom my noble and generous boy was pleased 
to bring in? Get you instantly away, and never let me be so un- 
happy as to see that face again. By this time the whole village 
and neighbourhood, as well as this noble family, were in trouble 
and alarms for the loss of their little favourite, when a countryman 
entered in a sweaty haste, and desired without preface to be ad- 
mitted to the earl. My lord, says he, I think I can give you some 
news of your dear child. As I was returning home on the London 
road, I saw a coach and six driving towards me at a great rate, 
and though it passed me in haste, I marked that the gentleman 
with the beard was in it, and that he had two children with him, 
one on each hand, though I had not time to observe their faces. 

Here is something for your news, said the earl; it may be 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 51 

as you say. Here, John, take a posse of the servants along with 
you ; go in haste to that man's house ; if no one answers, break open 
the door, and bring me word of what you can learn concerning him. 

John, who was the house-steward, hurried instantly on his 
commission ; and finding all in silence after loud and repeated 
knockings, he and his myrmidons burst open the door, and rushing 
in ran up and down through all the apartments. They found the 
house richly furnished, a library of choice books above-stairs, a 
beaufiet full of massy plate, and every thing in order, as if pre- 
pared for the reception of a family of distinction. At this they all 
stood astonished, till John, casting his eye toward a table in the 
street parlour, perceived a paper, which he hastily snatched up, 
and found to be a letter duly folded and sealed, and addressed to 
his lord. Exulting at this discovery, he left some of the servants 
to watch the goods, and hurried back with all possible speed to 
his master. 

My lord, says John, entering, and striving to recover breath, the 
dumb gentleman, as they call him, must be a main rich man, for the 
very furniture of his house cannot be worth less than some 
thousands of pounds. John then presented the letter, which the 
earl hastily broke open, and found to be as follows : 

"MY LOKD, I am at length presented with an opportunity of 
carrying off your little Harry the greatest treasure that ever 
parents were blessed with. 

"The distress that I feel in foreseeing the affliction that his 
absence will cause to your whole family, has not been able to 
prevail for the suspension of this enterprise, as the child's interest 
and happiness outweighs, with me, all other considerations. 

" Permit me, however, to assure your lordship that our darling 
is in very safe and very affectionate hands ; and that it shall be the 
whole concern and employment of my life to render and to return 
him to you, in due time, the most accomplished and most perfect 
of all human beings. 

" In the mean while your utmost search and inquiry after us 
will be fruitless. I leave to your lordship my house and furniture 
as a pledge and assurance of the integrity of my intentions. 
And am, &c." 

The mystery of our hero's flight was now, in a great measure, 
unravelled ; but no one could form any rational conjecture touch- 
ing the motives of the old gentleman's procedure in the case ; 
and all were staggered at his leaving such a mass of wealth behind 
him. 

As the falling on of a dark night rendered all pursuit, for that 
time, impracticable, my lord ordered the servants to bed, that they 
might rise before day; and then to take every horse he had, 
coach-cattle and all, and to muster and mount the young men 
of the village, and to pursue after the fugitives by different roads, 
according to the best likelihood or intelligence they might receive. 

In fhis hopeful prospect, the house was again in some measure 
composed ; all, except poor nurse, who would not be comforted, 

2 



52 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

neither could be prevailed upon to enter in at the doors ; but 
all night on the cold stairs, or rambling through the raw air, 
continued clapping and wringing her hands, and bewailing the irre- 
parable loss of her Harry. 

On the following day, my lord ordered a minute inventory to 
be taken of all the furniture in the forsaken mansion-house ; and 
further appointed Harry's foster-father, with his family, to enter 
into possession, and to take care of the eifects, till such time as 
the proprietor should renew his claim. 

After three tedious days, and as many expecting nights, the 
posse that went in quest of our runaways returned, all drooping 
and dejected, most of them slowly leading their overspent horses, 
and universally bespattered or covered with mire, without any 
equivalent of comfortable tidings to balance the weight of their 
languor and fatigue. 

The happiness or wretchedness of human life, as it should seem, 
does not so much depend on the loss or acquisition of real ad- 
vantage, as on the fluctuating opinions and imaginations of men. 
The absence of this infant, who, but a few months before, had no 
manner of interest in the views, affections, or solicitudes of this 
noble family, appeared now as the loss of all their honours and 
fortunes: a general face of mourning seemed to darken every 
apartment ; and my lord and lady no more paid visits, nor received 
public company. They were, however, inventive in many contri- 
vances for amusing and consoling their darling Dicky; but even 
this was to little purpose, for he was often found silently languish- 
ing in corners, or crying 0, where's my brother Harry, my own 
sweet brother Harry ! shall I never see my own brother Harry 
any more ? 

My lord had already despatched a multitude of circular letters 
to all his acquaintances, with other notices, throughout the king- 
dom, containing offers of ample rewards for the recovery of his 
child. But finding all ineffectual, he caused advertisements to 
the same purpose to be repeatedly inserted in all the public 
papers ; as the same, no doubt, are still extant, and may be found 
in the musty chronicles of those days. 

Within a few weeks after the publishing of these advertisements, 
my lord received a letter respecting his son Harry, that afforded 
great consolation to him and his lady ; insomuch that, with the 
help of the lenient hand of time, in less than the space of twelve 
months this noble family were restored to their former cheerfulness 
and tranquillity. 

But to return to the situation in which we left our hero : the 
coach drove on at a round rate, and the children continued in high 
glee, and thought this kind of conveyance the finest sport imaginable. 

When they entered a space on the first common, the coachman 
looked about to take care that no one was in sight ; and, turning 
to the right hand, he held gently on till he came to another great 
road, on which he drove at his former rate. This he did again 
at the next common, and coming to another road that led also to 
London, and night now approaching, he put up at the first great inn 
he came to. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 53 

Harry's patron had the precaution to keep his great-coat muffled 
about his face, so that no one could observe his beard, till they were 
shown to a room, and fire and candles were lighted up. Then his 
ancient friend and domestic having provided scissors and imple- 
ments for shaving, locked the door, and set to work in the presence 
of the children. 

Harry was all attention during the whole process ; and when the 
operation was quite completed, he drew near to his patron with a 
cautious kind of jealousy, and looking up to his face with the tears 
in his little eyes Speak to me, sir, says he ; pray, speak to me. 
It is, answered the old gentleman, the only comfort of my life to 
be with you, and to speak to you, my Harry. The child, hearing 
the well-known voice of friendship, immediately cleared again, and 
reaching up his little arms to embrace his patron 0, indeed, say? 
he, I believe you are my own dada still ! 

Though Harry was now reconciled to the identity of his friend, 
yet he felt a secret regret for the absence of his beard ; for he 
loved all and every part of him so entirely that the loss of a hair 
appeared a loss and a want to the heart of Harry. 

After an early supper, and two or three small glasses of wine 
per man, this gentleman, whom his servants had now announced 
by the name of Mr. Fenton, proposed hide-and-go-seek to his 
associates. This invitation was accepted with transport ; and after 
they were cloyed with hide-and-seek, they all played tagg till they 
were well warmed. 

Mr. Fenton ordered a pallet into the chamber for James, his 
faithful domestic, and little Ned. Then, helping to undress Harry, 
he put him first to bed ; and hastening after, he took his darling 
to his bosom, and tenderly pressed him to a heart that loved him 
more than all the world, and more than that world ten times told. 

In about three days more they arrived safe at Hampstead, and 
stopping at the court of a large house, that was delightfully 
situated, they were welcomed by a gentlewomanly-looking matron 
whom James had fixed for housekeeper, about a fortnight before. 

The next day Mr. Fenton and his blithe companions were 
attended at table by James and the two footmen. 

As soon as the latter grace was said, and the cloth taken away 
Harry, says Mr. Fenton, it is now our turn to wait on James and 
his fellow-servants ; for God made us all to be servants to each 
other : one man is not born a bit better than another ; and he is 
the best and greatest of all who serves and attends the most, and 
requires least to be served and attended upon. And my precious, 
he that is a king to-day, if so it shall please God, may become a 
beggar to-morrow, and it is good that people should be prepared 
against all that may happen. 

"Having so said, he took his associates down to the hall, just as 
the servants had sat down to dinner. He gave his domestics the 
wink, and beginning to set the example, asked Mrs. Hannah, and 
Mr. James, and Mr. Frank, and Mr. Andrew, what they would 
please to have ? The servants readily falling in with their master's 
scheme, ordered Harry to bring such a thing, and Ned to fetch such 
a thing, and Harry to do this, and Harry to do that : while Harry, 



54 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

with a graceful action, and more beautiful than Ganymede, the 
cupbearer of the gods, flew cheerfully about from side to side, pre- 
venting the wishes of all at table ; so that they poured upon him 
a thousand blessings from the bottom of their hearts, and would 
not now have parted with him for the mighty rewards which his 
father some time after proposed for his recovery. 

Within a fortnight after this, Mr. James, the house-steward, fur- 
nished a large lumber-room with hundreds of coats, out-coats, 
shirts, waistcoats, breeches, stockings, and shoes, of different sorts 
and sizes, but all of warm and clean, though homely, materials. 

When this was done, Mr. Fenton led his favourite up to the 
stores, and said My Harry, you see all these things, and I make 
a present of all these things to my Harry. And now tell me, my 
love, what will you do with them? Why, dada, says Harry, you 
know that I cannot wear them myself. No, my dear, says Mr. 
Fenton, for you have clothes enough beside, and some of them 
would not fit you, and others would smother you. What then 
will you do with them, will you burn them, or throw them away ? 
O, that would be very naughty and wicked indeed ! says Harry. 
No, dada, as I do not want them myself, I will give them to those 
that do. That will be very honestly done of you, says Mr. Fenton; 
for, in truth, they have a better right to them, my Harry, than you 
have, and that which you cannot use cannot belong to you. So 
that, in giving you these things, my darling, it should seem as 
if I made you no gift at all. O, a very sweet gift ! says Harry. 
How is that? says Mr. Fenton. Why, the gift of doing good to 
other people, sir. Mr. Fenton, then stepping back, and gazing on 
our hero, cried Whoever attempts to instruct thee, my angel, 
must himself be instructed of heaven, who speaks by that sweet 
mouth. 

But Harry, it would not be discreet of you to give these things 
to the common beggars who come every day to our door; give 
them victuals and halfpence or pence a-piece, and welcome ; but 
if you give such beggars twenty suits of clothes, they will cast 
them all off and put on their rags again, to move people to pity 
them. But when you spy any poor travellers going the road, and 
your eyes see that they are naked, or your heart tells you that 
they are hungry, then do not wait till they beg of you, but go and 
beg of them to favour you with their acceptance ; then take them 
unto the fire and warm them and feed them, and when you have 
so done, take them up to your storeroom and clothe them with 
whatever you think they want ; and believe me, my Harry, when- 
ever you are cold, or hungry, or wounded, or in want, or in sickness 
yourself, the very remembrance of your having clothed, and fed, 
and cured, and comforted the naked and the hungry, the wounded 
and the afflicted, will be warmth, and food, and medicine, and balm 
to your own mind. 

While Mr. Fenton spoke, the muscles of Harry's expressive 
countenance, like an equally tuned instrument, uttered unisons to 
every word he heard. 

From this day forward, Harry and Ned by turns were frequently 
out on the watch ; and often single, or in pairs, or by whole families, 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 65 

Harry would take in a poor father and mother, with their help- 
less infants, driven perhaps from house or home by fire or other 
misfortune, or oppressive landlord, or ruthless creditor ; and having 
warmed, and fed, and clothed, and treated the old ones as his 
parents, and the little ones as his brothers and sisters, he would 
give them additional money for charges on the road, and send them 
away the happiest of all people except himself. 

By this time, Mr. Fenton had inquired into the circumstances 
and characters of all the poor in the town and throughout the 
precincts ; and, having refuted or confirmed the intelligence he had 
received, by a personal inspection and visit from house to house, 
and having made entries of all such as he deemed real objects 
and worthy of his beneficence, he invited the heads of the several 
families to take a dinner with him every Sunday at his hall. 

On the following Sunday there came about thirty of these 
visitants, which number soon increased to fifty weekly guests. 

On entering, they found the cloth ready spread, and Mr. James, 
having counted heads, laid a crown in silver upon every plate, 
which first course was a most relishing sauce to all that followed. 
A plentiful dinner was then introduced, and the guests being seated, 
Mr. Fenton, Harry, Ned, and the four domestics attended, and 
disposed themselves in a manner the most ready to supply the 
wants of the company. The guests, all abashed and confounded 
at what they saw, sat some time with open mouth and unswallowed 
victuals ; much less did they presume to apply to the waiters for 
any article they wanted, till, being encouraged and spirited up by 
the cheerfulness, ease, and readiness of their attendants, they be- 
came by degrees quite happy and jovial ; and, after a saturating 
meal and an enlivening cup, they departed with elevated spirits, 
with humanized manners, and with hearts warmed in affection 
toward every member of this extraordinary house. 

By the means of this weekly bounty, these reviving families were 
soon enabled to clear their little debts to the chandlers, which had 
compelled them to take up every thing at the dearest hand. They 
were also further enabled to purchase wheels and other implements, 
with the materials of flax and wool, for employing the late idle 
hands of their household. They now appeared decently clad, and 
with happy countenances ; their wealth increased with their indus- 
try, and the product of the employment of so many late useless 
members became a real accession of wealth to the public. So true 
it is that the prosperity of this world, and of every nation and 
society therein, depends solely on the industry or manufactures of 
the individuals. And so much more nobly did this private patron 
act than all ancient legislators, or modern patrons and landlords, 
whose selfishness, if they had but common cunning, or common- 
sense, might instruct them to increase their proper rents, and en- 
rich their native country, by supplying the hands of all the poor 
within their influence with the implements and materials of the 
prosperity of each. 

In the mean time, Mrs. Hannah daily instructed the children in 
the reading of English ; neither was Mr. Fenton inattentive to any 
means that might preserve and promote the health, action, and 



56 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

corporal excellences of his little champion. He had a large lawn 
behind his garden ; and hither he summoned, three times in every 
week, all the boys of the vicinage who were between two years 
advanced above the age of our hero. To these he appointed pre- 
miums for foot-ball, hurling, wrestling, leaping, running, cudgelling, 
and buffing. But the champions were enjoined to invest their fists 
with little mufflers, insomuch that, how great soever their vigour 
might be, the bruises that they gave stopped short of mortality. 

Now, though these premiums were almost universally adjudged 
to the party of which Harry then happened to be a member, or 
individually to himself for his single prowess and pre-eminence, yet 
he never would consent to bear the prize from the field, but either 
gave it to some favourite among those with whom he had been 
associated, or to the particular champion whom he had worsted in 
contest ; for he felt the shame and defeat of his mortified adversary, 
and consolingly hinted at the injustice of the judges, and reformed 
their error by the restoration of the reward. 

One day, while Harry was watching to intercept poor travellers, 
as eagerly as a fowler watches for the rising of his game, he heard 
a plaintive voice behind the hedge, as he thought, in the opposite 
field. He flew across the road, and, passing through a small turn- 
utile, soon found the unhappy objects he sought for. He stood for 
some time like a statue, and his compassion became too strong for 
tears or utterance; but, suddenly turning and flying back again, 
he rushed with precipitation into the room where Mr. Fenton was 
writing a letter. What is the matter? said Mr. Fenton, starting 
what has frighted you, my Harry what makes you so pale ? To 
this Harry replied not ; but catching hold of his hand, and pulling 
with all his force O come ! says he ; O come, dada, and see ! 

Mr. Fenton then got up, and suffered himself to be led where 
the child pleased to conduct him, without another word being 
asked or answered on either side. 

When they were come into the field, Mr. Fenton observed a man 
Bitting on the ground. His clothes seemed, from head to foot, as 
the tattered remainder of better days. Through a squalid wig and 
beard, his pale face appeared just tinctured with a faint and sickly 
red; and his hollow eyes were fixed upon the face of a woman, 
whose head he held on his knees, and who looked to be dead, or 
dying, though without any apparent agony ; while a male infant, 
about four years of age, was half stretched on the ground, and half 
across the woman's lap, with its little nose pinched by famine, and 
its eyes staring about wildly, though without attention to any 
thing. Distress seemed to have expended its utmost bitterness 
on these objects, and the last sigh and tear to have been already 
exhausted. 

Unhappy man ! cried Mr. Fenton, pray, who or what are you ? 
To which the stranger faintly replied, without lifting his eyes 
Whoever you may be, disturb not the last hour of those who wish 
to be at peace. 

Run, Harry, says Mr. Fenton, desire all the servants to come 
to me immediately, and bid Mrs. Hannah bring some hartshorn 
and a bottle of cordial. 



TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 57 

Away flew Harry, like feathered Mercury, on his god-like errand. 
Forth issued Mr. James, Frank, and Andrew; and last came 
Mrs. Hannah, with the housemaid and cordials. 

Hannah stooped in haste, and applied hartshorn to the nose of 
the woman, who appeared wholly insensible. After some time, 
her bosom heaved with a long-rising and subsiding sigh, and her 
eyes feebly opened, and immediately closed again. Then Mrs. Han- 
nah and the housemaid, raising her gently between them, got a 
little of the cordial into her mouth, and, bending her backwards, 
they observed that she swallowed it. Then James, Frank, Andrew, 
and the housemaid, joining their forces, lifted her up, and bore 
her, as easy as possible, toward the house ; while Harry caught 
up her infant, as a pismire does its favourite embryo in a time of 
distress, in order to lodge it in a place of protection and safety. 

In the mean time, Mr. Fenton and Mrs. Hannah put their harts- 
horn with great tenderness to the nostrils of the stranger, and 
requested him to take a sip of the cordial ; but he, turning up his 
dim though expressive eyes, feebly cried Are you a man or an 
angel? and directly fainted away. 

They rubbed his* temples with the spirits, and did their utmost 
to recover him ; but a sudden gust of grateful passion had proved 
too strong for his constitution. On the return of the servants he 
was also carried in. A physician was instantly sent for ; beds were 
provided and warmed in haste the new guests were all gently 
undressed, and laid therein ; and, being compelled to swallow a little 
sack- whey, they recovered to a kind of languid sensibility. 

The physician gave it as his opinion, that this unhappy family 
were reduced to their present state by excess of grief and famine ; 
that nourishment should be administered in very small propor- 
tions; and that they should be kept as quiet as possible, for a 
fortnight at least. 

While all imaginable care is taking for the recovery of these poor 
people, we beg leave to return to the aifairs of their protectors. 



CHAPTER VI. 

ABOUT a month before this, Mr. Fenton had engaged one Mr. 
Vindex, the schoolmaster of the town, to come for an hour every 
evening, and initiate the two boys in their Latin grammar. But 
he had a special caution given him with respect to the generous 
disposition of our hero, which was said to be induced to do any 
thing by kindness ; but to be hardened and roused into opposition 
by severity. 

In about ten days after the late adventure, Mr. Fenton was called 
to London, where he was detained about three weeks, in settling 
his books with his Dutch correspondents, and in calling in a very 
large arrear of interest that was due to him upon his deposits in 
the funds. 

During his absence, Mr. Vindex began to assume a more expanded 
authority, and gave a free scope to the surly terrors of his station. 



58 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

Ned was by nature a very lively, but very petulant boy ; and 
when Vindex reproved him with the imperial brow and voice of the 
Great Mogul, Ned cast upon him an eye of such significant con- 
tempt, as no submissions or suflerings, on the part of the offender, 
could ever after compensate. 

The next day Mr. Vindex returned, doubly armed, with a mon- 
strous birch-rod in one hand, and a ferule in the other. The first 
he hung up, in terrorem, as a meteor is said to hang in the heavens, 
threatening future castigation to the children of men. The second 
he held as determined upon present action ; nor was he unmindful 
of any hook whereon to hang a fault, so that, travelling from right 
to left and from left to right, he so warmed the hands of the un- 
fortunate Edward, as ruined the sunny economy of his countenance, 
and reduced him to a disagreeable partnership with the afflicted. 

On the departure of Vindex, though Ned's drollery was dismayed, 
his resentment was by no means eradicated; for the principle of 
Ned was wholly agreeable to the motto of a very noble escutcheon ; 
and Nemo me impune lace-ssit was a maxim of whose impropriety not 
St. Anthony himself could persuade him. 

All night he lay ruminating and brooding on mischief in his 
imagination ; and having formed the outlines of his plan toward 
morning, he began to chuckle and comfort himself, and exult in the 
execution. He then revealed his project to his bedfellow, Mr. 
James, who was greatly tickled therewith, and promised to join in 
the plot. 

Full against the portal that opened upon the schoolroom, there 
stood an ancient and elevated chair, whose form was sufficiently 
expressive of its importance. Mr. Vindex had selected this ma- 
jestic piece of furniture as alone suitable to the dignity of his 
exalted station ; for he judiciously considered that, if thrones and 
benches were taken from among men, there would be an end of all 
dominion and justice upon earth. 

Through the centre of the seat of this chair of authority, Ned 
got Mr. James to drill a small hole, not discernible except on a 
very minute scrutiny. He then provided a cylindrical stick of 
about six inches in length, to one end of which he fastened a 
piece of lead, and in the other end he fixed the end of a large 
needle. This needle had been a glover's, of approved metal, keen 
and polished, and three-square toward the point, for a quick and 
ready penetration of tough leather. He next fastened two small 
cords transversely to the leaden extremity of the stick ; and, James 
assisting, they turned the chair with the bottom upward, and 
tacked the four ends of the cords in such a manner as answered to 
the four cardinal points of the compass ; while the stick remained 
suspended in an upward direction, with the point of the needle just 
so far through the drill, as put it upon a level with the surface 
of the seat. Lastly, they fastened a long and well-waxed thread 
about the middle of the stick, and drawing this thread over the 
upper rung, they dropped the end of it just under Ned's stool, and 
replaced the seat of learning in its former position. 

Greatly did Ned parade it, when on trial he found that his 
machine answered to a miracle; for the stick being restrained 






THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 59 

from any motion, save that in a direction to the zenith, on the 
slightest twitch of the thread the needle instantly mounted four- 
sixths of two inches above the surface of the seat, and was quickly 
recalled by the revulsion of the lead. 

At the appointed hour of magisterial approach, in comes Mr. 
Vindex. Master Harry and Ned are called. Each seizes his book, 
and takes his seat as usual in a line, nearly diagonal to the right 
and left corner of the chair of authority. Mr. Vindex assumes the 
throne ; but scarce was he crowned when Ned gives the premedi- 
tated intimation to his piercer, and up bounces Vindex, and gives two 
or three capers as though he had been suddenly stung by a tarantula. 
He stares wildly about puts his hand behind him with a touch of 
tender condolence returns to the chair peers all over it with 
eyes of the most prying inspection ; but, not trusting to the 
testimony of his ocular sense in a case that so very feelingly re- 
futed its evidence, he moved his fingers over and over every part 
of the surface ; but found all smooth and fair, in spite of the late 
sensible demonstration to the contrary. 

Down again, with slow caution, subsided Mr. Vindex, recon- 
noitring the premises to the right hand and to the left. 

As his temper was not now in the most dulcet disposition, he 
first looked sternly at Ned, and then turning toward Harry, with 
an eye that sought occasion for present quarrel, he questioned him 
morosely on some articles of his lesson ; when Ned, not enduring 
such an indignity to the patron of his life and fortunes, gave a 
second twitch with better will, and much more lively than the 
first; and up again sprung Vindex with redoubled vigour and 
action, and bounded, plunged, and pranced about the room, as be- 
witched. He glared, and searched all about with a frantic pene- 
tration, and peered into every corner for the visible or invisible 
perpetrators of these mischiefs ; when, hearing a little titter, he 
began to smell a fox, and, with a malignant determination of 
better note for the future, he returned with a countenance of dis- 
sembled placability, and, resuming his chair, began to examine the 
boys with a voice apparently tuned by good temper and affection. 

During this short scene, poor Ned happened to make a little 
trip in his rudiments, when Vindex turned, and cried to our hero 
Mr. Harry, my dear, be so kind as to get up and reach me yon 
ferule. 

These words had not fully passed the lips of the luckless pre- 
ceptor, when Ned plucked the string with his utmost force, and 
Vindex thought himself at least impaled on the spot. Up he shot 
once more, like a sudden pyramid of flame. The ground could no 
longer retain him he soared aloft, roared and raved like a thou- 
sand infernals. While Ned, with an aspect of the most condoling 
hypocrisy, and words broke by a tone of mourning, tenderly 
inquired of his ailments. 

Vindex turned upon him an eye of jealous malignity, and, taking 
a sudden thought, he flew to the scene of his repeated infliction, 
and turning up the bottom of the seat of pain, this complicated 
effort, of extraordinary genius lay revealed, and exposed to vulgar 
contemplation. 



60 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

He first examined minutely into the parts and construction of 
this wonderful machinery, whose efficacy he still so feelingly recol- 
lected. He then drew the string, and admired with what a 
piercing agility the needle could be actuated by so distant a hand. 
And lastly, and deliberately, he tore away, piece by piece, the 
whole composition, as his rascally brethren, the Turks, have also 
done, in their antipathy to all the monuments of arts, genius, and 
learning, throughout the earth. 

In the mean while, our friend Edward sat trembling and frying 
in his skin. All his drollery had forsaken him ; nor had he a single 
cast of contrivance for evading the mountain of mischiefs that he 
saw impending. How, indeed, could he palliate ? what had he to 
hope or plead in mitigation of the penalty, where, in the party so 
highly offended, he saw his judge and his executioner ? 

Mr. Vindex had now the ball wholly at his own foot ; and that 
Ned was ever to have his turn again, was a matter no way pro- 
mised by present appearances. 

Vindex at length looked smilingly about him, with much fun in 
his face, but more vengeance in his heart Mr. Edward, said he, 
perhaps you are not yet apprised of the justice of the Jewish laws, 
that claim an eye for an eye, and a breach for a breach ; but I, my 
child, will fully instruct you in the fitness and propriety of them. 

Then, reaching at the rod, he seized his shrinking prey as a kite 
trusses a robin ; he laid him, like a little sack, across his own stool ; 
off go the trousers, and with the left hand he holds him down, while 
the right is laid at him with the application of a woodman, who 
resolves to clear part of the forest before noon. 

Harry, who was no way privy to the machination of the needle, 
now approached, and interposed in behalf of his unhappy servant. 
He petitioned, he kneeled, he wept ; but his prayers and tears were 
cast to the winds and the rocks, till Vindex had reduced poor Ned 
to a plight little different from that of St. Bartholomew. 

Mr. Vindex justly deemed that he had now given a lesson of such 
ample instruction, as might dispense with his presence for some 
days at least. 

In the mean time, Ned's flogging held him confined to his bed, 
where he had full time and leisure to contrive with one end, a just 
and worthy retribution for the sufferings of the other. 

Harry went often to sit and condole with Ned, in this the season 
of his calamity ; and as he had now conceived a strong aversion to 
the pedagogue, on account of his barbarity, he offered to assist his 
friend in any measures deemed adequate to the stripes and injuries 
he had received. 

The house of Mr. Vindex was a large and old-fashioned building, 
with a steep flight of stone stairs, and a spacious landing-place 
before the door. Ned was again on his legs; the night was ex- 
cessive dark, and the family of the preceptor had just finished an 
early supper. 

About this time a gentle rapping was heard, and a servant open- 
ing the door, looked this way and that way, and called out re- 
peatedly to know who was there ; but no voice replying, he retired 
and shut all to again. Scarce was he re-entered "when he hears 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 61 

rap, rap, rap, rap. The fellow's anger was now kindled, and 
opening the door suddenly, he bounced out at once, in order to 
seize the runaway ; but seeing no creature, he began to feel a 
coming chillness, and his hairs to stir, as though each had got the 
life of an eel. Back he slunk, closed the door with the greatest 
tenderness, and crept down to reveal a scantling of his fears to his 
fellows in the kitchen. 

Now, though men and maids laughed heartily at the appre- 
hensions of Hodge, they resented this insult on their house, as they 
called it ; and getting all up together in a group, they slily crowded 
behind the door, with the latch in one of their hands, ready to issue, 
in an instant, and detect the delinquents. 

They were not suffered to freeze. Knock, knock, knock, knock, 
knock. Open flies the door, and out rush the servants. Nothing 
appeared. They all stood silent, and astonished beyond measure. 
Some, however, with outward bravade, but inward tremblings, 
went searching along the walls and behind the posts for some 
lurcher. Again they gathered to the landing-place, and stood 
whisperingly debating what this might be ; when, to the inex- 
pressible terror and discomfiture of all present, the spontaneous 
knocker assumed sudden life and motion, and gave such a peal and 
alarm to their eyes and ears, as put every sense and resolution to 
the rout ; and in they rushed again, one on the back of the other, 
and clapped to the door, as in the face of an host of pursuing 
demons. 

Mr. Vindex and his lady, for some time past, had been sitting 
opposite, and nodding over a fire in the back-parlour, where they 
returned each other's salute with the greatest good manners and 
punctuality imaginable. He now started on hearing the rustling 
in the hall, and angrily called to know what was the matter. 

Vindex, from the prejudice of education during his infancy, had 
conceived the utmost spite to all spectres and hobgoblins, insomuch 
that he wished to deprive them of their very existence, and la- 
boured to persuade himself, as well as others, of their nonentity ; 
but faith proved too strong within him, for all his verbal parade 
of avowed infidelity. 

While the servants, with pale faces and short breath, made their 
relation, the magisterial philosopher did so sneer, and contempt- 
uously toss this way and the other, and throw himself back in such 
affected fits of laughter, as nothing could be like it, till, bouncing 
at the sound of another peal, he mustered the whole family, 
boarders and all, to above seventeen in number, together with 
Madam Vindex, who would not be left sole ; and now they ap- 
peared such an army as was sufficient to face any single devil at 
least; and forth they issued and filled the landing-place, leaving 
the door on the jar. 

Here Mr. Vindex turned, and, with his face toward the knocker, 
thus addressed the assembly : 

My honest but simple friends, quoth he, can any thing persuade 
you that a spirit or ghost, as ye call it a breath or being of air 
a something or nothing that is neither tangible nor visible, can lay 
hold of that which is ? Or are ye such idiots as to imagine that 



62 TEE FOOL OF QVALITY. 

yon knocker (for he did not yet venture to touch it), a substance 
of solid and molten brass, without members or organs, or any in- 
ternal system or apparatus for the purpose, can yet be endued with 
will, design, or any kind of intelligence, when the least locomotive 
faculty, in the meanest reptile, must of necessity be provided with 
an infinitely varied mechanism of nerves, tubes, reservoirs, levers, 
and pulleys for the nonce; I should discredit my own senses on 
any appearance contrary to such palpable demonstration. In all 
lights Soft break we off look where it comes again ! For, in 
this instant of affirmation, so peremptory and conclusive, the 
knocker, as in contempt and bitter despite to philosophy, so 
loudly refuted every syllable of the premises, as left neither time 
nor inclination to Vindex for a reply; but, rushing desperately 
forward, he burst in at the portal with such as had presence of 
mind to take advantage of the opening; and, turning again, and 
shutting the door violently in the face of half his family, he ran 
and threw himself into his chair in an agony of spirits. 

The servants and boarders, whom Vindex had shut out, not 
abiding to stay in presence of the object of their terrors, tumbled 
in a heap down the stairs, and, gathering themselves up again, ran 
diversely to communicate to all their neighbours and acquaintance 
the tidings of the enchanted knocker. Their contagious looks and 
words gave the panic throughout; but curiosity prevailing above 
apprehension, the town began to gather, though first in thin parties, 
and at a cautious distance, till the crowd, increasing, took heart 
and resolution from number, and venturing up a step or two of 
the stairs, and being still pressed and urged forward by new-comers 
from behind, they at length filled the whole flight and landing-place, 
and one of them growing bold enough to lift his hand toward the 
knocker, the knocker generously convinced him that no assistance 
was wanting. Eap, rap, rap, rap. Kap, rap, rap, rap. Eap, rap, 
rap, rap. Back recoil the foremost ranks, casting off and tumbling 
over the ranks behind. No one stayed to give help or hand to 
friend or brother ; but, rising or scrambling off on all-fours, each 
made the best of his way to the first asylum, and in less than ten 
seconds there was not a mouse stirring throughout the street. 

If I had the ill-nature of such authors as love to puzzle, I also 
might leave the foregoing enigma to be solved, or rather made 
more implicit, in such ways as philosophy might have to account 
for it ; but, in compassion to the pains of a labouring imagination, 
I choose to deliver my reader with all possible ease and despatch. 

The fact is, that these astonishing and tremendous phenomena, 
that discomfited a little city, alarmed the country round, and re- 
suscitated the stories and legends of the old women of all the 
parishes from Barnet to London, were the whole and sole con- 
trivance of our hero's petulant foundling, during a nightly lucu- 
bration. 

.Ned had accordingly imparted his plan of operations to Harry, 
and Harry had engaged Mrs. Hannah in the plot. 

Now Mrs. Hannah had a house hi a narrow part of the street, 
just opposite to that of Mr. Vindex, where her niece and old servant 
resided. This house was narrow, but of the height of four stories .; 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 63 

and on the said memorable night, Ned dropped the end of a 
bottom of small twine from the garret window, which Hannah took 
across the way, and fastened with a double knot to the knocker 
of Vindex's door. And now it is twenty to one that, if Vindex's 
family and the rest of the neighbourhood had been even thus far 
let into the secret, they would not have been altogether so much 
alarmed at the consequences. 

I have read of generals who could gain, but not maintain con- 
quests ; and of women who could keep all secrets but their own. 
Thus it happened to Ned. His vanity was at least on a level with 
his ingenuity; he was so elated with the success of his recent 
stratagem, that he boasted of it to some, and half-whispered it to 
others, till it came to the ears of the much- exasperated Vindex. 
Vindex., in the first heat and very boil of his passions, snatches up 
a huge rod, just cut from that tree whose bare name strikes terror 
through all our seminaries of learning, and taking with him one 
of his boarders, he marches directly down to the house of Mr. 
Fenton, and thus formidably armed he enters the fatal schoolroom. 

Ned, by great good fortune for himself, was then absent; but 
our hero happening to be there, Vindex instantly shut the door, 
and called him to task. 

Master Harry, says he, did you know any thing of the strange 
knocking at my door last Tuesday night ? To this question, Harry, 
who was too valiant to be tempted to tell a lie through fear, with- 
out hesitation answered in the affirmative. You did, sirrah ! replied 
the pedagogue ; and you have the impudence also to confess it to 
my face ? Here, Jacky, down with his trousers, and horse him for 
me directly. 

Jack was a lusty lubberly boy, about ten years of age, and 
stooping to unbutton Harry, according to order, our hero gave him 
such a sudden fist in the mouth, as dashed in two of his teeth that 
then happened to be moulting, and set him a crying and bleeding 
in a piteous manner. Vindex then rose into tenfold fuiy, and took 
our hero in hand himself ; and notwithstanding that he cuffed, and 
kicked, and fought it most manfully, Vindex at length unbuttoned 
his trousers, and set him in due form on the back of his boarder. 

The pedagogue, at first, gave him the three accustomed strokes v 
as hard as he could draw. So much, my friend, says he, is for your 
own share of the burden ; and now tell me who were your con- 
federates and abettors in this fine plot. That I will never tell you, 
deliberately and resolutely answered our hero. What, shall I be 
bullied and out-braved, replied the frantic savage, by such a one 
as you? You little stubborn villain, I will flay you alive, I will 
carbonado you on the spot. So saying, he laid at him as though 
he had been a sheaf of wheat ; while Harry, indignantly, endured 
the torture, and holding in his breath that he might not give 
Vindex the satisfaction of a groan, he determined to perish rather 
than to betray. 

In the mean time, Ned had peeped in at the keyhole, and spying 
the situation and plight of his loved patron, he ran to Mrs. Hannah 
and imparted the horrid tidings. Hannah rose with all the wrath 
of Tisiphone in her countenance, and flying to the schoolroom, she 



64 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

rushed violently against the door, burst it open in a twinkling-, and 
springing forward, fastened every nail she had in the face and eyes 
of Yindex, and tore away and cuifed at a fearful rate. Jack, at 
this period, had let his rider to the ground ; when Harry, catching 
ut a sword that hung against a wainscot, whipped it down, and 
drawing it from the sheath as quick as lightning, he sprung at 
Vindex, in order to run him through the body; but, happily, not 
having had the patience to put up his breeches, they trammelled 
him in his advance, and he fell prostrate with the sword in his 
hand, which reached the leg of the pedagogue, and gave him a 
slight wound just as he was endeavouring to make his way through 
the door. Jack had already made his escape, and the mauled pre- 
ceptor scampered after, with his ears much better warmed, and his 
temper better cooled, than when he entered. 

Harry bore his misfortune with a sort of sullen though shame- 
faced philosophy. But every other member of this honourable 
family almost adored him for the bloody proof he had given of 
his virtue; and vowed unpitying vengeance on the ungenerous 
Yindex. 

During the above transactions, the strangers whom Mr. Fenton 
had received into his house had been tended with great humanity, 
and were now on the recovery. 

Mr. James, on conversing with the head of this little family, ob- 
served that he was an exceeding sensible person, and had provided 
him with a decent, though cast suit of his master's ; and had also, 
with the assistance of Mrs. Hannah, put his wife and little boy into 
clean and seemly apparel. 

As James's invention was on the rack to get adequate satisfaction 
on the base-spirited Vindex, he went to consult his new friend, who 
dropped a tear of generosity and admiration on hearing the story 
of Harry's heroism and nobility of soul. 

By his advice, Mr. James despatched a messenger to a druggist 
at London, and to several other shops for sundry apparatus ; and 
having all things in readiness, and Harry being now able to bear 
a part in the play, James sent a strange porter to Vindex, with 
compliments from his master, as though he were just come home, 
and requested to speak with him. 

Vindex accordingly comes and knocks. The door opens, he 
enters, and it instantly shuts upon him. He starts back with 
horror, as at the sight of Medusa. He perceives the hall all in 
black, without a single ray save what proceeded from a sickly lamp, 
that made the gloom visible. He is suddenly seized upon by two 
robust devils covered over with painted flames. They drag him to 
the schoolroom but O, terror of terrors ! he knows the place of 
his pristine authority no more. He beholds a hell more fearful 
than his fancy had yet framed. The ceiling seemed to be vaulted 
with serpents, hirpies, arid hydras, that dropped livid fire. And 
here, the Tisiphone, Megsera, and Alecto of the heathens appeared 
to contend for frightfulness with Milton's Death and Sin. Foui 
fiends and two little imps at once laid their fangs upon him, and 
would have dragged him to the ground ; but the pedagogue was a 
sturdy athletic fellow, and cuffed, and scratched, and roared it out 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 65 

most manfully. The devil, however, proving too strong for the 
sinner, he was cast prostrate to the earth ; and being left, in re- 
trospection, as bare as Father Time, some sat upon his shoulders to 
keep him down, while others on each side, alternately keeping time 
like the threshers of barley, gave our flogger such a scoring as im- 
printed on his memory, to his last state of magistracy, a fellow- 
feeling for the sufferings of petty delinquents. 

Being all out-breathed in turns, they remitted from their toil, 
and now appeared to be a set of the merriest imps that ever 
associated. They fastened the clothes of the disconsolate Vindex 
about his neck with his own garters ; and, having manacled his 
hands before him, they turned him loose to the street. While he, 
with a wonderful presence of mind in the midst of his terrors, 
raised his hands the best way he could, to cover his face, and 
hurried homeward. 

Within a few days after this adventure, Mr. Fenton returned. 
At the first sight of one another, he and his Harry grew together 
for near half an hour. He then addressed every member of his 
family one by one ; and, with a familiar goodness, inquired after their 
several healths and concerns. He also asked after his late guests, 
and desired to see them ; but on Mr. James's intimation, that he 
had somewhat of consequence to impart to him, they retired to 
the next room. 

Here James made him a minute recital of the preceding ad- 
ventures ; and set forth, in due contrast, the baseness and barbarity 
of Vindex on the one part, and the unassailable worthiness of his 
Harry on the other ; while the praise of this chosen of the old 
gentleman's soul sunk, like the balm of Gilead, upon his wounded 
mind, and almost eradicated every memorial of former grief, and 
planted a new spring of hope and joy in their room. 

The table being spread for dinner, Mr. Fenton sent to desire the 
stranger and his little family should join company. They came, 
according to order ; but entered, evidently overcome by a weight of 
shame and gratitude too grievous to be borne. 

Mr. Fenton saw their oppression, and felt the whole burden upon 
his own shoulders. He accordingly was interested and solicitous 
in its removal, which he effected with all that address of which his 
humanity had made him a finished master. 

Through the enfoldings of the stranger's modesty, Mr. Fenton 
discerned many things preceding the vulgar rank of men. Mr. 
Clement, said he, I am astonished beyond measure that a person 
of letters, as you are, and who has so much of the gentleman in his 
person and manner, should yet be reduced to such an extremity 
in a Christian country, and among a people distinguished for their 
humanity. There must be something very singular and extra- 
ordinary in your case ; and this night, if you are at leisure, and 
that the recital is not disagreeable to you, you would oblige me 
by your story. 

Sir, answered Mr. Clement, since my life is yours, you have 
surely a right to an account of your property. Whenever you 
think proper, I will cheerfully obey you. 

Mr. Fenton now rose and stepped into town, and calling upon a 



66 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

neighbour, whom he took to the tavern, he sent for Mr. Vindex, 
who came upon the summons. 

Mr. Vindex, says he, pray take your seat. I am sorry, Mr. 
Vindex, for the treatment you have got in my house, and still 
sorrier that you got it so very deservedly. 

I have long thought, Mr. Vindex, that the method of school- 
masters, in the instruction of our children, is altogether the 
reverse of what it ought to be. They generally lay hold on the 
human constitution, as a pilot lays hold on the rudder of a ship, 
by the tail, by the single motive of fear alone. 

Now, as fear has no concern with any thing but itself, it is 
the most confined, most malignant, and the basest, though the 
strongest, of all passions. 

The party who is possessed with it, will listen to nothing but 
the dictates of his own terror, nor scruple any thing that may 
cover him from the evil apprehended. He will prevaricate and 
lie; if that lie is questioned, he will vouch it by perjury; and, 
if he happens to do an injury, he will be tempted to commit murder 
to prevent the effects of resentment. 

Fear never was a friend to the love of God or man, to duty or 
conscience, truth, probity, or honour. It therefore can never make 
a good subject, a good citizen, or a good soldier, and, least of all, 
a good Christian ; except the devils, who believe and tremble, are 
to be accounted good Christians. 

How very different is the lesson which our master CHRIST 
teacheth, who commandeth us not to fear what man can do unto 
us ; to smile at sickness and calamity ; to rise superior to pain and 
death ; and to regard nothing, but as it leads to the goal of that 
immortality which his gospel has brought to light ! 

There is, Mr. Vindex, but one occasion wherein fear may be 
useful in schools or commonwealths ; and that is, when it is placed 
as a guard against evil, and appears, with its insignia of rods, ropes, 
and axes, to deter all who behold from approaching thereto. 

But this. Mr. Vindex, is far from being the sole occasion on 
which schoolmasters apply the motive of fear and castigation. 
They associate the ideas of pain to those lessons and virtues which 
the pleasure of encouragement ought alone to inculcate : they yet 
more frequently apply the lash for the indulgence of their own 
weaknesses, and for tne gratification of the virulence of their own 
naughty passions ; and I have seen a giant of a pedagogue, raving, 
raging, and foaming, over a group of shrinking infants, like a kite 
over a crouching parcel of young turkeys. 

There are, I admit, some parents and preceptors, who annex 
other motives to that of the rod; they promise money, gaudy 
clothes, and sweetmeats, to children ; and, in their manner of ex- 
patiating on the use and value of such articles, they often excite, in 
their little minds, the appetites of avarice, of vanity, and sensuality ; 
they also sometimes add the motive of what they call emulation, 
but which, in fact, is rank envy, by telling one boy how much 
happier, or richer, or finer, another is than himself. 

Now, though envy and emulation are often confounded in terms, 
there are not two things more different, both in respect to their 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 67 

object and in respect to their operation: the object of envy is 
the person, and not the excellence, of any one; but the object 
of emulation is excellence alone, as when CHKIST, exciting us to 
be emulous of the excellence of God himself, bids us be perfect, 
as our Father which is in heaven is perfect: the operation of 
envy is to pull others down ; but the act of emulation is to exalt 
ourselves to some eminence or height proposed : the eyes of envy 
are sore and sickly, and hate to look at the light ; but emulation 
has the eye of an eagle, and soars, while it gazes in the face 
of the sun. 

Were tutors half as solicitous, throughout their academies, to 
make men of worth as to make men of letters, there are a 
hundred pretty artifices, very obvious to be contrived and practised 
for the purpose. They might institute caps of shame and wreaths 
of honour in their schools : they might have little medals, ex- 
pressive of particular virtues, to be fixed on the breast of the 
achiever till forfeited by default : and on the report of any boy's 
having performed a signal action of good-nature, friendship, grati- 
tude, generosity, or honour., a place of eminence might be appointed 
for him to sit on, while all the rest of the school should bow 
in deference as they passed. Such arts as these, I say, with that 
distinguishing affection and approbation which all persons ought 
to show to children of merit, would soon make a new nation of 
infants, and consequently of men. 

When you, Mr. Vindex, iniquitously took upon you to chastise 
my most noble and most incomparable boy, you first whipped him 
for his gallant and generous avowal of the truth ; and next, you 
barbarously flayed him because he refused to betray those who had 
confided in his integrity. 

When I behold so many scoundrels walking openly throughout 
the land who are styled your honour, and your honour, and who 
impudently usurp the most exalted of all characters the character 
of a gentleman ; I no longer wonder, when I reflect that they have 
been principled, or rather unprincipled, by such tutors as Mr. 
Vindex. 

The merry devils, Mr. Vindex, who took you in hand, were not 
of a species so alienated from humanity as you might imagine; 
they have, therefore, appointed me their vehicle of some smart- 
money in recompense, but desire no further advantage from your 
company or instructions. 

So saying, Mr. Fenton put a purse of five-and-twenty guineas 
into the hands of the preceptor, and withdrew without speaking 
another word. 

Friend. Upon my credit, this Mr. Fenton I long to know some- 
thing more of him he is a sensible kind of a man, and has given 
us some very valuable hints upon education. But may I be so 
free with you as to drop some general remarks upon the whole of 
what I have read? 

Author. Free, sir ? by all means ; as free as you please, to be 
sure. Believe me, you cannot do me a greater favour. 

Friend. Why, there's the plague on't, now ; you begin to 

p 2 



68 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

kindle already. Ah ! were you authors to know the thousandth 
part of the liberties that are taken behind your backs, you would 
learn to bear with more humility a gentle admonition, though 
uttered to your faces. Few, indeed, have the generosity, or even 
humanity, to intimate what they themselves think, or what the 
world speaks of you. We are seldom over forward to say any 
thing that might give displeasure to others, because we like that 
others should be pleased with ourselves ; but in your absence 
we pay ourselves largely for our taciturnity in your presence, 
and I have often been in company where the intimates and 
confidants of you authors have depreciated and ridiculed the 
very same passages which they applauded with cries and claps 
in your closets. The world, my friend, has substituted good 
manners in the place of good nature ; whoever conforms to the 
former is dispensed with from any observance of the latter. 
Shall I add (for the misfortune of you authors), that there is a 
set of men who at once dispense with common manners and 
common humanity ? They go under the name of critics ; and 
must be men of wealth, that the deference paid to fortune may 
give a sort of stamp and currency to the dross of their erudition. 
In the strictest sense, indeed, they may be called men of letters, 
their study as well as capacity being nearly confined to a just or 
orthographical disposition of the alphabet. Their business is to 
reconnoitre the out-works of genius, as they have no key to the 
gates of nature or sentiment. They snuff faults from afar, as 
crows scent carrion, and delight to pick, and to prey, and to dwell 
upon them. They enter like wasps upon the gardens of litera- 
ture, not to relish any fragrance, or select any sweets, but to 
pamper their malevolence with every thing that savours of rank- 
ness or oifence. Happily for them, their sagacity does not tend 
to the discovery of merit ; in such a case, a work of genius would 
give them the spleen for a month, or possibly depress their spirits 
beyond recovery. 

To these high and dreaded lords-justiciaries, the critics, authors 
deem it incumbent to submit the products of their lucubrations ; 
not in the prospect of any advantage from their advice or animad- 
versions; neither in the hopes of acquiring their friendship or 
patronage ; but merely to soothe and deprecate the effects of their 
malignity. Accordingly, I have been present when some of these 
dictators have been presented with a manuscript as with an humble 
petition ; they have thereupon assumed the chair, as a judge assumes 
the bench when a criminal is called before him, not in order to 
trial or hearing, but to sentence and condemnation. To what 
scenes of mortification have I been witness on such occasions ! to 
what a state of abatement, of abasement, of annihilation, have these 
entertainers of the public been depressed ! " I am sorry, sir, to 
tell you that this will not do a few attempts here and there, but 
that will not compensate. Here again, how injudicious, absurd, 
unpardonable! Good sir, you should have considered that when 
a man sits down to write for the public, the least compliment they 
expect from him is, that he should think Here, my friend, I have 
seen enough ; I cannot affront my judgment so much, as either to 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 69 

recommend or patronize your performance ; all I can do for you 
is to be silent on the subject, and permit fools to approve who have 

not sense to discern." Thus do these critics-paramount, with 

the delicacy and compassion of the torturers of the Inquisition, 
search out all the seats of sensibility and self-complacence, in order 
to sting with the more quick and killing poignancy. 

Now, my dear friend, as you have not applied for the favour of 
these established arbitrators of genius and literature, you are not 
to expect the least mercy from them ; and I am also free to tell 
you, that I know of no writer who lies more open to their attacks. 
You are excessively incorrect. Your works, on the one hand, have 
not the least appearance of the Limse, labor ; nor, on the other, 
have they that ease which ought to attend the haste with which 
they seem to be written. Again, you are extremely unequal and 
disproportioned ; one moment you soar where no eye can see, and 
straight descend with rapidity, to creep in the vulgar phrase of 
chambermaids and children. Then you are so desultory that we 
know not where to have you; you no sooner interest us in one 
subject, than you drag us, however reluctant, to another. In short, 
I doubt whether you laid any kind of plan before you set about 
the building ; but we shall see how your fortuitous concourse of 
atoms will turn out. 

Author. Do I want nature ? 

Friend. No. 

Author. Do I want spirit ? 

Friend. Kather too much of fire at times. 

Author. Do I want sentiment ? 

Friend. Not altogether. 

Author. Then, sir, I shall be read and read again, in despite of 
my own defects, and of all that you and your critics can say or do 
against me. The truth is, that the critics are very far from being 
bugbears to me; they have always proved my friends, my best 
benefactors. They were the first who writ me into any kind of 
reputation ; and I am more beholden to their invectives than I am 
to my own genius, for any little name I may have got in the world : 
all I have to fear is, that they are already tired of railing, and may 

not deem me worth their further notice. But pray, my good sir, 

if you desire that I should profit by your admonitions, ought you 
not to give me instances of the faults with which you reproach me ? 

Friend. That would be time and labour altogether thrown away, 
as I have not the smallest hope of bringing you to confession. 
You are a disputant, a casuist, by your education ; you are equally 
studied and practised in turning any thing into nothing, or bringing 
all things thereout. But do not flatter yourself that I have yet 
given you the detail of half your faults ; you are often paradoxical, 
and extremely peremptory and desperate in your assertions. In 
this very last page you affirm that the character of a gentleman is 
the most reverable, the highest of all characters. 

Author. I did, sir ; I do affirm it, and will make it good. 

Friend. I knew it, sir, I knew it ; but do not choose at present 
to enter into the discussion. At the next pause I shall willingly 
hear you on this question. 



70 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 



CHAPTER VII. 

ON his return he ordered a fire and a bottle of wine into his 
study, and sent for Mr. Clement. Mr. Clement, says he, sit down. 
I assure you, Mr. Clement, I am inclined to think very well of you. 
But pray let me have the narrative of your life and manners with- 
out disguise. An ingenuous confession and sense of past errors 
has something in it, to me full as amiable, or more, than if a man 
had never strayed. 

Sir, says Mr. Clement, I have indeed been faulty, very faulty in 
my intentions; though God has hitherto preserved me from any 
very capital act, and has, by your hand, wonderfully brought me 
to this day. 

HISTOBY OF THE MAN OP LETTEES. 

Bartholomew Clement, sir, a retailer of hardware on the Strand, 
is my father. He was low-bred, and, as I believe, of narrow ca- 
pacity ; but proceeding in what they call the dog-trot of life, and 
having a single eye to the making of money, he became vastly 
rich, and has now a large income from houses and ground-rents 
in the city of Westminster, the fruits and acquisition of his own 
application. 

I remember nothing of my mother except her fondness for me ; 
nor of her character, except the tears that I have seen my father 
shed when occasional circumstances have brought her fresh to his 
memory. She died when I was in my seventh year. I was their 
only surviving child ; and my father transferred all his tenderness 
for her to me. 

The love of my father was not the mere partiality or prejudice 
of a parent ; it was not an affection ; he had a passion for me that 
could be equalled by nothing but his vanity in my behalf. He 
resolved, he said, that there should be one gentleman in the family; 
and with this view he resisted his desire of having me always in 
his sight, and sent me to Westminster school, and from thence to 
Cambridge, where I remained till I was twenty years of age, with- 
out any thing happening that was uncommon, or deserving of your 
attention. 

In the mean time my father was as prodigal of his purse towards 
me as he was of his caresses. He had me with him every vacation. 
He visited me frequently during term, and seemed to lose the 
better half of his existence when we parted. 

He had infused into me a strong tincture of his own vanity and 
views. I lost even a portion of that tenderness and respect which 
I had felt in his regard. He was a trader, a mechanic ; I sighed 
for his reptile state ; and I looked down upon him as Icarus did 
on that very father from whom he had derived wings for so exalted 
a flight. 

My application, accordingly, was equal to my ambition. I was 
not merely a master, I was a critic in the classical languages. I 
relished, and commented on the beauties of the Greek and Latin 
authors ; was a thorough connoisseur hi the customs and manners 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 71 

of the ancients ; and could detect the slightest transgression of a 
sculptor or designer in their folding of the Roman toga. I also 
had the honour of being intimate with all the great of antiquity ; 
I frequently sat in synod, with the whole posse of the heathen gods, 
on Olympus ; and I kept them, as I imagined, in a kind of de- 
pendence, by my perfect knowledge of all their secret lapses and 
mistreadings. I had traced the system of nature, from Aristotle 
and Pythagoras down to Epicurus and Lucretius, and from them 
down to Des Cartes, Gassendi, and Hobbes ; and I was so thorough- 
paced an adept in all the subtleties of logic, that I could confute 
and change sides without losing an inch of ground that I had 
gained upon my adversary. 

I now imagined that I was arrived at the very pinnacle of human 
excellence, and that fortune and honour were within my grasp on 
either hand. I looked on the chancellorship, or primacy, as things 
that must come in course, and I was contriving some station more 
adequate to the height of my merits and ambition, when I received 
this letter : 

" SON HAMMEL, Have lately inquired into thy life and character: 
am sorry to find them too bad to give hope of amendment. Have 
lost my money and my child. Thou hast cut thyself from my love ; 
I have cut thee from my fortune. To comfort myself, have taken 
a neighbour's widow to wife. Come not near me ; I will not see 
thee. Would pray for thee, if I did not think it in vain. 

"BARTHOLOMEW CLEMENT." 

For some time after the receipt of this cruel letter, I remained in 
a state of stupidity. I could not believe the testimony of my senses. 
I gave a kind of discredit to all things. But, awaking from this 
lethargy into inexpressible anguish, my soul was rent by different 
and contending passions. 

Whatever contempt I might have for the station of my father, 
I still loved his person better than riches and honours. But he 
loved me no more he was gone he was lost ; he was already 
dead and buried, at least to me. I cast myself on the ground, 
I groaned, I wept aloud, I bewailed him, as though he had lain 
a lifeless corpse before me. At length, having vented the first 
ravings of my passion, I rose and wrote to my father an answer, 
of which this in my pocket-book is the copy : 

"SiB, If you had not wished to find those faults you sent to 
seek after, in a life that defies malice, and is wholly irreproachable, 
you would not have given credit to scoundrels, who cannot judge 
of the conduct of a gentleman; nor have condemned your only 
child without hearing or defence. 

" In cutting me from your fortune, you only cut me from what 
I despise; but in cutting me from your love you have unjustly 
robbed me of what no fortune can repair. I see that you are 
irretrievably taken away from me ; I shall never more behold my 
indulgent and fond father; and I shall not cease to lament his 
loss with tears of filial affection. But for this new father, whose 
heart could dictate so unnatural and inhuman a letter, I equally 



72 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

disclaim all commerce and concern with him. And, could it 
be possible that a person of my talents and abilities should be 
reduced to indigence or distress, you, sir, are the very last man 
upon earth to whom I would apply, or from whom I would deign 
to accept relief. 

" But if, on the other hand, it should please God hereafter to 
visit your hard-heartedness with affliction and poverty, and that 
I, like the son of the blacksmith in the days of our eighth Harry, 
should stand next the throne in dignity and honours, you will then 
find me desirous of making you all sorts of submissions you will 
then find the dutifullest, the fondest, and tenderest of children, in, 
sir, your little-known and much-injured, 

" HAMMBL CLEMENT." 

Having thus vented the gusts and feelings of my heart, I began 
seriously to think of the course I ought to take ; and considered 
London as the sphere in which a luminary would appear with the 
greatest lustre. 

I discharged my servant, sold my two geldings, disposed of my 
room, my furniture, and most of my books, and having mustered 
somewhat upward of three hundred and fifty pounds, I lodged 
the three hundred pounds with a Cambridge dealer, from whom 
I took bills on his correspondent in London, and set out on my 

Tdition in the first stage, 
took cheap lodgings near Charing Cross; I was altogether 
unknowing and unknown in that great city ; and, reflecting that 
a hidden treasure cannot be duly estimated, I daily frequented 
Markham's coffee-house, amidst a promiscuous resort of swordsmen, 
literati, beaus, and politicians. 

Here, happening to distinguish myself on a few occasions where 
some articles of ancient history, or 'tenet of Thales, or law of Ly- 
curgus, chanced to be in question, I began to be regarded with 
better advantage. 

An elderly gentleman, one day, who sat attentive in a corner, 
got up and whispered that he would be glad of my company to 
take share of a pint in the next room. I gratefully obeyed the 
summons, and when we had drank a glass a-piece Mr. Clement, 
says he, you appear to have but few acquaintance, and may possibly 
want a friend. My fortune is small, but I have some influence 
in this town ; and, as I have taken an inclination to you, I should 
be glad to serve you. If the question is not too free, pray, what 
is your present dependence and prospect for life ? 

Having, with a grateful warmth, acknowledged his goodness to 
me, I ingenuously confessed that my circumstances were very 
slender, and that I should be glad of any place wherein I could 
be useful for myself and my employer. AJnd pray, says my friend, 
what place would best suit you ? I hope, sir, answered I, my educa- 
tion has been such, that laying aside the manual crafts, there is 
not any thing for which I am not qualified. I am greatly pleased 
to hear it, replied Mr. Goodville, and hope soon to bring you 
news that will not be disagreeable. 

Within a few days Mr. Goodville again entered the coffee-house 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 73 

with a happy aspect. He beckoned me aside. Clement, says he, 
I have the pleasure to tell you that I have brought you the choice 
of two very advantageous places. Mr. Giles, the banker, wants a 
clerk who can write a fine hand, and has made some proficiency 
in arithmetic. And my good friend Mr. Tradewell, an eminent 
merchant, would give large encouragement to a youth who under- 
stands the Italian method of book-keeping, as his business is very 
extensive, and requires the shortest and clearest manner of entry 
and reference. 

My friend here paused, and I blushed and hung down my head, 
and was wholly confounded. At length I answered hesitatingly 
Perhaps, sir, you have happened on the only two articles in the 
universe (mechanics, as I said, apart) of which I have no knowledge. 
Well, well, my boy, says he, don't be discouraged. I will try what 
further may be done in your behalf. 

Within about a fortnight after, Mr. Goodville sent me a note, 
to attend him at his lodgings in Eed Lion Square. I went, flushed 
with reviving hope. My child, said he, as I entered, I have now 
brought you the offer of three different places, and some one of 
them, as I trust, must surely fit you. 

Our East India Company propose to make a settlement on the 
coast of Coromandel, and are inquisitive after some youths who 
have made a progress in geometry, and are more especially studied 
in the science of fortification. There is also the colonel of a regi- 
ment, an old intimate of mine, who is going on foreign service, 
and he, in truth, applied to me to. recommend him a person who 
was skilled in the mechanic powers, and, more particularly, who 
had applied himself to gunnery and engineering. There is, lastly, 
the second son of a nobleman to whom I have the honour to be 
known ; he is captain of a man of war, and would give any con- 
sideration to a young man of sense and letters, who is a proficient 
in navigation and in the use of the chart and compass, and who, 
at the same time, might serve as a friend and companion. 

Sir, said I, quite astonished, I have been a student, as Goliath 
was a man of war, from my childhood. If all my tutors did not 
flatter me, my genius was extensive ; and my progress in learning 
may prove that my application has been indefatigable. I know 
all things from the beginning of time that the ancient or modern 
world, as I was told, accounted matters of valuable erudition or 
recognizance, and yet I have not so much as heard of the use or 
estimation of any of these sciences, required, as you say, by persons 
in high trust and commission. 

Mr. Goodville hereupon looked concerned, and shook his head. 
My dear Clement, says he, I do not doubt your talents or learning; 
but I now begin to doubt whether they have been directed or 
applied to any useful purpose. My cousin Goodville informs me 
that the bishop of St. Asaph is in distress for a young gentleman, 
a man of morals and a linguist, who has some knowledge in the 
canon and civil law, as his vicar-general is lately dead. He tells 
me further that a gentleman, a friend of his, who is in great 
circumstances, and who is now about purchasing the place of sur- 
veyor-general, wants a youth who has got some little smattering 



74 TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

in architecture, and has an elegant hand at the drawing of plans 
and sections. I am also known to one of the commissioners of 
excise, and, if you are barely initiated in gauging or surveying, 
I think I could get you into some way of bread. 

Alas, sir, I replied, in a desponding tone, I am equally a stranger 
to all these matters ! 

Perhaps, said Mr. Goodville, I could get you into holy orders if 
you are that way inclined. Are you well read in theology? 

Yes, yes, sir, I briskly answered; I am perfectly acquainted 
with the gods and manners of worship through all nations since 
the deluge. 

But are you, replied my friend, equally versed in the Christian 
dispensation? Have you studied our learned commentators on the 
Creeds ? Are you read in Polemic divinity ? and are you a master 
of the sense and emblematical reference that the Old Testament 
bears to the New ? 

Sir, said I, I have often dipped, with pleasure, into the Bible, as 
there are many passages in it extremely affecting, and others full 
of fine imagery and the true sublime. 

My poor dear child (mournfully answered Mr. Goodville), by all 
I can find you know no one thing of use to yourself, or any other 
person living, either with respect to this world or the world to 
come. Could you make a pin, or a waistcoat button, or form a 
pill-box, or weave a cabbage net, or shape a cobbler's last, or hew 
a block for a barber, or do any of those things by which millions 
daily maintain themselves in supplying the wants and occasions, 
or fashions and vanities of others, you might not be under the 
necessity of perishing. 

The ways of life for which your studies have best prepared you 
are physic and the law. But then they require great expense, and 
an intense application of many years to come, before you can 
propose to enter on a livelihood by either of those professions. 
And, after all, your success would be very precarious, if you were 
not supported by many friends and a strong interest, at least on 
your setting out. 

I have already told you, Clement, that I am not rich, and if I 
were, it is not he who gives you money, but he who puts you into 
a way of getting it, that does you a friendship. 

I am advised to go to Montpelier for the establishment of my 
health, after a tedious fit of sickness that I had at Bath. I shall 
set out in about a month. But before I go, my child, I earnestly 
wish and advise you to fix on some craft or trade or manner of em- 
ploying your time, that will enable you to earn a certain subsistence, 
and, at the same time, make you a worthy member of the commu- 
nity. For, believe me, my boy, that it is not speculative science, 
no, nor all the money and jewels upon earth, that make any part 
of the real wealth of this world. It is industry alone, employed on 
articles that are useful and beneficial to society, that constitutes 
the true riches of all mankind. 

As soon as you have made your election, let me see you again ; 
and, at all events, let me see you before I set out. 

Hereupon I bowed and retired, the most mortified and dejected 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 



75 



of all beings. I was so low and dispirited that I could scarce get 
to my lodgings. I threw myself on the bed. The gilding of the 
vapours of grandeur and ambition, that, like the sky of a summer's 
evening, had delighted my prospects, now wholly disappeared, and 
a night of succeeding darkness fell heavy on my soul. 

One third of my principal fund was almost sunk, and my imagina- 
tion considered the remainder as already vanished, without the 
possibility of supply or resource. I now secretly cursed the vanity 
of my father : He must breed me a gentleman, thought I, as though 
I had been born to no manner of end. Had I been the son of a 
cobbler, of a porter, an ostler, of the lowest wretch who wins his 
bread by the sweat of his brow, I should not yet have been reduced 
to the worst species of beggary that of begging with sound limbs 
and a reasonable soul, the least pitied, though most pitiable, object 
of the creation ; for, surely, that is the case of a poor scholar and 
a poor gentleman ! 

For some following days I went about prying and inquiring 
into the various and numberless occupations that maintained so 
many thousands of active hands and busy faces throughout that 
wonderful city. 

One evening, as I returned late and fatigued through Cheapside, 
I observed a man very importunate with a woman who walked 
before me. Sometimes she would hurry on, and again make a full 
stop, and earnestly beseech him to go about his business ; but, in 
spite of her entreaties, he still stuck close to her, till, coming to the 
end of a blind alley, he suddenly seized her by the arm, and pulled 
her in after him. 

She shrieked out for help with repeated vociferation ; when, 
recollecting all my force, and drawing my sword Villain ! I cried 
out, quit the woman instantly, or you are a dead man ! He per- 
ceived the glittering of the weapon, and retired a few paces ; but, 
taking out a pocket pistol, he discharged it full at me, and ran off 
with precipitation. 

The ball entered my clothes and flesh, and lodged on the rotula of 
my left arm. I felt a short pang ; but, not attending to it, I took 
the woman under the arm, and returning with her to the street, 
I told her we had no time to lose, and desired to know where she 
lived. She answered At the sign of the Fan and Kuffle, in Fleet 
Street, where she kept a milliner's shop. We had not far to go ; 
we made the best of our speed, and were let in by a servant-maid, 
who showed us to a back parlour. 

Jenny, said Mrs. Graves (that was her name), bring a glass, and a 
bottle of the cordial wine. You look a little pale, sir ; I hope you 
are not hurt. Not much, I think, madam, but I feel a small pain in 
my left shoulder. Sir, here is my best service to you, with my best 
blessings and prayers for you to the last hour of my life. You must 
drink it off, sir ; we both stand in need of it ; this was a frightful 
affair. Jenny, where's Arabella? Within a few doors, madam, at 
the Miss Hodgins'. Come, sir, said Mrs. Graves, T must look at 
your shoulder ; then, opening the top of my waistcoat, she instantly 
screamed out, God preserve my deliverer ! I fear he is wounded 
dangerously. Jenny, fly to Mr. Weldon's; bring him with you 



76 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

immediately; do not come without him. Dearest, worthiest of 
men, let me press another glass upon you. It is necessary in such 
a waste of blood and spirits. Madam, I replied, the wound cannot 
be of consequence ; but I was greatly fatigued at the time I had 
the happiness to rescue you from that ruffian. 

The surgeon soon came, and, looking at my wound, said some- 
thing apart to Mrs. Graves, who thereupon ordered Jenny to get a 
fire, and to make and warm the bed in the best chamber. 

Sir, said I to Mr. Weldon, do not alarm the gentlewoman. I am 
not of a fearful temper, and hope to bear my fortune like a man. 
Sir, said he, your wound has been made by a rifled ball, and it may 
cost you much pain to extract it. You must not think of stirring 
from hence for the present. By the time your bed is ready I will 
be back with the dressings. 

During the surgeon's absence, Mrs. Graves was all in tears, while 
I sat suspended between my natural fears of an approaching disso- 
lution, and my hopes of being suddenly and lastingly provided for. 
The cruelty of my father, the disappointment and overthrow of all 
my elevated expectations, and my utter incapacity of being of the 
smallest use to myself or mankind, had given me a kind of loathing 
to life. I had not, indeed, attended to my duty as a Christian ; but 
I was then innocent of any actual or intentional evil, and, as my 
conscience did not condemn me, I looked to mercy with a kind of 
humble resignation. 

Mr. Weldon came with the dressings, his eldest apprentice, and a 
man-servant. I was then conducted to my chamber, and helped to 
bed, where I was put to great anguish in the extraction of the ball ; 
as the periosteum had been lacerated, and the lead, being flattened, 
extended much beyond the wound it had made. 

Having passed a very painful and restless night, I remembered 
nothing further, till, at the expiration of twenty- one days, I seemed 
to awaken out of a long and uneasy dream. 

I turned my head and beheld, as I imagined, all arrayed in 
shining white, and at my bedside, an inhabitant of some superior 
region ; for never till then had I seen, nor even conceived an idea, 
of any form so lovely. 

Tell me, said T, fair creature, on what world am I thrown ? But 
instead of replying, she flew out of my apartment, and soon after 
returned, accompanied by Mrs. Graves, whose hands and eyes were 
elevated, as in some extraordinary emotion. 

Mrs. Graves, said I, how do you do? I hope you are well. I 
now begin to conjecture whereabouts I am. But neither did she 
answer ; but falling on her knees by my bed, and taking hold of my 
hand I thank thee, O my God ! she cried ; and, bursting into tears, 
she wept and sobbed like an infant. Ah, Mrs. Graves! said I, 
I fear that you have had a very troublesome guest of me. But 
then, says she, we remember that trouble no more, now that you 
are, once again, born into the world. 

During the few succeeding days in which I kept my bed, Mrs. 
Graves and her fair niece, Arabella, whom I had taken for a vision, 
constantly breakfasted and spent their evening in my apartment. 

I gave them a short narrative of my foregoing history ; and 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 77 

understood, on their part, that they were the sister and daughter of 
the late Keverend Mr. Graves, of Putney, who had little more to 
bequeath than his books and furniture, amounting to about five 
hundred pounds, which they held in joint stock, and had, hitherto, 
rather increased than diminished. 

As I scarce remembered my mother, and had now, as it were, 
no farther relation nor friend upon earth, I felt a vacuity in my 
soul, somewhat like that of an empty stomach, desirous of seizing 
on the first food that should present itself to my cravings. Delight- 
ful sensibilities ! sweet hungerings of nature after its kind ! This 
good woman and her niece became all the world to me. The one 
had conceived for me all the passion of a parent ; the other, that of 
the fondest and tenderest of sisters. On the other hand, I had for 
Mrs. Graves all the feelings of a child who conceives himself a part 
of the existence of her who bore him ; and my eyes and actions 
could not forbear to discover to Arabella, that my heart was that 
of the most affectionate of brothers, though too delicate to indulge 
itself in those familiar endearments which the nearness of kindred 
might venture to claim. 

When I was up and about the house, I requested Mrs. Graves to 
make out her bill for my board, and for my physician, surgeon, 
drugs, &c., during my long illness. Hereupon she looked eagerly 
and tenderly at me. Mr. Clement, says she, I think you are too 
generous designedly to reproach us with what we owe you. But 
for what is it, my child, that you desire us to charge you ? Is it 
for rescuing me from death, or a shame worse than death probably 
from both ? Or is it for delivering this, my darling, from the bitter 
grief and distress that my loss must have brought upon her ? Or 
do you rather desire to pay us for the fearful pains and sickness 
which you suffered on our account, and for having nearly forfeited 
your life in our defence ? No, Mr. Clement, you must not think of 
paying us the very debts that we owe you; more, indeed, Mr. 
Clement, than all our little fortune, than the product of the in- 
dustry of our lives, can ever repay. 

Here I was silenced for the present, but in no degree convinced ; 
and I felt, in a sort, the disgust of an injured person, uneasy and 
studious, till some revenge might be had. 

In two days after, while Mrs. Graves was at market, and Ara- 
bella gone with a Brussels head and ruffles to a young lady of dis- 
tinction, I stepped into the shop where Jenny waited the commands 
of those that should call. I had scarce entered when a sheriff's 
officer appeared at the door, and, bolting in, laid an execution on the 
shop for eighty-five pounds odd shillings, at the suit of Mr. Hard- 
grave, the cambric and lace-merchant. 

I was at first surprised and grieved, but pleasure quickly suc- 
ceeded to my concern on the occasion. I took out my pocket-book, 
immediately discharged the debt with costs, and gave a crown to 
Jenny on her solemn assurance that she would not betray a syllable 
of what had happened to her mistress or Arabella. 

Soon after this good gentlewoman and her niece returned, dinner 
was ordered up, and I sat down to table with a heart and coun- 
tenance more easy and cheerful than ordinary. 



78 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

Before the cloth was removed, Jenny came and delivered a note 
to her mistress. She read it over and over with apparent surprise 
and attention, asked if the messenger was waiting, and stepped to 
the door. Again she returned, sat down without speaking a word, 
and the muscles of her countenance being strongly affected, she 
could no longer retain her passion, and her tears burst forth. 

What is the matter ? cried Arabella ; my aunt my dear, dear 
mother my only friend and parent ? And, breaking also into tears, 
she threw herself about her neck. 

O, there is no bearing of this! exclaimed Mrs. Graves. This 
young man, my Arabella, distresses us beyond expression. He has 
this very clay, my love, for the second time, snatched us from 
instant ruin. I would tell you if I could speak; but read that 
note which she did accordingly. 

The note was signed Freestone Hardgrave; and imported how 
sorry he was that his late losses by sea had put him under the 
necessity of laying an execution on her house without customary 
notice. That he was glad, however, she had so large a sum ready 
as 90, the receipt of which he acknowledged, and hoped that this 
affair would make no difference with respect to their future 
dealings. 

And why, best and dearest of women, said I to Mrs. Graves 
why would you grieve that I should endeavour to relieve myself 
from a part of that burden with which your goodness and obliga- 
tions have so greatly oppressed me ? O that it were in my power ! 
I cried ; and my hands pressed each other with an involuntary 
ardour. But it never will it never can be possible for me to 
prove the passion that my soul has for you, and there I hesitated 
to show you, I say, the love that I have for you, Mrs. Graves. 
You two make my world, and all that I am concerned for or 
desire therein. 

Since that is the case, said Mrs. Graves, with a smile and a tear 
that glistened together, if you will admit an equal passion from one 
so old as I am, it were pity we should ever part. Send, my child, 
this very day, and discharge your former lodgings. The time that 
we spend together cannot but be happy. All cares are lessened by 
the society of those we love ; and our satisfactions will be doubled 
by feeling for each other. 

I did not at that time know the whole reason of the delight with 
which I accepted this generous invitation. I settled at Mrs. 
Graves's without any formal agreement, and all my little matters 
were directly brought home. 

O, how happy were many succeeding days ! How still more happy 
when contrasted with the misery that ensued ! "We spent all the 
time together that business and attention to the shop would permit, 
and we grudged every moment that was spent asunder. I related 
to them a thousand entertaining stories, and passages occasionally 
recollected from the poets and historians of antiquity ; and a secret 
emotion, and inward ardour for pleasing, gave me fluently to inter- 
sperse sentimental observations and pertinent digressions, more 
delightful to my auditory than all my quoted authorities. 

I was now daily gathering health and strength, to which the com- 






THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 79 

placence of my mind greatly contributed ; when one evening, Mrs. 
Graves returned more dejected than ordinary. I inquired into the 
cause, with a solicitude and countenance that naturally expressed 
the interest I took in her concerns. Why, my dear child, says she, 
perhaps I have been both impertinent and indiscreet, but I meant 
all for the best. You must know, then, that I have been on a visit 
to your father. To my father, madam? Even so. I would to 
Heaven that he were worthy to be called father to such a son. But 
as I was saying your father, Mr. Clement, is in great circum- 
stances ; he keeps his coach, has taken a fine new house, and lives 
at a high rate. I sent in my name, with notice that I came to him 
on business of consequence. I was thereupon shown to a back 
parlour, where he sat in company with Mrs. Clement and a lusty 
ill-looking young gentleman ; but your stepmother has a comely 
and good-humoured countenance ; she also appears to be far ad- 
vanced in her pregnancy. Mrs. Graves, said your father, take a 
seat. What are your commands with me, madam ? I came, sir, 
to let you know that your son, Mr. Hammel Clement, the best of 
human beings, has been at the point of death. Have you nothing 
to say to me, madam, but what concerns my son Hammel ? I have 
not, I confess, sir but that is more than enough; it is very 
interesting and aifecting, and concerns you most nearly. Here 
Mr. Clement, for I will never more call him by the sacred name 
of father ; here, I say, he started up, and catching at a book, he 
pressed it to his lips and cried 1 swear by the virtue of this 
and all other holy books, that I will never listen to any person 
who would speak a single word in behalf of Hammel Clement ; and 
so, mistress, give me leave to show you the way out again. So 
saying, he caught my hand and drew me to the door, while I 
turned and cried to your stepmother O madam! what sort of 
a heart is yours, that refuses its intercession on this occasion ? 
But she gave me an eye and sneer, of such a mischievous meaning, 
as expressed the whole fiend under the guise of an angel. When 
Mr. Clement had taken me to the outward door, I just turned and 
said I am sorry, sir, that a man of your grave and sensible 
appearance should suffer yourself to be so duped by people whose 
interest it is to deceive you; but, swelling into choler, he gave me 
a violent push from him, and clapped to the door in my face. So 
that, in short, my dear child, I fear I have done you harm, where 
I meant you true service. 

It matters not, my mother, said I (endeavouring to suppress a 
tear of tender resentment), I will soon, I trust, procure some kind 
of independence on that barbarian and his fortune ; and while I have 
you and your Arabella, I shall want neither father nor friend. 

Being now very nearly re-established in my health, I set out 
again in search after some employment that might suit me. As 
I was strolling on Tower-Hill, 1 observed a shop on my left hand ; 
it was that of Mr. Wellcot, a bookseller and printer. I stepped in, 
and after some introductory discourse I asked him if he had occa- 
sion, in the way of his business, for a friend of mine a gentle- 
man in distress, but of parts and learning. Alas, sir ! cried 
Wellcot, such creatures as you mention are a drug upon earth; 



80 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

there is a glut of them in all markets. I would give any one a 
broad piece per man who should deliver me from three or four of 
them who lie heavy on my hands. Not, sir, that they are greedy 
or idle in the least ; I can get one of these gentlemen, as you are 
pleased to call them, on whose education more money has been 
expended than, at the common and legal interest, would maintain 
a decent family to the end of the world I can get one of them, 
I say, to labour like a hackney horse from morning to night, at 
less wages than I could hire a rascally porter or shoe-boy for three 
hours. I employ them occasionally in correcting the press, or fold- 
ing or stitching the sheets, or running of errands. But then, sir, 
they have all of them aspects of such a bilious despondence, that 
a man may with less melancholy behold a death's-head ; and 
really, sir, I could not stand it, if custom, as I may say, did not 
harden me by the perpetual vision of these spectres. 

While Wellcot was speaking, I made a secret vow against having 
any kind of commerce or concern with booksellers or printers for 
at least a century to come ; but, fearing to be suspected as a party 
concerned, I affected an air as easy as possible, and, observing some 
females who were busy in stitching pamphlets, I asked him if they 
contained any thing new or entertaining. 

Sir, said Wellcot, this is an elaborate performance of the most 
eminent of our patriot writers ; I pay him, at the lowest, five 
guineas weekly ; and could any man write with double his spirit 
and genius, I could better afford to give that author a hundred, 
for good writings are like diamonds, that are valued according to 
their carats ; do but double their weight, and they immediately 
become of twenty times the estimation. 

This pamphlet consisted of a sheet, sewed in blue paper. I 
instantly paid my twopence, and sat down to peruse it. I found 
that it contained several very free remonstrances against his 
majesty and the ministers for joining with France in the war 
against Holland in opposition to the civil and religious interests of 
England, together with a few collateral digressions in assertion 
of Magna Charta, of the freedom of man in general, and of Britons 
hi particular. I perceived that it was written with much more 
judgment than genius. And what, said I to Wellcot, will you give 
to that man who shall, confessedly, excel this your most eminent of 
patriot writers upon his own subject, and in his own way? Give, 
sir ? cried the bookseller ; many thanks, and a proportionable in- 
crease of the profits. Enough, sir, I answered ; you shall soon 
hear from me again I wish you a good-morrow. 

On my return I called at Mr. Goodville's, but he had sailed for 
France about a fortnight before. I then went about to a number 
of pamphlet shops, and bought up all the political papers that had 
any reference to the matter in hand. 

I sat down to my work like a hungry man to his victuals; and 
I grudged my heart those short indulgences which it enjoyed in 
the society of 'the two objects of its fondest affections. 

Having finished my first paper in about a fortnight, I entitled 
it the Weekly Monitor, and took it directly to Wellcot's. Here, 
sir, said I, is my friend's first venture. But has your friend, de* 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 81 

manded "Wellcot in a discouraging accent, sent the usual indemnity 
for the first impression of a young author? That shall not be 
wanting, I answered, if you require it, Mr. Wellcot. Why, said 
he, I do not take upon me to be a judge in these matters ; and 
yet custom has given me a shrewd sort of a guess. Come, sir, I 
have a few minutes to throw away, and they are at your service. 

He then sat down, and having read about a dozen lines Ay, ay! 
said he, they don't always do thus at Newmarket; your friend, I 
find, has set out at the top of his speed. 

Going on something further, he cried Well supported, by Ju- 
piter ! And then, proceeding to the third page This, says he, must 
have been stolen from one of the ancients, because there is no 
modern who could write like it. Well, sir, you need not give 
yourself further trouble for the present ; I will print this first 
paper at my own suit. Desire your friend to be careful about the 
second. Call on me in a week, and I think I shall be able to tell 
you something that will please you. 

How diligent is expectation how elevated is hope ! I returned 
with the feathers of Mercury at my heels. I set about my second 
paper with double genius and application. My ideas were more 
expanded my spirits more sublimed. All the persuasives of 
Cicero ; all the thunder of Demosthenes ; all that I had read on 
the topic of liberty, in popular governments or commonwealths, 
occurred to my remembrance. 

I finished my second essay within the week. I went with it to 
Wellcot, and he presented me at sight with twenty guineas. It 
is more, said he. than hitherto comes to your share ; but I love 
to encourage, and I trust that in the run I shall not be a loser. 
I sell this pamphlet for twopence ; nearly two-fourths thereof go to 
printing, paper, &c. ; another fourth I reserve as an equivalent for 
my application and knowledge in this way ; and the remainder is 
a redundance which, on extraordinary tides, ought to flow to the 
writer. The demand for this paper has been very uncommon ; 
and, by what I can judge, the sale may in time amount to twelve 
thousand. You need not, sir, be ashamed to acknowledge yourself 
the author. Preserve but a moiety of the spirit of this Elijah 
with which you have set out, and my own interests will instruct 
me to serve you effectually. 

I now returned as in a triumphal chariot. I never before re- 
ceived the prize, as I may say, of personal prowess. The fortune 
of my father the fortune of all men living who were merely born 
to fortune diminished beneath me. O how sweet, said I to my- 
self, how delicious are the fruits of a man's own plantation ! Then, 
like the sagacious and independent spider, his labours will be 
crowned with personal honour and success, while he spins his sub- 
sistence from his proper bowels. It is then, and then only, that a 
man may be said to be the true proprietor of what he possesses ; 
and the value is endeared, and the enjoyment doubled, thereby. 

I hastened to impart my transports to the two loved objects of 
all my cares and satisfactions. Jenny told me that her mistress 
was not at home, but that Miss Arabella was above in her closet. 
I ran up, I tapped at the door, but no one answered. Again I 

G 



82 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

tapped and added the soft voice of affection, requesting to be 
admitted. At length she opened, but looked pale, and with 
swollen and downcast eyes. I perceived she had been in tears, 
and a sudden frost fell upon all my delights. What is the matter, 
miss, I cried ; my sister, my sweet friend, my dearest Arabella ? 
and I gently took her hand between both of mine. I wish you 
had not come at this time, Mr. Clement, said she, coolly. But you 
must permit me to keep my little griefs to myself. Yes, I replied, 
if it is your pleasure to torture, to kill me outright, refuse me my 
portion in your interests and concerns. O, Mr. Clement, says she, 
your soul is too generous I dare not tell you ; I feel what you 
would suffer should you know that you are concerned in the cause 
of my tears. But we must part, sir indeed, we must ; we must 
part, Mr. Clement, and that suddenly. 

Here her voice failed, and throwing herself into a chair, she 
burst out afresh into a gush of affliction, while I stood astonished, 
and, dropping beside her on one knee, awaited with unspeakable 
anguish the suspension of her grief. 

At length, perceiving my situation Else, sir, she cried, I entreat 
you to rise and take a chair beside me, and I will tell you as fast 
as I can of this distressful business. 

You must know that I was, a while ago, at the Miss Hodgins*. 
They are very friendly, and good young women, and told me in 
confidence, though with much concern, of a whisper in the neigh- 
bourhood, that my aunt had entertained a young gentleman in the 
house who was admitted to such familiar and convenient intimacies, 
as could not, at all times, be without their consequence, especially 
between persons of our age and sex. 

Now, Mr. Clement, I am no way ashamed to confess that I have 
nothing in heaven but my innocence, nor on earth but my cha- 
racter; and I think you wish me better than to desire that I 
should forfeit the one or the other. Desire it ! O heavens ! I sud- 
denly exclaimed, I will for ever guard them both to the last drop 
of my blood, and last breath of my life ! Alas ! cried Arabella, you 
are the man, of all others, whom the world would not admit for 
my champion in this case ; they are absolute judges ; they ought 
to be obeyed ; our parting will be painful, but it must be com- 
plied with. 

But, my sister, my Arabella, most lovely and most beloved of all 
the human species ! tell me, said I, my angel, is there no other way, 
no expedient to satisfy a misdeeming world, save a remedy that is 
worse than death itself? No, said she, with an air somewhat re- 
solute and exalted, there is no other expedient ; at least, no other 
to which I can consent. O, Miss Graves ! answered I, with a hasty 
dejection, if that is the case you shall be obeyed ; I am indeed very 
unhappy, but I will not be importunate. Adieu, dearest of creatures, 
adieu, for ever ! I spoke, and suddenly withdrew, and gave her, 
as I imagined, the last farewell look. 

Hold, sir ! she cried ; pray, stay a moment. I should be wretched 
beyond expression if you went away in the greatest of all errors. 
But is it possible you should think that I could mean any slight 
to you, Mr. Clement ? No, sir, no, of all men living ; indeed, it was 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 83 

not possible. I spoke through an humble sense of my own de- 
merits; my determination was just; I do not repent me of it. 
I I perhaps, sir, I have not understood you; indeed, I scarce 
know what 1 say or mean myself. Of this, however, be assured, 
that I can neither do, nor ever did, nor ever can, mean any offence 
to Mr. Clement. 

While she spoke I had kneeled before her. I took her hand and 
pressed it to my lips and my bosom. My Arabella, said I, I confess 
that this was no premeditated motion of mine. Nay, this very 
morning, the world should not have prevailed with me to have 
accepted this hand for which I now kneel. I was then poor and 
wretched, without resource ; and I could not think of bringing 
distress upon her, independent of whose happiness I could have no 
enjoyment. I was sensible that I loved you with infinite tender- 
ness, with unspeakable ardour ; but my passion did not dare to 
admit of hope I could have suffered all things to have heaped 
blessings upon you ; but I would not permit to my soul the distant, 
though dear wish, of being happy with you. Ah! what posture 
is this ? exclaimed Arabella. Nay, you shall not stir, I cried, nor 
will I rise till you have heard me a few words. Since morning, 
I say, I have got room to hope that my Arabella would not be so 
unhappy as I feared, in being united to me. I will not urge her, 
however. I leave her free I leave her mistress of her own will 
and actions ; but here I vow to heaven, that whether she live or 
die, consent or not consent, I will never marry another. I am, 
from this moment, her wedded for eternity, the faithful and fond 
hi sband of her image and remembrance. 

So saying, I rose and seated myself beside her. She looked 
astonished and affected beyond the power of utterance; but, 
covering her face with a handkerchief, she gently leaned toward 
me, and shed a plenteous shower of tears upon my bosom. 

When Mrs. Graves returned, I told her of my extraordinary 
success at the bookseller's. I had before made her the treasurer 
of my little possessions, and I poured my twenty pieces into 
her lap. 

Arabella, as I conjectured, did not delay to impart to her aunt 
the late adventure; for I observed that the eyes of that good 
woman dwelt upon me with a fresh accession of fondness and 
delight. 

Having finished my third paper, I took it to Wellcot, who pre- 
sented me with twenty guineas ; and further, acknowledged himself 
my debtor. Keturning homeward, I cast up, in a pleasing kind of 
mental arithmetic, how much my weekly twenty guineas would 
amount to at the year's end, and found it much beyond my occasions, 
even in the state of matrimony. 

I now looked upon myself as in the certain receipt of a plentiful 
income, and this encouraged me to press for the completion of my 
happiness. Decency alone could give difficulty or delay in an affair 
that was equally the wish of all parties. We were privately married 
in the presence of the Miss Hodgins' and two or three other 
neighbours ; and I was put in possession of the blushingest, fear- 
fullest, and fondest of all brides. 

G2 



84 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

Job very justly says " Shall we receive good at the hands of 
God, and not receive evil?" And yet, I imagine, that the recol- 
lection of past happiness rather heightens than alleviates the sense 
of present distress. My soul, in those days, enjoyed a tide of delight 
to the fulness of its wishes, and to the stretch of its capacity. I 
thought that till then no person had ever loved as I loved. But 
the love of my Arabella was a kind of passion that wanted a new 
name whereby to express it. It was an absence a sort of death 
to all other objects. It was a pleasure too paining ; a distressful 
attention ; the avarice of a miser who watches over his hoard, and 
joins to the rapture with which he beholds it, the terrifying ideas 
of robbery and loss. 

I had now, within the space of five weeks, received about one 
hundred and twenty guineas on the sale of my Monitor, when, going 
abroad one evening, I was stopped, within a few doors of my house, 
by a genteel-looking person, who asked if my name was Clement ? 
It is, sir, I answered. Then sir, says he, I arrest you in his ma- 
jesty's name for sedition, and a libel against the government. 
Then, beckoning to three or four sergeants that attended, he had 
me directly seized and conveyed toward Newgate. 

As I was not of a timorous temper, nor conscious of the smallest 
tincture of the crimes with which I was charged, I should have 
made little more than a jest of this business had I not trembled for 
the apprehensions of those who I knew would tremble for me. 

On the way, this officer informed me that my bookseller had be- 
trayed me, and had confessed to the ministers that I was the author 
of a famous pamphlet, entitled the Weekly Monitor. Being delivered 
to the keeper, I put a few pieces into his hand, and was conducted 
to a decent apartment, considering the place. 

I immediately sent for Humphrey Cypher, Esq., sergeant-at-law, 
whom I had once occasionally fee'd in behalf of Mrs. Graves ; and 
I sent, at the same time, for a set of the WeeHy Monitor. When 
Mr. Cypher came I put five pieces into his hand, and having told 
him my case, I requested him to peruse the papers in question, and 
to give me his opinion thereon. Having read them with due at- 
tention Mr. Clement, says he, I perceive that you are a learned 
and ingenious young gentleman ; but I find that you are better 
acquainted with the republics of Greece, than with the nature and 
constitution of our limited monarchy. Hence, alone, hath proceeded 
some lapses and misapplications that your adversaries would lay hold 
of. Yet there is nothing grossly scurrilous or malicious throughout, 
nor what may amount to the incurring of a prsemunire, by the most 
violent constraint or wresting of the sense. If you are inclined, 
says he, to proceed in the course of these papers, I would advise 
you to put in bail, and to stand the action. But as I am persuaded 
that the court have commenced this prosecution as a matter merely 
in terrorem, to deter you from a work that gives them great disgust, 
if you have any genteel friend who would solicit in your favour, 
and promise a future conduct more amenable to power, you would 
undoubtedly be discharged without further cost or trouble. 

I returned my warm acknowledgments to the sergeant for his 
friendly counsel, and told him I would consider of it before I gave 



TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 85 

him further trouble. When he was gone I despatched a letter to 
Mrs. Graves, wherein I gave her an account of my present situation, 
in a manner as little alarming as possible. I requested her to pro- 
vide bail for my appearance at bar, but insisted that, till this was 
done, neither she nor Arabella should come to my prison, and that 
I had given express orders that they should not be admitted. 

Alas ! had they complied with my directions, how happy might 
we have been all together at this day ! But the excess of their 
goodness was the cause of our common ruin. Their affection would 
not be satisfied with simple bail ; and they resolved never to rest 
till they had procured my full discharge. 

They went about to all their customers of any distinction. They 
solicited, petitioned, and bribed without measure. They borrowed 
money to the utmost extent of their credit; and pawned or sold 
all their effects under prime cost. They gave a purse to one to 
bring them acquainted with another, on whom they bestowed a 
larger sum to introduce them to a third. Having at length made 
their way to Lord Stivers, an agent of the minister, he thought he 
saw an advantage in granting their request, and my discharge was 
made out without further delay. 

On the fifth evening from my imprisonment the door of my 
chamber opened, and in came my dear aunt with my dearer 
Arabella they flew upon me they clasped me on each side in 
their arms, and my wife instantly swooned away upon my bosom. 
She soon revived, however, at the known voice of love; and as 
every door for my enlargement had been previously opened, we 
went down, stepped into the coach, and drove home directly. 

Here I saw the first subject and cause of alarm the shop was 
shut up! I was shocked, and felt a sudden chillness come upon 
me, but did not venture to inquire, except by my eyes. 

The kettle being down, and all seated to tea, I introduced the 
affair with an affected unconcern, and, by question after question, 
artfully extracted from my companions the whole history and ad- 
ventures of the five preceding days, whereby I found that they had 
expended in my behalf beyond the last penny of their own sub- 
stance ; and that nothing remained save one hundred and fifty 
pounds, to which the several deposits amounted, which I had made 
with Mrs. Graves. 

I could now no longer contain myself. Cruel woman inhuman 
friends ! I cried ; the bitterness of enmity, the rancour of malice, 
could never have brought an evil like this upon me. Accursed 
wretch that I am ! ordained to be the instrument of perdition to 
those whom I would feed with my blood and foster with my vitals ! 
"Would to heaven I had not been born ! or would I had been cut 
off by some quick and horrid judgment ere this had happened ! 

Here Mrs. Graves drew her chair close to mine, and catching 
me about the neck, and dropping upon me a few tears, that she 
struggled to suppress Do not grieve, my child, she cried ; do not 
afflict yourself for nothing. All is as it should be. There is no 
harm done. Your Arabella and I can always earn genteel and in- 
dependent bread, without shop or other means than the work of 
our hands. We can never want, my Hammy. We have done 



86 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

nothing for you. Neither has any thing happened wherewith you 
ought to reproach yourself. What we did was for ourselves, for 
the relief of the anguish of our own hearts ; to bring you home 
to us again as soon as possible, my son, since we have found that 
we could live no longer without you. 

Within a few days I perceived that my dear aunt began to 
decline in her health, perhaps occasioned by her late fatigue and 
anxiety of spirits. I brought an able physician to her, but he 
could form no judgment of the nature of her disorder, till some time 
after, when her complexion began to change, and the doctor de- 
clared her to be in the jaundice. He began to apply to the 
customary medicines, and no care nor expense was spared for her 
recovery. Arabella and I sat up with her alternately every night, 
and all the day we read to her some book of amusement, in order 
to dissipate the melancholy of her disease. But, alas ! all our cares 
and remedies, our attention and solicitude, our prayers and tears, 
proved equally unsuccessful, and at the end of five months she 
expired within our arms. 

Arabella then quitted her hold, and crossing her arms upon her 
bosom, and looking eagerly on the face once so lovely, and always 
beloved ! You are then at peace, said she, my mother. O death ! 
hadst thou not enough of terrors in thy aspect, without adding 
to thy agonies those of tearing from us that which we prized 
above life? my friend! my only parent! my dearest, dearest 
mother! She could say no more, but immediately fainted away 
upon the body. 

I took her up in my arms, and, carrying her into the next room, 
I laid her on the bed. I ordered Jenny and the two nurse-keepers 
to take care of her recovery, and charged them not to permit her 
to see her aunt any more. 

I then returned to the chamber wherein the precious ruins of 
the half of my world was laid. I locked the door within side. 
I approached the body, and hung over it, and gazed upon it with 
inexpressible emotion. I repeatedly clapped my hands together. 
I stooped down, and kissed and rekissed her cold h'ps in an agony 
of affection. I gave a free scope to my tears, sobs, and lamentations. 
Ah ! I cried, my parent, my patroness ; ah, mother to the son of 
your unhappy election ! Have I lost you, my only prop ? Are you 
for ever departed from me, my support and consolation? I was 
abandoned by the world, by friends, father, and relations ; but you 
became the world and all relations to me. " I was a stranger and 
you took me in ; I was sick, and in prison, and you ministered unto 
me." But you are gone, you are gone from me afar off; and I die 
a thousand deaths in the anguish of surviving you. Here you lie, 
my mother, the victim of your goodness to your unlucky guest. 
Wretch that I am, doomed to bring no portion save that of calamity 
to those who regard me ! Woe of woes, where now shall I ease my 
soul of its insupportable burden ? of the debt with which it labours 
to this kind creature? She will no more return to take ought 
at my hands, and I must suffer the oppression through life and 
through eternity! 

Having thus vented the excesses of my passion, my spirits sub- 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 87 

sided into a kind of gloomy calm. I returned to my wife. But 

I see, sir, you are too much affected. I will not dwell on this 
melancholy scene any longer. 

When I had discharged doctor's fees, apothecaries' bills, and 
funeral expenses, I found that our fortune did not amount to fifty 
pounds. My wife was now far advanced in her pregnancy; her 
labour was hastened by her grief and late fatigues ; and she was 
delivered of that boy whom your charity a second time brought 
into this world. 

As I was now all things to my Arabella, the only consolation she 
had upon earth, I never left her during her illness. By the time 
she was up and about, what with the charges of child-bearing, and 
a quarter's rent, &c., our fund was again sunk within the sum of ten 
pounds ; and I was going one evening to look out for some employ- 
ment, when we heard a rapping of distinction at the door. 

Jenny came in a hurry, and brought us word that Lord Stivers 
was in the parlour, and desired to speak with me. I went down, 
greatly surprised, and something alarmed at his visit. Mr. Clement, 
says he, with a familiar air, I have long wished to see you ; but I 
did not think it seasonable to disturb you during the misfortune of 
your family, and the illness of your wife. Your Weekly Monitors 
have genius and spirit, but they have done some mischief which we 
wish to have remedied. As how, pray, my lord ? Why, Mr. Clement, 
I never knew a writing in favour of liberty, or against any measures 
of government, which the populace did not wrest in favour of 
licentiousness, and to the casting aside all manner of rule. Now, 
Mr. Clement, we want you to undertake our cause, which is by 
much the more reasonable and orderly side of the argument ; in 
short, we want you to refute your own papers. 

O, my lord ! I answered, I should think it an honour to serve 
your lordship or the ministry on any other occasion. But in a 
matter that must bring public infamy upon me, indeed, my lord, 
you must excuse me. I should be pointed at, as an apostate and 
prostitute, by all men, and bring my person and writings into 
such disgrace, as would for ever disable me from serving either 
myself or your lordship. 

Well, sir, replied my lord, I will not then insist on a formal 
refutation of your own writings. I only ask, if you are willing to 
engage in our quarrel, as far as is consistent with honour and truth? 
I am, my lord, I rejoined, as far as is consistent with my own 
credit and the good of my country. 

The good of your country, Mr. Clement ! says my lord. I hope 
you do not think that government is contrary to the good of your 
country. Pray, in what do you make this LIBERTY consist, of 
which you are become so eminent a patron? 

There are two sorts of LIBEKTY, my lord, I answered: the first 
constitutes the duty and happiness of a man, independent of com- 
munity ; the second constitutes the privilege and happiness of a man, 
merely as he is a member of any state or commonwealth. 

Independent of community, a man is so far free, and no further, 
than he acts up to the dictates of reason and duty, in despite of 
inward appetite and outward influence. 



88 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

As a member of community, a man is so far free, and no further, 
than as every other member of that community is legally restrained 
from injuring his person, or encroaching on his property. 

Inimitably well defined ! cried his lordship. I have read volumes, 
in folio, upon the subject; but never knew what LIBEBTY was 
before. Well, Mr. Clement, as this LIBERTY of yours is, in all 
respects, so opposite to the licentiousness I was talking of, it cannot 
but make mainly in favour of good government. I therefore 
request you to write a treatise to the purpose of your definition ; 
and to take us with you, as far as you can. We shall not be un- 
grateful ; we are good paymasters, sir. Why do you hesitate ? Did 
you not tell me you were disposed to serve us ? 

My lord, I replied, I fear I should fall greatly short of your 
expectations. I am not studied in the constitution of modern states ; 
and how shall I be able to justify any government with respect to 
measures that, perhaps, are a secret to all except the ministers? 
I must further observe to your lordship, that my former field would 
be greatly contracted on this occasion. It is very easy and obvious 
to find fault and to call in question ; but to vindicate truth itself 
against popular prejudice, hoe opus, Me labor est. 

Mr. Clement, says my lord, I am proud that we have got a gen- 
tleman of so much honesty and ingenuity to befriend us. It shall 
be my care to provide you with materials, and I am confident that 
so great a master of his instrument as you are, will make excellent 
music on a few fundamental notes. Here are twenty guineas 
earnest, and ten guineas shall be paid you weekly, till we can fix 
you in some station of due honour and advantage. I will take a 
glass or a dish of tea with you in a few days, and I wish you a 
good-evening. 

On the third morning after this interview, my lord returned 
with a large bundle of antipatria pamphlets in his chariot, and 
some manuscript notes and hints for my instruction. He break- 
fasted with us, and was easy, polite, and cheerful. 

I now entered on my new province, but not with usual ardour. 
As I had formerly lashed the insolence, encroachments, and rapa- 
ciousness of power, less ambitious of conquest over aliens and 
enemies, than over the very people it was ordained to protect : I 
now, on the other hand, rebuked with like acrimony the riotous, 
factious, and seditious propensities of a turbulent, licentious, and 
unsatisfied people, ever repugnant to government, and reluctant to 
the reign of the gentlest ruler. I proved, from many authorities 
and instances, derived from Greece and Rome, that power is never 
so dangerous to a populace as when it is taken into their own 
hands ; that the governors and governed, by the violence of col- 
lision, are apt to fly to extremes on either side ; that anarchy is 
the most direct of all roads to tyranny ; and that a people, who 
have no will to be governed, reduce themselves to the necessity of 
being crushed, insulted, and governed, whether they will or no. 

Now, sir, though I thus alternately sided with the people against 
power, and with power against the people, yet I struck at nothing 
but faults on either hand, and equally asserted, on both sides of the 
question, the causo of my country, of liberty, and tnith. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 89 

I took five times the pains with these latter papers that I did 
with the former, and yet I confess I had not equal pleasure in the 
delivery. I am also persuaded that these had more than double 
the merit of the other; and, in point of sentiment, moral and general 
instruction, were of twenty times the value to mankind ; but how 
can that instruct which is not attended to? It was intimated to 
the people that these had been written at the instance of their 
governors; and they would not have listened to an oracle if 
uttered from that quarter. 

Six months had now elapsed in these lucubrations. I had deli- 
vered to my wife two hundred and sixty guineas, the weekly price 
of my labours. We had lived with great frugality. Arabella had 
again taken in as much work as her nursing and attention to the 
child would admit; and we had some pieces left of our former 
remnant, when Lord Stivers called in upon me, with pleasure and 
good news, as it were prologue in his aspect. 

Mr. Clement, says he, I want to speak to you apart. I had 
yesterday some talk with the minister about you, and he has 
promised me four hundred a-year pension for you till something 
better can be done ; and this is to be wholly clear and over your 
weekly wages of ten guineas, while we keep you so hard at work. 
But tell me, Clement, says he, laying his hand with an affectionate 
familiarity upon my shoulder, are you of a jealous temper? The 
furthest from it, my lord, of any man breathing. Oh ! I am glad 
of that ; but, if you were, I have nothing exceptionable to propose. 
To be short, half a dozen of noblemen, all my friends, and people 
of strict probity and virtue, have engaged to spend a share of 
to-morrow in a party of pleasure upon the Thames ; and we have, 
each of us, laid a bet of a hundred guineas, that from the number 
of his relations, his friends, or acquaintance, he will bring the 
prettiest woman to this field of contention. I had fixed on Lady 
Fanny Standish, a lovely creature, and a relation Oi my own, but 
she unfortunately happened to be pre-engaged to one of my rivals. 
I am therefore quite at a loss, and must infallibly lose my wager 
if you do not favour me with the company of Mrs. Clement. With 
her I can make no question of conquest ; and I give you my honour 
to pour into her lap the whole five hundred guineas, the just prize 
of her beauty. 

Why, my lord, I answered, this is indeed a very pleasant project, 
and has nothing in it exceptionable that I can perceive, if no one 
was to know any thing of the matter. But what will the world 
say to see your lordship so paired? Psha, never heed the world, 
Clement ! I am your world man. Your lordship has a very good 
right to scorn an inferior world, I rejoined ; but the world has an 
equal right, and would certainly make use of it, in the scorning 
of my wife. What, said he, warmly, you will not then confide her 
to my friendship and honour? I will not, my lord, confide her 
honour unnecessarily to any man, from under that guardianship 
and protection which I vowed to her in marriage. It is very 
well, Mr. Clement ; you may hear from me to-morrow. And away 
he went. 

He was equal to his word. The very next morning I was arrested 



90 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

at his suit for two hundred and fourscore guineas, the amount of 
all that I had received from him ; and I was hurried to the Fleet 
prison without being permitted to speak to any one. 

As my lord knew that, on issue, I must cast him in his action, 
and further come upon him for special damage and false duress, it 
instantly occurred that this was merely a stratagem for the seduc- 
tion of my Arabella ; and her defenceless state gave me inexpressible 
torture. I immediately wrote her an account of my situation and 
apprehensions, which unhappily for all parties were too well- 
founded. 

But, sir, I will not afflict you or myself by giving you a detail of 
these extraordinary events, as I afterwards learned them from the 
mouth of my wife, and from the testimony of others on trial in the 
public court. For, alas ! even now, when all anger should be dead, 
the remembrance of so much injury and outrage offered to one so 
pure, so helpless, and so gentle, wakes up the old indignation, and 
stirs my spirit to its centre. 

Sufficient to say that, taking occasion by my absence, my lord 
paid my wife a visit : that he had the audacity to make base over- 
tures to her, and to proffer her a large purse ; the former she had 
repulsed with scorn, the latter she had flung after him, as he 
retreated baffled and enraged. She then at once commenced to 
make up a sum by the sale of furniture, and other articles which 
she could spare, and by the afternoon of the following day, with 
incredible labour she had procured 40, which, with her former 
deposit of 260, was more than sufficient for my release ; and, as she 
was putting on her bonnet to come to me, her maid was suddenly 
called into the street, and Lord Stivers entered. Then began the 
first act of the tragedy which shadowed our life so long ; he had 
bribed her servant, and filled her kitchen with his retainers. At 
once, and casting aside all disguise, he addressed her in terms 
loathsome to her pure womanly nature; and, disregarding her 
pathetic prayers and appeals to his better feelings, he proceeded to 
such a measure of violence that he stung the lamb into a lioness ; 
and finding no help, from earth or heaven, near, in the agony and 
the wrath of the minute, she became the justifier of her own purity, 
and the executioner in the cause of her endangered honour, by 
slaying her brutal assailant. 

When the fatal blow was given, she at once went running to the 
cradle, where her infant lay crying ; she caught him in her arms ; 
and opening the chamber-door softly, and shutting it after her, she 
stepped down-stairs as upon feathers, and stealing to the street-door, 
she opened it suddenly, rushed into the street, and hurried on till 
she came to a stand of coaches, where she hired the first she met, 
threw herself hastily into it, and desired the man to drive with all 
speed to the Fleet prison. 

On her arrival she discharged the action and fees of arrest with 
all possible despatch, and then hurried up to my apartment. On 
the first gh'mpse I sprung to her, and caught her in my arms with 
unspeakable transport; but finding the child with her, and observing 
that her breath was quick and uneven, I withdrew a step or two, 
and looked eagerly at her ; and perceiving that she was pale, and 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 91 

had a kind of wildness in her eyes and motions What is the 
matter, my love, I cried ; what has happened to you ? I have not 
been well, she answered with an affected unconcern before the 
keeper. But pray come down, my dear; you are much wanted, 
and the coach is in waiting. 

Nothing further passed between us till we got into the coach, 
and that my wife desired the man to drive to some neighbouring 
street, and stop at the first door where he saw a bill for lodgings. 
For lodgings again, I demanded ; for whom does my Arabella 
desire to take lodgings? For you and me, Mr. Clement for you 
and me, she cried, wringing her hands together : Lord Stivers lies 
weltering in his blood ait our house, deprived of life within this half 
hour by my unhappy hand. 

I was suddenly struck dumb with surprise and horror. All the 
occasions and consequences of this direful event whirled through 
my imagination in a fearful succession. What must now become of 
my soufs sole enjoyment! what indignities must have been offered! 
what outrage might she not, or rather, must she not have suffered, 
before she could be brought to perpetrate so terrible a deed! I 
grew instantly sick, and putting my head through the window, 
desired the coachman to stop at the first tavern. I ordered the 
drawer to hasten, with a pint of Spanish white wine, to the door, 
and I pressed and compelled my wife to swallow a part. Our 
spirits being in some degree settled thereby, we drove to a private 
street, on the right-hand of Cheapside, where I took a back-room 
and closet, up two pair of stairs, at one Mrs. Jennett's, an old 
maid and a mantua-maker. I immediately ordered a fire to be 
kindled, and the tea-things to be laid, and, giving the servant a 
crown, desired her to bring the value in proper ingredients. 

The evening was now shut in ; and, while the maid was abroad, 
not a syllable passed between my wife and me. I dreaded to 
inquire of what I still more dreaded to understand ; and Arabella 
seemed to labour under some mighty oppression. When retiring to 
the closet, where our bed stood, she covered her child up warm, and 
kneeling down by his side, broke forth into a violent torrent of 
tears, intermingled with heavings and half-strangled sobs. 

I sat still without seeming to observe her emotion. I was sensible 
that nature wanted this kindly relief. The teas and sugars were 
brought, the kettle was put on the fire, and the maid had again 
retired ; when I gently called to my Arabella to come forth, with 
a voice of the truest love, and softest endearment, that ever yet 
breathed from a human bosom. 

Her eyes were already wiped, her countenance composed, and 
her motions and demeanour much more settled than before. She 
sat down with a rising sigh, which she checked with a half smile. 
My Arabella, said I, my only joy, my unmeasured blessing ! what 
is it that thus distracts my dearer part of existence ? Your mind, 
your spirit, my angel, is still pure and unpolluted ; and bodies are, 
merely as booses, incapable of defilement, being doomed from our 
birth to dissolution and corruption. Ah, my Hammy! she ex- 
claimed, you are quite beside the mark ; I sigh not, I weep not, I 
grieve not for myself. I fear not, nor regard the consequences, 



92 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

however fatal, of what has happened Suppose a sudden and 

shameful death ! I thank my God for it, death will offer me a 
victim still pure and unpolluted. But, O the wretched Stivers! 
what is now become of him, sent, so suddenly and unprovided, to 
his eternal audit ? Unhappy that I am ! perhaps an instrument of 
perdition to an immortal being. Ah, rather that I had not been 
born ! would I had perished in his stead ! A death in the cause of 
virtue had been my advocate for mercy. 

How is this, my Arabella ? I cried. Is condemnation then to be 
brought upon the good because they oppose themselves to evil? 
Would you have censured any one living, except yourself, for 
having given you this deliverance by the death of the spoiler ? No, 
surely, in the daily and nightly robberies, massacres, and assassina- 
tions, that the violent machinate against the peaceful; is it the 
fault of those who stand in the defence of righteousness, that 
villains often perish in the act of transgression ? Tell me, my sweet 
mourner, in the sacking of a city, when the wild and bloody soldiery 
are loosed to their own delight in burnings, rapines, slaughters, 
howlings, and violations ; is it the perpetrators of all these horrors 
that you compassionate, when they happen to be crushed in the 
ruins they have wrought? Meritorious, my Arabella, most meri- 
torious were that hand who should cut a whole host of such infernals 
from the earth ; remaining innocence and virtue would be his 
debtors for ever. Commiseration to the flagitious is cruelty to the 
just ; and he who spares them becomes the accomplice of all their 
future crimes. 

During tea, my wife gave me an ample narrative of all that 
happened at our house while I was in confinement. As she spoke, I 
was first speechless with fearful and panting expectation : I was then 
kindled into fury and a vehement thirst of vengeance ; and, lastly, I 
was elevated into an awful rapture. I looked at my wife with eyes 
swimming with love and veneration ; I rose from my seat ; I threw 
myself on my knees, and worshipped that GODHEAD who inspires 
and delights in such perfections as I then saw before me. 

Our fortune was now reduced to very little more than fifteen 
guineas. We had no clothes but what we wore : and we did not 
dare to go or send to our house for others, neither to make our- 
selves known to any acquaintance. 

We went by the name of Stapleton ; and on the following night 
I ventured abroad, and bought for myself a few second-hand shirts, 
with a common gown, and some changes of linen for my wife. 

On the fifth day, at breakfast, while Arabella was casting her 
eye over a newspaper that she had borrowed from Mrs. Jennett, 
she turned suddenly pale. What, she cried, before I could question 
her, accused of robbery as well as murder ! that is hard, indeed. 
But I trust that my lot shall not exceed my resignation. And so 
saying, she handed me over the paper with a smile, in which heaven 
appeared to open. 

The advertisement ran thus "WHEEEAS Arabella Clement, 
alias Graves, did on the 15th day of September instant, most bar- 
barously stab and murder the right Hon. James * * * *, late Lord 
Stivers, at a house where she formerly had kept a milliner's shop, 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 93 

in Fleet-street : and whereas she did further rob the said right hon. 
&c. of a large purse of money, his gold repeater, snuff-box, diamond- 
ring, &c. ; and did, lastly, flee for the same, as may be proved, and 
is evident, from the examination and testimony of three concurring 
witnesses : Now his majesty, in his gracious abhorrence of such 
crimes, doth hereby promise a reward of three hundred guineas to 
any person who shall stop, discover, or arrest the said Arabella, so 
as that she may be brought to condign and adequate punishment, if 
any such may be found, for such unequalled offences." 

O, said my wife, I perceive that my enemies will swear home 
indeed ! Their plunder of Lord Stivers can no way be assured save 
by my condemnation. But, be it as it may ; that Providence, who 
overrules the wickedness of this world, may yet give submission a 
clue to escape its perplexities, and my innocence, I trust, will be an 
equivalent to all that the world can inflict, and much more than an 
equivalent to all that it can bestow. 

I now had every thing to fear for my Arabella, as well from the 
interested villainy of the witnesses, as from the power of the 
ministry, and the resentment of the relations of so great a man ; and 
I looked upon her death to be as certain as her caption. Had I 
been the first in remainder to the greatest estate in England, I 
would have exchanged my whole interest for as much ready cash as 
would have served to convey us to some region of safety. But this 
was not practicable with the very small remainder of the wreck of 
our fortune ; and we had taken our lodging certain at fifty shillings 
per quarter. 

We appeared as little as possible, even to the lodgers of the 
house ; and I intimated to my landlady, that it was the fate of 
many a gentleman to be obliged to abscond till his affairs could be 
compounded with hard-hearted creditors. 

During the space of nine months our principal diet was weak tea 
and bread ; and if we ventured, at odd times, on a small joint of 
meat, it served us cold, hashed, and minced, from one week to the 
other. 

As my wife did not dare to take in work, nor I to stir abroad 
to look for employment, our chief entertainment was the reading 
some old folio books of history and divinity, which I borrowed 
from Mrs. Jennett, and which had belonged to her father. 

How small must be the cravings of simple nature, when a family 
like ours, accustomed to affluence, could subsist in London, without 
murmuring, for upward of nine months, on less than eight guineas! 
But our fund was now exhausted to a fow shillings ; and my sword, 
watch, and buckles were also gone, in discharge of our three 
quarters' rent to the landlady. Kuin stared us in the face. I 
beheld as it were a gulf, unfathomable and impassable, opening 
beneath our feet, and heaven and earth joined to push us down the 
precipice. 

We yet lived a month longer, on coarse bread and cold water, 
with a little milk which we got, now and then, for the child ; but 
I concealed from my wife that we had not a single sixpence now 
left upon earth. 

I looked up to heaven, but without love or confidence. Dreadful 



94 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

power ! I cried out, who thus breakest to powder the poor vessels 
of thy creation ! Thou art said to be a bounteous and benevolent 
caterer to the spawn of the ocean, and to the worms of the earth. 
Thou clothest the birds of the air and the beasts of the forest ; 
they hunger, and find a banquet at hand. Thou sheddest the dew 
of thy comforts even on the unrighteous ; thou openest thy hand, 
and all things living are said to be filled with plenteousness. Are 
we alone excepted from the immensity of thy works? shall the 
piety of my wife, shall the innocence of my infant, thus famish, 
unregarded and unpitied, before thee ? 

Ah, it is I who am the accursed thing who bring plagues upon 
all with whom I am connected ! Even the labours of my life, the 
issues of my honest industry, have been changed by thy ordinances 
into nothing but damage ; to the imprisonment of my person ; to 
the ruin of those who had the misfortune to befriend me ; and to 
the death, danger, and desolation of all whom I held dear. I strive 
in vain with thy omnipotence ; it is too mighty for me, and crushes 
me below the centre. Pour out, then, the vessels of thy wrath 
upon my head, but, on my head alone, just Creator ! and take 
these little ones to thy mercy, for they cannot have participated of 
the guilt thou art pleased to impute to me. 

The night was now advanced ; but that which fell upon my soul, 
was a night which would admit no ray of comfort, nor looked 
ever to behold another morning. I wished ior dissolution to my- 
self, to the universe. I wished to see the two proprietors of my 
soul's late affections now lying pale and breathless before my eyes. 
I would not have endured my hell another moment. I would have 
given myself instant death ; but I dreaded to leave my desolate 
widow and helpless orphan, without a friend, as I then conceived, 
either in heaven or earth. 

My wife had lain down with her infant on the bed. A sudden 
reflection started. My death, thought I, may yet be useful to those 
for whom only I could wish to live. I rose frantically determined. 
My brain was on fire. I took down an old pistol which hung in a 
corner ; I put it into my breast ; down-stairs I went, and issued 
to the street. 

I was bent on something desperate, but knew not what. I had 
not gone far when I saw a large tavern open beside me. I passed 
through the entry, and running up-stairs, boldly entered the dining 
room, where a numerous company of gentlemen sat round their 
bottle. I clapped to the door ; and taking out the pistol Gentle- 
men, I cried ; I starve, I die for want ; resolve instantly to relieve, 
or to perish along with me. 

They all fixed their eyes upon me ; but the meagre frenzy, as I 
suppose, which they saw in my countenance, held them silent. The 
person who was nearest, directly took out his purse and presented 
it to me. I again returned it to him, and putting up my pistol 
No, no, sir, I cried, I will not take your gold, I am no robber. 
But give me some silver among ye, to keep a while from the grave 
three creatures who famish amidst a plentiful world. 

They all, as by one consent, put their hands to their pockets, 
and instantly made a heap of upwards of three pounds. I de- 



TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 95 

voured it with my eyes ; I beheld it as a mint of money ; and 
panting, and grappling at it like a vulture, I stuffed it into a side- 
pocket ; and, being too full of acknowledgments to thank my 
benefactors by word or token, I burst forth into tears, and, turn- 
ing from them, I got once more into the street without any 
interruption. 

I made directly home, and, stepping softly up-stairs, I first re- 
stored the pistol to its old station. I then went to the closet, 
where my wife lay still asleep. I gently waked her by the fond- 
ness of my caresses. My Arabella, I cried, I have ventured out for 
the first time, and heaven has sent us some small relief by a friend 
that I happened to meet. Here, my love, I said, putting a crown 
into her hand ; call the maid, and send out for some comfortable 
sustenance ; our fast has been long indeed. 

Within a few days our strength and our spirits began to recruit, 
though we still continued to live much within the bounds of tem- 
perance. My soul again settled into a kind of sullen calm, and 
looked forth, though at a distance, to some future dawning. 

One day, as my landlady's Bible lay shut before me, a sudden 
thought occurred. I breathed up to God a short and silent ejacula- 
tion, beseeching him to instruct me in what I ought to do, by the 
passage upon which my thumb should happen to rest on opening 
the book. I instantly made the venture, and found the following 
words : " I will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him, 
Father, I have sinned against thee, and before heaven, and am no 
more worthy to be called thy son." 

Alas ! I was far from imagining at that time that it was no other 
than my Father in heaven who called me, and who would thereby 
have directed and conducted me to himself. 

I puzzled and racked my memory to discover in what I had 
given just offence to my earthly progenitor, but resolved, at all 
events, to observe the admonition. 

In the dusk of the evening, I tied my handkerchief sailor-like 
about my neck, I pulled my wig forward, and slouching my hat, I 
slid out of doors ; and, stooping half double, I limped with a coun- 
terfeited gait toward my father's. I was duly apprised that, if I 
knocked at the door, or directly inquired for him, I should not 
be admitted. I therefore walked to and again, now near, now aloof, 
for near an hour, before his door, in patient expectation of his 
appearance. 

I had repeated this exercise for five successive evenings, when 
the door at length opened, and a servant in livery came up and 
accosted me. Is your name Clement, sir? Suppose it were, says 
I. Supposing so, replied he, I am ordered to tell you that my 
master is well informed of all your wicked designs ; and that, if 
ever you appear again in sight of his windows, he will send you to 
Newgate without bail or mainprize, and prosecute you to the last 
of the laws of the land. 

We parted without another word, and I crossed over the way to 
a chandler's shop. The good woman of the house also happened 
to sell some small ale in her back apartments. I called for a mug, 
and requested her company for a few minutes. After some intro- 



96 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

dnctory chat, I addressed her in a manner that I judged most en- 
gaging: for one in her sphere. She very freely told me the his- 
tory of my father and his present family ; and further, that it was 
his custom on every Monday and Friday to repair to the Trades- 
man's Club, at the Golden-anchor in Temple-lane, about eight of 
the clock at night, and not to return till about eleven. 

I went home something satisfied with this intelligence, as I now 
knew where to find my unnatural parent, though his last barbarous 
and insulting message had rendered me hopeless, and quite averse 
to any kind of application to him. 

We had now lived three months longer on the last booty or 
charity, I know not which to call it. We were again reduced to 
the last shilling, and, what was still worse, our landlady became 
importunate for her quarter's rent. My wife had lately requested 
her to look out for some sempstry-work among the neighbours. 
This she promised to do, but purposely declined, as she and her 
family got the benefit of her labour gratis. 

I began again to return to my former evil thoughts. I resolved 
to make war upon the whole race of man, rather than my wife and 
infant should perish in my sight : but I reflected that it was more 
equitable to begin with a father, on whom nature had given me a 
right of dependence, than to prey upon strangers, on whom ne- 
cessity alone could give me any claim. 

It was Monday night. The clock struck ten. I took down the 
old pistol, and marched toward the Anchor. I patrolled near the 

Slace of expectation above an hour. The night was excessive 
ark, and no lamps in that part. At length I listened to the sound 
of distant steps, and soon after heard a voice cry Murder, murder ! 
Bobbery ! Watch, watch ! 

I ran to the cry, and perceived one man on the ground, and 
another stooping, in act to rifle his pockets. I instantly drew my 
pistol, and striking at the robber's head with my full force, I laid 
him senseless on the pavement. I then gently raised the other, 
who was bleeding and stunned by the stroke he had received. I 
supported him step by step toward a distant lamp, where at length 
we arrived, and found a tavern open. I entered, and ordered a room 
with fire and lights ; and desired that a surgeon should be imme- 
diately called. The gentleman, whose face was nearly covered 
with blood and dirt, began now to recover his strength and senses. 
I got him to swallow a small dram of spirits, and he stepped with 
me up-stairs, scarcely leaning on my shoulder. 

While we sat by the fire, and a napkin and warm water were 
getting ready, the stranger grew passionate in his acknowledg- 
ments for the life which he said he owed me, and which service he 
promised to recompense to the stretch of his power and fortunes. 
But when he had washed and wiped away the blood and dirt from 
his face ; heaven ! what was my emotion at the sight of an aspect 
once so loved and so revered ! All my injuries and resentments 
vanished instantly from my memory. I fell at his knees with 
a great cry Is it you, then, my father? my once dear, my ever 
dear and lamented father ! Is it the face of a father that I at last 
behold? I burst into tears: I wept aloud. I interruptedly de- 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 97 

manded Will you not know me ? will you not own me ? will not 
nature speak in you? will you not acknowledge your son, your 
once beloved Hammel, so long the comfort of your age, and the 
pride of your expectations ? 

While I spoke, my father looked wild and eager upon me. He 
at length recollected me through all my leanness and poor apparel ; 
and, hesitating, replied I I I believe indeed you are my child 
Hammel, and straight fainted away. 



CHAPTER VIIL 

DURING his fit, the surgeon came with his instruments and 
dressings ; and having in vain attempted to restore him, by sprink- 
ling water in his face, and by the application of hartshorn to his 
nose and temples, he took some blood from him, whereon he opened 
his eyes, and began to breathe with freedom. He then examined 
his wound, which was a little above his forehead, and declared it so 
slight as scarce to be an excuse for keeping his chamber. The 
surgeon, having dressed it, received his fee and retired; and my 
father ringing for the drawer, ordered up a flask of Burgundy, with 
a cold fowl, oil, and vinegar. 

When the table was laid, and the waiter desired to withdraw, 
my father again looked earnestly and compassionately upon me 
I believe, says he, my child may be hungry; and straight his 
countenance falling, and the muscles of his lips beginning to work, 
he broke into tears. Barbarous wretch ! he exclaimed ; unnatural 
ostrich ! who could thus leave the first-begotten of thy bowels to 
the nakedness of the sands, and to the blasting of the elements. 

No, no, my father, I cried, again throwing myself on my knees 
before him ; kill me not with your tears, crush me not with this 
your unmerited concern ! All is well, all is happy and blessed as 
I can bear it to be. This moment overpays my years of anguish ; 
it is like heaven after passing the vale of death and mortal sufferings. 

After supper, of which my father scarce tasted, he got up, and, 
as I rose at the same time, he stepped to me, and catching me 
passionately in his arms, and putting his neck across mine My 
child, he cried ; my beloved child, my life's blessed preserver ! come 
once more to my bosom, enter thy forsaken mansion ! Too long has 
it been desert and desolate without thee ! But here I vow to the 
Almighty, that no stepdames, nor viperous instruments, shall ever 
hereafter insinuate between us ; accursed be they who shall attempt 
to divide us ; and may they come to an evil end who shall desire 
to deprive me of thee, the light of mine eyes, till I am cold and 
insensible to every other joy. 

While we sat over our bottle, my father called for ink and paper, 
and first presenting me with a purse of fifty guineas, he again 
gave me a bill at sight on his banker for five hundred pounds. 
I started up, but stopping me, he cried Hold, hold, my Hammy, 
I see myself overpaid in the acknowledgments of that dear though 
meagre countenance ; and then as I kneeled before him, with both 

H 



98 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

hands held over me, and eyes raised to heaven, he blessed me in 
an ejaculation of the tenderest ardour. 

The reckoning being discharged, and two chairs ordered to the 
door, my father desired me to meet him at the same tavern the 
following evening ; and said that, in the mean time, he would think 
of settling some certain income upon me ; and thus we parted, as 
though our souls had accompanied each other. 

It was now near two o'clock, and the morning bitter cold. My 
Arabella had, long since, put her child to rest ; and I found her in 
tears by a fire, scarce alive. She started up on my entering ; her 
face gleamed with a sickly joy ; and she uttered some soft re- 
proaches, of love and apprehension, for my absence at those hours. 

Before I ventured to let in the full tide of our returning happi- 
ness on her weak and alarmed spirits, I took out some confections 
and a pint of sack, which I had purposely brought in my pocket. 
I broke some Naples biscuit into a cup, and pouring some of the 
wine upon it, I set her the example, and prevailed on her to eat. 

Meanwhile she gazed earnestly and inquisitively in my face. 
My Hammy, she tenderly cried, what is the meaning of this? 
What eyes are these, Hammy? what new kind of a countenance 
is this you have brought home to me ? Ah, forbid it, my God ! 
that the darling of my soul should have done any thing criminal. 
First, perish your Arabella, perish also her infant, rather than, 
on our account, or on any account, the least of the virtues of my 
Hammy should be lost. 

No, no, my angel, I cried, daughter of highest heaven ! God has 
been wonderfully gracious to me ; he blesses me for your sake, my 
Arabella. I have seen my father ; we are happily reconciled, and 
famine and affliction shall come near us no more. 

I then took the bellows and lighted up a good fire, and while we 
were emptying our pint, of which I compelled my wife to take the 
larger share, I gave her a transporting detail of what had passed, 
and poured my purse of guineas into her lap. So we went to bed 
in peace, regardless of futurity, the happiest of all the pairs on 
whom the succeeding sun arose. 

We lay in bed till the day was far advanced. I then ordered 
some comforting white-wine caudle for breakfast, and, calling up 
the landlady, I discharged our quarter's rent. 

When she was dismissed, I consulted with my wife whether she 
would choose to retire to France or Holland ; or rather to York, or 
some other remote place within the kingdom. But, reflecting again 
on the present excess of my father's tenderness for me, she joined 
in thinking it advisable to act with his concurrence ; and I de- 
termined that very evening to reveal to him, in confidence, the 
whole pathetic history of our marriage and adventures. 

Meanwhile I thought it best, in all events, to secure the means 
of moderately compassing our purpose, by taking up the 500 
from my father's banker. I found, by experience, that I had now 
little to fear from being known to any one. My shabby apparel, 
and emaciated face and limbs, that had prevented the knowledge 
and remembrance of a father, appeared a double security against 
all other eyes. I therefore adventured, though not without circum- 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 99 

spection, to Mr. Giles's in Lombard-street, and, presenting my bill, 
demanded payment. 

My friend, said Mr. Giles, it is not two hours since a stop was 
put to the payment of that draught; and I was desired, at the 
same time, to put this paper into the hands of the party who should 
call. So saying he gave me a note, which I opened with a trepida- 
tion that was turned into agony on reading the following words : 

"To HAMMEL CLEMENT. 

"Most subtle, and most accursed of all cruel contrivers! thou 
didst thyself, then, set that villain on thy foolish and fond father ; 
by whom his blood was shed, and his life nearly lost. I renounce 
thee, I abjure thee from henceforth, and for ever. And as I con- 
tinue to disclaim all sorts of ties with thee, either here or hereafter ; 
so may heaven continue to prosper, 

" BARTHOLOMEW CLEMENT." 

On reading this dreadful paper, I retired from the counter with- 
out speaking a word. I got home, I know not how ; for I neither 
knew what I did, nor considered what I was about. I walked up- 
stairs without perceiving that I was followed. But I had scarce 
got into my room, when five or six men entered almost along with 
me; and one of them stepping directly up to my wife, cried 
Mistress, I arrest you in his majesty's name. 

Hereat I turned, and was stunned, and roused again in an instant. 
I caught up the poker, and aiming at a well-dressed man whose 
face was not wholly unknown, and who appeared the most active 
and joyous of the crew, I missed the crown of his head, but tore 
off one ear, and cut him through his clothes and shoulder to the 
bone ; I then flew upon the rest. I dealt my blows with incon- 
ceivable fury and quickness. I cleared my room in a few seconds ; 
and though several shots were fired at me from the stairs, I chased 
them all to the entry, and, returning to my Arabella, I barricadoed 
the door. 

It was then that she interposed, and, dropping on her knees 
before me What is my Hammy about ? she cried ; what madness 
has possessed my love ? Would you be guilty of actual and instant 
murders, through a rash and vain attempt of rescuing from our 
laws a person whom neither God nor man hath yet condemned? 
This, indeed, were to ensure the ruin you apprehend. Ah, no, my 
heart's master, let us neither commit nor fear iniquity ! Join with 
me, my Hammy, let us trust in our God, and nothing but good can 
happen unto us. 

While she spoke, the late terrors of her countenance disappeared, 
and her aspect was gradually overspread with a serenity, to be 
imagined, in some measure, from the face of an evening heaven 
in autumn, when the songs of harvest are heard through the villages 
all about. 

I gazed on her with a speechless and complacent reverence. 
She gently took the weapon from my unresisting hand ; and, leading 
me back, she seated me in the furthest chair. She then removed 
every bar and obstacle to their entrance. The stairs were now 

H2 



100 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

filled with people who had been called to the assistance of the 
king's officers, but they still appeared apprehensive, and fearful of 
advancing. 

Gentlemen, said Arabella, be pleased to walk in ; I deliver myself 
peaceably into your hands; ye shall find no further opposition to 
his majesty or the laws. The officers accordingly entered, but 
bowing, and with a timid kind of respect ; neither did any of them 
offer to lay a hand upon her. Good God, madam ! exclaimed the 
foremost, is it possible you should be guilty of the crimes laid to 
your charge by that rascal, whom your husband has half killed? 
He is carried off to the doctor's; but I think, in my conscience, 
that he has got his deserts ; and, as for the few hurts that we have 
received, we excuse your husband, madam, for your sake ; and we 
think him the braver and the better man for what he did. For, in 
truth, sweet madam, you are well worth defending. 

I thank ye, gentlemen, said my wife, gracefully smiling and 
curtsying ; pray, be pleased to sit while I prepare to attend you. 
I am guilty, indeed, of the death of a man, and yet guilty of no- 
thing that I would not repeat in the defence of virtue. But, 
gentlemen, says she, again smiling, you are likely to be troubled 
with more prisoners than you look for. One of them, indeed, is 
young, and as little meaning of harm to any one as his mother. I 
must, therefore, beg your indulgence in sending for a coach ; and 
pray, do me the favour to accept this trifle, as the means of washing 
away animosity between you and my husband. So saying, she pre- 
sented their chief with a guinea ; who, rising and awfully bowing, 
ordered one of the others to step for a coach. 

Had the harp of Orpheus been tuned like the voice of my Ara- 
bella at this season, it is not to be wondered that tigers should grow 
tame, and bears crouch down before him and lick his feet; since 
wretches like these, hardened in hourly acts of insolence and in- 
humanity, were now awed to downcast reverence, and, on her 
return from the closet with her infant in her arms, dropped a tear 
of still compassion, as though they had not wholly forgotten that 
they were born of women. 

In the mean time, my fury having subsided at the instance of my 
wife, I should certainly have fainted if I had not been relieved by 
a gush of tears ; which I endeavoured to conceal by turning aside 
and putting my handkerchief to my face. A cloud of thick dark- 
ness again overspread my soul ; and every internal idea grew 
pregnant, and laboured with apprehension and horror. I cursed 
my meeting with my father, and his treacherous appearance of 
bounty, which had served to bring this decisive ruin upon us; 
and I looked upon fortune as solicitous and industrious to bring 
evil and destruction out of every presentment and promise of 
advantage. 

Being conducted to Newgate, I agreed with the keeper for a 
tolerable apartment at two guineas per week ; and, putting on the 
best cheer I could affect before my wife, I sent out for a nourishing 
dinner ; for I judged it late to be frugal when death was at our 
door, and I had determined not to survive my Arabella a moment. 

The day following, I procured copies of the depositions of the 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 101 

three witnesses, the first of whom was our own servant-maid. 
These I laid before two of the most learned in the law, but 
received no consolation from their report. They told me that, had 
my wife been actually guilty of the robbery as alleged, she might 
have had some prospect of being acquitted of the murder, by being 
enabled to bribe off the evidence. But that, if she was really 
innocent of the robbery, as I affirmed, it then became the very 
cause as well as interest of the guilty evidence to have her con- 
demned on both articles of accusation. 

As the fearful day approached, I bought at second-hand two 
decent suits of mourning, with the requisite appendages for my 
wife and myself. Whenever I could get apart, I was drowned in 
my tears, and half-sufibcated by my sobs ; and I did every thing 
but pray for my Arabella ; for I could not think of lifting my heart 
to heaven, where I had lost all dependence. 

In the mean time my beloved daily recovered flesh and health. 
Her eyes grew more brilliant, her complexion more clear, her 
countenance was as the surface of a depth of peace ; and I gathered, 
I knew not why, a kind of reflected confidence by beholding her 
aspect. 

Early on the fatal morning, when I had left her within at her 
prayers, and had pulled my hat over my eyes, and sat down in a 
corner to vent the throbbings of my heart, I cast my eye on a 
paper that appeared from under the door. I took it up with 
precipitation, and in it found the following lines : 



Though mountains threat thy naked head, 

Though circling gulfs around thee close, 
Though help is distant, hope is dead, 

Though earth and hell are sworn thy foes. 

n. 

Yet, Heav'n their malice shall defy; 

And, strong in last extremes, to save, 
Shall stand with guardian seraphs nigh, 

And with thy sland'rers glut the grave. 

I had no sooner read this paper, than I dropped down involun- 
tarily on my knees. My hands clenched together ; and I breathed 
up a most ardent petition, that some over-ruling power would take 
my Arabella under his protection. 

Soon after she came forth, adorned like the moon when girt 
about with clouds, through whose blackness her beauty breaks 
forth with improved lustre. 

While we sat at breakfast I presented her with the verses. She 
read them over and over with deep attention ; and then returning 
them with a smile This, says she, has been the stratagem of some 
very charitable person, who judged that hope was wanting to 
support me at such a trial. 

As the dreadful hour was at hand, and as I had considered before 
now that at last it must come, I had prepared a small bottle of 
salts and a cordial, to support myself as well as my wife from an 
unseemly dejection of spirits in court. 

Ah, sir, can you tell me how one thing should come to pass? can 



102 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

you account for this most extraordinary of all the workings in 
human nature? that a man at some times should more feelingly 
live, or die in others, than in himself. Had I been called to my last 
audit, had the decision of my own existence been at stake, my 
apprehensions, as I think, could not have equalled what I felt at 
that period. 

At length the keeper appeared, and warned my Arabella that she 
must speedily set out. I turned instantly cold and pale ; and it was 
long before I recovered strength to rise from my chair. In the 
mean time my wife returned to our bed-chamber, and, bringing 
out her infant, gave him in charge to a nurse-keeper; she then 
held her hands over him, and raised her eyes to heaven in blessing 
for some time. Again she fixed them on his face, and gazing upon 
him, as it were, for a last farewell look, tear dropped after tear in 
a pathetic and affectionate silence. 

Being conducted to the Old Bailey, my wife on entering the 
court turned suddenly pale ; and her countenance was downcast 
with a diffidence that she could not for some time overcome. The 
concourse was excessively great, and chiefly consisting of the nobility 
and gentry of both sexes. The great man himself was there, with 
a crowd of his dependants, and all the male and female relations 
and friends of the deceased. 

I gave my Arabella the salts to smell to ; and, as she weakly 
and bashfully advanced to the bar, a confused and jarring murmur 
was held on all sides, and the words impudence and innocence 
resounded throughout. 

When, according to order, she had held up her hand and heard 
her indictment, the judge, with a countenance and voice equally 
stern, demanded guilty, or not guilty ? She answered, Guilty, my 
lord, I confess, of the death of Lord Stivers ; but never guilty of 
any kind of robbery or malice. Woman, said the judge, you confess 
yourself guilty, and I shall proceed to your sentence. But I ask 
you, for the last time, guilty or not guilty? Not guilty, my lord, 
she then rejoined ; if to do what I approve, and shall never repent 
of, is not to be guilty. 

Again the murmur was repeated; but continued much longer, 
and with more virulence on the one part, and more concern on the 
other. 

I shall not detain you, sir, with an account of the examination of 
the two first witnesses, one of whom had been our own servant- 
girl, and the other the principal footman of Lord Stivers. They 
had all manner of encouragement and countenance from the court, 
and concurred in every circumstance that could serve for condemna- 
tion. The sound of triumph was heard through all the gentry, and 
the populace sighingly gave my Arabella for lost. 

The third witness was then called. He was a very genteel and 
modest-looking young man, and was now out of livery. 

My lord, says he, with a respectful but resolute voice, before I 
give my testimony in this case, I request that the two first 
witnesses should be taken into custody. Into custody ! cried the 
3 ; do you know what you say ? I do know what I say, my 
and I repeat my request, that they should be taken into 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 103 

custody. Why, friend, said the judge, they are as you are ; they 
are witnesses for the crown against a criminal, and no man has a 
right to order them into custody. I say, rejoined the youth, with 
an air still more determined, that they are witnesses against inno- 
cence, against his majesty, and against the laws ; that they alone 
are criminal ; that I am evidence against them ; and I again 
require it of your lordship, of the jury, and of all present, that they 
should not be permitted to make their escape. 

I see, exclaimed the judge, you are a prevaricating villain; 
but I shall trounce you before we part. Where is this fellow's 
examination ? 

My lord, my lord, said the young man, with somewhat of a 
severe and sarcastical tone, you were not placed there to prejudicate 
in any matter, no more than I was called here to be browbeat and 
sentenced without trial. If you find that I prevaricate if you 
desire to sift me as wheat, and find any chaff in me I refuse not 
the bitterest punishment that our laws can inflict. But your lord- 
ship observes I am an evidence for the crown; and his majesty, 
God be praised! will not fix his tribunal in any unrighteousness. 
I therefore demand to be heard in the cause to which I am cited ; 
and all present shall be assured that I speak nothing but the 
truth. And you, gentlemen of the jury, I petition you to intercede 
in favour of equity with his lordship, and to prevail that these 
criminals, for such I affirm them to be, should not be suffered to 
get away : and further, that they should be instantly searched, 
and all that is found about them reserved for the inspection of 
yourselves and his lordship. 

My lord, said the foreman, I humbly conceive that no ill 
consequence can ensue from searching and setting a watch over 
those people; their testimony is already given, and cannot be 
invalidated thereby. 

Well, added the judge, I would willingly hear what this fellow, 
this turncoat, has to say for himself. 

My lord, replied the youth, provided I approve my truth before 
God, I shall be the less afflicted for having fallen under your lord- 
ship's displeasure. My name is Edward Longfield, I was born to 
happier prospects. My father was a gentleman ; and about eighteen 
months ago I took the degree of bachelor at Queen's College in 
Oxford. But misfortunes and misunderstandings happening in our 
family, I was left to be the former of my own fortunes, and, arriving 
at London, I was taken into service by my late Lord Stivers. He 
grew fond of me beyond my merits ; and I began to partake of his 
friendship and confidence, at the time that I was deprived of the 
most generous of masters by the most unhappy of all events. 

He then deposed to his lord having communicated to him his 
designs against Mrs. Clement, and that, upon his daring to remon- 
strate with him on the illegality of his plans, Lord Stivers had 
become angry, and threatened him with the loss of his favour for 
ever. He then, continued Mr. Longfield, told me how he had 
gained over her maid by a large bribe to his interest. I felt sad 
and unwilling to participate in my lord's doings, but I was a de- 
pendant on his bounty, and really attached to him from many of his 



104 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

very engaging qualities. We adjourned to Mrs. Clement's house on 
some intimation from the confederate there : Lord Stivers went up- 
stairs, while we followed the maid, Mrs. Deborah, to the kitchen. 

I soon observed that my companion, Mr. Robert there, was intent 
on making up his acquaintance with Mrs. Deborah ; and, as I found 
myself extremely uneasy, I gave them the slip without being 
observed, and, stealing up-stairs, I put my ear to the door where I 
heard the voice of my master. Blessed heaven ! to what surpassing 
sentiments was I then an amazed witness ! to what proofs of an 
innocence of the most exalted nature ! If I should not be tedious I 
would deliver to the court to you, my lord, in particular and to 
you, gentlemen of the jury, the best account I can of those wonder- 
ful passages. 

Hear him hear him hear him ! was then almost the universal 
cry, till he was permitted by the bench, and desired by the jury, 
to speak with freedom. 

He then repeated, in a more ample and pathetic manner, all that 
passed, as I have told you, between Lord Stivers and my wife. But 
stopping, as he drew near to the fatal catastrophe I could no 
longer bear, he said, the piercing cries, the agonizing shrieks of one 
in such extremity. Had I any kind of weapon I thought I should 
have done my lord good service by preventing his wickedness. But 
I trembled and grew exceeding sick, and hastening down to the 
kitchen, I threw myself into a chair, and swooned away. 

While I was in my fit, and Robert and Deborah were busy about 
me, the fatal stroke, as I imagine, was given, and the prisoner made 
her escape with her infant in her arms. When I was somewhat 
recovered, and had taken a dram of Mrs. Deborah's bottle, she put 
down the kettle, and invited us to a dish of tea. I requested my 
companions, from tune to time, to step out and listen ; but they 
reported that all was quiet above stairs. 

At length it grew darkish, and being all of us surprised that no 
candles were called for, we went in a body up-stairs, and Deborah 
ventured gently to tap at the door; but hearing no voice nor 
stirring in the chamber, she turned the bolt softly, and peeping in, 
she gave a loud shriek, and drew suddenly back again. We then 
entered together, and as I was prepared, by my knowledge of the 
lady's virtue, for some dreadful catastrophe, I was the less shocked 
and concerned at what I beheld. 

The floor was half covered with blood. My master lay in 
the midst, already stiif and cold; and part of the fatal scissors 
was still within the wound. We all stood for some time in silent 
astonishment; and then, with joint tears, lamented his fate. At 
length, says Deborah, I would gladly see if my bloody mistress has 
taken care to provide for her journey. So saying, she stooped, and, 
taking his lordship's purse from his pocket, she counted down two 
hundred and ninety-seven guineas. She then took out his fine 
gold repeater, and next his gold snuff-box, and last, took his large 
diamond ring from his finger. 

Come, my lads, says Deborah, my lord's silence gives consent, 
and we can no more be said to rob this piece of earth, than the 
people in the mines who gather gold from clay. If my mistress is 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 105 

ever taken she must suffer death for the murder ; and they can do 
no more to her for the robbery, and twenty such matters together, 
if you will therefore be of my council, we will comfort ourselves 
as we ought for this melancholy business; and share a prize 
between us that no one else had a right to, and that nobody 
will want. 

Kobert did not hesitate long. In a little time he appeared more 
sanguine than Deborah herself ; and they urged me to join them bj 
a number of interesting and cajoling instances. I was dispirited 
I was affrighted ; I saw a scene of blood and slaughter before me ; 
and I doubted not that, if I refused them, I should be made the 
second victim to their resentment and avarice. I pretended to 
value the watch at an unmeasurable rate, and that I should be 
greatly the gainer if I got it for my dividend. Mrs. Deborah then 
went to her mistress's drawers, and taking out half a dozen silver 
spoons, a tea-equipage, and several articles in lace and cambrics, 
she fairly laid them before us ; and observed at the same time that 
her mistress would not call in a hurry to demand them, and that 
the landlord would take all if we did not come in for snacks. She 
then made a new division ; she compelled me further to accept of 
the snuff-box. She gave the purse of gold entire to Kobert, and 
contented herself with the diamond ring, some gold medals, my 
lord's handkerchief, and the plunder of her mistress. 

While Mr. Longfield was in this part of his testimony, the fore- 
man of the jury cried out Stay, sir ! Good people, pray stop those 
witnesses there I see they are making off. And now do us the 
favour to search their pockets, and to put what ye find into two 
hats, severally, and to hand them up to us. 

This being accordingly done, Mr. Longfield, says the foreman, 
be pleased now to proceed. 

I have little further to say, replied Mr. Longfield. Here is my 
noble master's watch, and here is his snuff-box. They are un- 
doubtedly known to many honourable persons at present in court ; 
and I bless my God that I have been enabled to preserve them, 
for the vindication of innocence, and the illustration of virtue, at 
this day. 

Here Mr. Longfield paused ; and the judge cried put Clerk, 
hand me up the examination of this prevaricator. This his lord- 
ship perused with a countenance and scrutiny apparently inveterate ; 
but finding that the deponent had not touched upon the robbery, 
and that neither the words feloniously nor of malice were inserted 
in that part that referred to the death of Lord Stivers, he tore the 
examination into twenty pieces. Come, come, he cried again, I have 
not yet done with this same Longfield. I perceive perfectly well 
how he came by the watch and snuff-box. The transference was 
not difficult from the prisoner who stole them to this her con- 
federate. But tell us, my wonderfully honest friend, how came 
you to keep these things from their lawful owners for the very 
long space of twelve months and upwards? Why did you not 
immediately, or long before now, give informations against those 
whom you so suddenly take it into your head to accuse ? And why 
would you suffer that so exceeding chaste and innocent lady to 



106 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

labour, all this time, under the infamy with which her character, 
in my judgment, is still justly loaded ? 

To all these questions Mr. Longfield barely smiled ; but bowing 
with his head, and making a motion with his hand to two gentlemen 
who sat on one side of the bench, Mr. Archibald, an eminent 
merchant and an alderman of the city, got up and spoke to the 
following effect : 

I wish, my lord, that I could as well content your lordship, as I 
can satisfy the jury and all others present on the articles you 
require. The day immediately succeeding this fatal accident, 
Mr. Longfield came to me, and, in the presence of Mr. Truelove here, 
my worthy and substantial neighbour, gave a detail, almost word 
for word, of all that he has this hour deposed in court ; he then 
deposited the watch and snuff-box with us, and did not reclaim 
them till early this morning. As I am of his majesty's peace, he 
also gave in this examination before me, which however I must not 
venture to hand over to your lordship, till I have your previous 
engagement that you will not tear it. I therefore offered to issue 
warrants for apprehending the delinquents ; but Mr. Longfield 
most sensibly and judiciously observed, that such a step must 
unquestionably shut the door against justice and all knowledge of 
the truth; that the criminals were two to one against their accuser; 
that, on the slightest alarm, they would infallibly abscond or make 
away with the effects, of which they now held themselves the peace- 
able and unquestioned possessors, or contrive some further plot to 
invalidate his evidence ; or, probably, make him away by pistol or 
poison, and so deprive that unhappy gentlewoman of the only wit- 
ness of her innocence. But, says he, if they are permitted to enter 
the court under the confidence of my confederacy, they will have 
no reserve upon them, no foreformed evasions or contrivances for 
escape. My unexpected testimony will suddenly confound their 
guilt, and they may happen to carry some articles about them which 
might serve for their conviction beyond ten witnesses. 

In the mean time, Mr. Longfield, Mr. Truelove, and I were 
solicitous and unwearied in our inquiries after the unfortunate 
prisoner, that we might persuade her to stand her trial, and to 
deliver herself up to justice. But all our search proved fruitless 
till the day on which she was discovered and taken. 

Here Mr. Archibald ended, and the judge exclaimed Crier! 
call the two first witnesses into court, that we may hear what they 
say to this fair-weather speech. The crier accordingly vociferated 
several Oyez's for Deborah Skinner and Robert Callan to come 
into court. But, had they been within call, they did not choose to 
hear. During the attention of the court and jury to alderman 
Archibald, they had imperceptibly slipped behind their next 
neighbours ; and proceeding in like manner from one to another, 
they at length confounded themselves with the crowd, and got 
clear off. 

My lord then began to sum his charge to the jury, and dwelled 
with much emphasis on some articles. Here, says he, we have 
lost a nobleman a minister one of the first ornaments of our 
country and stays of our land. And what, I pray ye, have we 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 107 

pot in recompense of this great damage? Why, my friends, we 
have got a new thing upon the earth ; we have got a saving of the 
honour of a milliner. But if this woman is inviolate, as still is 
pretended, how came she to be guilty of this most horrid of all 
murders, before she knew to what extremity his lordship would 
have proceeded? How did she dare capitally to execute a peer 
of the realm, on that for which our laws would not have confined 
a common porter ? This woman must, certainly, have been a trader 
in blood ; and her felonious intents and malice are fully expressed, 
in the very peculiar use and inhumanity of the weapon with which 
she perpetrated this most desperate deed. You need not therefore, 

fntlemen, go out of your box to bring her in guilty of the murder, 
will not affirm with equal certainty touching the robbery ; and 
yet to me it is apparent, that she could not have enterprised so 
barbarous a fact, if she had not done it in prospect of plundering 
the deceased. But, as she is capitally punishable in the first 
instance, I leave ye, gentlemen, to determine of the second at 
pleasure. First permit us, my lord, replied the foreman, to examine 
what we have got in these hats. He then drew a long purse from 
among the relics of Kobert; and, having counted out seventy 
guineas, Mr. Longfield, says he, would you know my lord's purse? 
If it is my master's purse, said Longfield, it is of green silk, and 
has, toward the top, a coronet and the letter S. wrought under it 
in silver twist. The very same, sir, indeed, rejoined the foreman. 
And now let us see what Mrs. Deborah might have got in her 
honest keeping ? So saying, he took from the second hat a small 
wooden box neatly stuffed with cotton, in which he found my lord's 
diamond ring, three gold medals, and the ends of the handles of 
several silver spoons. Mrs. Clement, says he, I imagine we may 
have got some of your property among us. Pray had you any mark 
to your silver spoons ? Yes, sir, said she, scarce audibly ; a G at 
top for Graves, and a D and a A below for Dorothy and Arabella. 
I wish, madam, replied this gentleman, that we were equally 
enabled to find an equivalent for your merits, as to restore to you 
this trifling remnant of your rights. 

Come, gentlemen, cried the judge, the day wears apace. It is time 
for you to retire, and consult on the verdict ye are to bring in. 

My lord, answered the foreman, you truly observed that we need 
not leave our box for the purpose you require. We are already 
agreed and unanimous in our verdict. And I would to heaven 
that we were not confined, on this occasion, to literal precedents 
and forms of law, that we might give a verdict some way adequate 
to the merits of the prisoner, who, however depressed by fortune, 
is superior in all excellencies; whom we judge to be an honour 
to human nature, and the first grace and ornament of her own sex. 
But since we are limited by custom in these matters, we do say, 
with one voice, and a conscience that compels us to utterance, 
Not guilty, my lord not guilty ! 

The words were scarce pronounced when the court-house was 
almost split by a sudden peal. Hats, caps, and wigs universally 
filled the air, and jostled against each other. The triumph was 
caught and echoed by the crowds without; and the sound was 



108 TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

repeated, and floated from street to street, till it seemed to die 
away in distant parts of the city. 

My wife then turned, gracefully curtsying to the foreman 
I thank you, sir, says she ; I thank ye, gentlemen, says she, again 
curtsying to the rest of the jury. And then, glancing modestly 
round, she saluted the assembly, and sat down. But I could not 
contain my gratitude, my transport overpowered me ; and falling 
on my knees, and lifting my hands towards the jury God alone 
can reward ye, gentlemen ! I cried. May he for ever preserve the 
properties, honours, and families of the worthy citizens of London 
from violation and insult ! 

I then rose hastily. I slipped out of the bar ; and rushing up to 
Mr. Longfield, I catched him eagerly about the neck. I could not 
speak. I hid my face in his bosom, and broke into tears. He 
attempted to disengage himself; but I held him fast. 1 believe, 
said he, you must be Mr. Clement. I congratulate you, sir, with 
all my soul. But you owe me nothing ; I barely did my duty. 

O, my friend my brother my preserver ! I cried ; I owe you 
more than life. Existence had been my greatest of curses without 
you. That I am not, at this moment, the deepest damned of the 
creation ; that I find myself the most blessed of all beings ; to 
you alone it is owing, my Longfield, my deliverer! Nay, hope 
not to escape me ; we never more must part. You are my captive 
for life. And I, and all that I am, or have, is yours to eternity. 

As the people within and without were still in great commotion, 
the court appeared much alarmed ; and the judge and most of 
the gentry made homeward, through a private door that opened 
into a back alley. But their fears were groundless ; for the crowd 
was wholly intent on another object, and impatiently waited for a 
sight of my Arabella. 

As she walked forward, attended by Mr. Longfield and myself, 
they made way for her on either hand, and the atmosphere again 
rung with shouts and acclamations. So sincere is the respect that 
the populace pay to virtue ; and such is their exultation when 
innocence rises superior to oppression ! But when innocence and 
virtue are accompanied by beauty, their reverence grows almost 
criminal and approaches to adoration. 

Thus we returned to Newgate, amidst the blessings, prayers, 
and praises of a yielding multitude, who still respectfully opened 
as Arabella advanced. The windows on all sides poured forth 
congratulations ; and those through whom we had passed pressed 
forward for another sight, as though their eyes could not be 
satisfied with beholding. 

Before we entered her late prison, my wife turned about and 
curtsied three or four times to her numerous attendants, with an 
acknowledging grace and humility that seemed oppressed by their 
favours. She then entered hastily, and running tip-stairs, she 
caught her child from the nurse-keeper. She held him some time 
in her arms ; her bosom gently heaved ; and the tears rolled in 
silence down her placid countenance. But on our approach, she 
turned suddenly into the bed-chamber, shut to the door, and con- 
tinued there in private for near an hour. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 109 

In the mean time I sent out for a warm dinner and a bottle of 
wine. Mr. Longfield now told me that he had often been tempted 
to introduce himself to us during my wife's confinement; but 
he feared that the discovery of any acquaintance or correspondence 
between us might prejudice Arabella upon her trial; and that, 
therefore, he had made use of the little stratagem of the verses, 
which he had thrust under our door, in order to preserve us from a 
total depression of spirits. 

When the cloth was laid, I whispered gently through the key- 
hole to my Arabella ; and soon after she came forth, with a har- 
mony and beatitude of motion and aspect, as though she had 
instantly dropped from that heaven which had wholly possessed 
her during her absence. 

At table, Mr. Longfield gave us some heads of his history. He 
further told us, that since the death of his late lord he had en- 
tered into another sendee ; but that he had been out of place for 
about a month past. 

After some further discourse, I called up the keeper, discharged 
the reckoning and fees, and returned thanks for his civility to my 
Arabella. I then sent for a coach, and we drove home together. 

Mrs. Jennett received us with warm congratulations ; we imme- 
diately invited her to a dish of tea, over which she agreed with 
our friend for the streeirroom on the same floor at three shillings 
per week. Arabella was now at liberty to revisit her old acquaint- 
ance. She was more caressed than ever, and took in so much work 
that she was obliged to hire a girl to attend to the child. 

I was now at the very pinnacle of human happiness. Affliction 
was no more. The remembrance of distress and poverty had 
vanished as a dream. Our days moved up and down, and joy and 
peace nightly prepared our pillows. 

Mr. Longfield was very lovely in his person and manners. "We 
had contracted a friendship which I imagined too strict for time to 
untie ; and I loved him the better for his attention to my Arabella, 
whose entertainment seemed to form the chief delight of his life. 
T gave him my story in parts from time to time, and he had 
plentifully watered the several passages with his tears. He intro- 
duced me to Mr. Marfelt, his late master, to whom he had recom- 
mended me as private tutor to his son ; and we agreed at fifty 
pounds per annum, to commence as soon as the young gentleman 
should descend from the nursery. 

Mr. Longfield, as I told you, was very lovely in his person, and 
he became daily more amiable and engaging in my eyes. I was 
pleased that he appeared in the same light to my wife. I thought 
that we could never love him enough ; and I daily importuned my 
Arabella to affect him with a tenderness equal to my own. 

At length I became uneasy, I knew not why nor wherefore. 
When I could form a pretence for retiring or going abroad, I took 
a solitary walk, or withdrew to some recess, where I lightened my 
oppression by given a loose to my tears. Ah ! are not the real 
evils of life sufficient ? Yet man adds to the heap by his tendency 
to realize what is merely imaginary. 

The source of my malady was now no longer a secret to me. 



110 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

Mr. Longfield, I cried to myself, my Arabella, my angel ! You are 
still faithful, my Longfield ! You are still chaste, my Arabella! 
But you are both of you too amiable ; you are fitted for each 
other. Your friend loves you too well to be a bar to your happi- 
ness. He will have no bliss but yours; your happiness shall be 
his ; and he will die to accomplish it, since his life is an interrup- 
tion. I was pleased that I daily declined ; but the affectation of 
cheerfulness became painful to me. One night as we sat together, 
my wife looked at me with an affectionate disturbance. What is 
the matter, Hammy ? she cried ; what is come over my love ? You 
look not, you speak not, like the once fond, the delighting and de- 
lighted consort of your Arabella. 

Ah ! I cried ; it is enough. I die, and I die contented, since I 
leave the only two happy for whom I could wish to live. What is 
this I hear, Hammy ? replied my Arabella ; you die, you say, and 
you say also you die contented. Ah! you love me no longer. 
What business have I then any longer to live, she would have 
said, but she instantly swooned away. 

At length she opened her eyes, and looking about with a languid 
kind of displeasure Mr. Longfield, says she, your services have been 
reat ; but at present I am not under any necessity for your assist- 
ance, whereupon he silently bowed and withdrew to his apartment. 

I then dropped on my knees before her. My Arabella, I cried, 
loveliest of womankind ! But here, with a forbidding hand, and a 
countenance averted No, Hammy, no, says she (in a voice inter- 
rupted by tears), after what has passed your lips I cannot be 
deceived, and I will not be comforted. You would leave me, you 
say, Hammy ; and would you leave me forlorn ? But I will not be 
forsaken. I will prevent your unkindness. I will go where I shall 
not be altogether friendless. Ah, my aunt ! my all relations in one 
why did you abandon me ? 

Here her words were suffocated by sobs and a burst of affliction. 
But still continuing my posture I am guilty, my love, I cried ; 
I am guilty past pardon. But I will live if you desire it, my 
Arabella ; will live to repent my follies, and to repair my defaults. 
But I cannot a minute longer survive your displeasure. She then 
beckoned me to rise and sit beside her, which I did ; when, reach- 
ing one arm about my neck, and gently leaning over, she joined her 
face to mine, and silently shed her tears into my bosom. 

Soon after I perceived that she was seized with a kind of shiver- 
ing, and, calling to the girl, I ordered her in all haste to warm the 
bed, and I assisted my wife to undress. 

As soon as she lay down and was somewhat composed, I stepped 
to my friend's apartment. I found him leaning on a table with his 
eyes downcast, like the figure of discomfort stooping over a monu- 
ment. What is the matter ? I said ; what ails my dear Longfield ? 
I hope I have not offended him past forgiveness. Indeed I am 
not well, says he. I beseech you to leave me to my own thoughts 
till morning. I understand you, Mr. Longfield, I cried ; I confess 
myself no longer worthy of your friendship, and I shall no more 
demand it of you till you condescend to make the tender ; and, so 
saying, I suddenly quitted his chamber. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. Ill 

All night my Arabella was cold and hot by turns, and her sleep 
was discomposed by starts and meanings. In the morning I 
observed that her breath was short and feverish, and I got up in 
haste and went for a physician. As soon as he had written his 
prescription, I went eagerly to wish Mr. Longfield a good-morning, 
and to apologize for the abruptness of last night's behaviour ; but 
Mr. Longfield had taken a long adieu, and this letter was all 
that I had left to console me for his loss : 

" To MB. H. CLEMENT. 

"I leave you, dearest of friends, and I leave you for ever. 
Wretch that I am ! to have brought affliction on the only two for 
whom I would have lived, for whom I would have died. Heavens, 
what a fate is mine ! I voluntarily depart, and I go where I must 
be miserable, since I leave those whose sight and converse made 
the whole of my enjoyment. That which doubles my unhappiness 
is, partly to suspect that I have been guilty. 

" Your Arabella, my Hammy ! I begin to fear that I loved your 
Arabella. Alas ! I feel that I still love her, and that I must love 
her during life. 

"Ah, fond and foolish passion! that could neither hope, nor 
wish, nor even accept of any kind of gratification, save the sight 
and society of the object of its ardour. No, most amiable of 
men, were it possible for your Arabella to stray but in thought 
from her truth, from her duty, from her tenderness for you, I could 
have loved her no longer. 

" I am jealous for you, my friend I am jealous of myself in your 
dearer behalf ; and I will amply avenge you on the injurious and 
hapless Longfield. 

"Ah! let no man henceforth confide in his own strength. I 
daily beheld your Arabella ; I daily conversed with, but I saw not 
my danger. The gracefulness of her motions, the sound of her 
voice, and the loveliness of her aspect, hourly sunk into my soul 
with an intoxicating delight ; and I wished, and was solicitous to 
become pleasing in her eyes, at the time that I would have taken 
the life of any man who had attempted to deprive you of your full 
right in her affections. 

" My confession reaches the utmost of my faults ; but from what 
a dream of delight has it suddenly awaked me ! Enchanting sen- 
sations ! you are departed for ever ; and all the future portion that 
you leave me is bitterness. 

" P.S. In the drawer of my table, on the left hand, you will find 
another paper, carefully sealed and addressed to you. It contains 
a poor legacy, though all that could be bequeathed by your de- 
parted 

"EDWAKD LONGFIELD." 

I wept as I read this pathetic epistle. My breast heaved, and I 
was agitated by emotions of self-reproach, and with a tide of re- 
turning tenderness to poor Longfield. 

Ah, unjust though most generous of men ! I exclaimed, I alone 
am guilty, and thou assumest to thyself a burden that thy virtues 



112 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

disclaim. Would to heaven that men and angels might love my 
Arabella with a purity like thine. 

I found seventeen guineas in the fore-mentioned paper, a most 
seasonable, and yet a most unacceptable supply, as I feared, from 
the generosity of Longfield's temper, that it contained very nearly 
the whole of his possessions. 

My wife's distemper turned out a tertian ague ; and at length 
settled into a certain rheumatism, that principally affected her arms 
and hands, and thereby prevented her earning any subsistence for 
herself or her infant. 

It was now upwards of four months since Mr. Longfield had left 
us. Our finances were again reduced to about two guineas. I was, 
however, confident of a supply in the tutorship promised me by 
Mr. Marfelt ; and I dressed in the best I could, and waited upon 
him. I was concerned to find the family in black. But when 
Mr. Marfelt himself appeared, and told me, with a voice interrupted 
with sighs, that his only son, my pupil in expectance, had been 
lately carried off by a malignant smallpox, my mourning passed all 
shows of sorrow. 

I took my leave with a dejection and absence of mind that forgot 
there was any road left for me upon earth. I went, I knew not 
where, a way that led from home. I saw nothing but the labyrinth 
within my own soul ; and from thence I could perceive neither 
outlet nor escape. 

My eyes at last were opened, and I perceived that I was now 
much further from my lodgings than when I set out from Mr. 
Marfelt's. I turned homeward as well as I could, fatigued in body, 
and with more than a mountain's weight upon my mind. On the 
way, 1 lifted up my eyes and rung my hands together in a kind of 
agony. Bread ! Bread ! I cried inwardly. Merciful heaven, a 
little, but a very little bread ! My helpless wife ! my helpless in- 
fant ! a little pittance for them ; I crave it in mercy ! and. O save 
me from beholding them famished, and gasping for a morsel of 
sustenance before my face ! 

As soon as I had crawled home, another weight was added to the 
burden I already bore. A bailiff was in waiting, and my landlady, 
with an aspect as inexorable as iron, ordered me directly into 
custody for the last quarter's rent. I was on this occasion obliged 
to disburse my last two guineas, and further to deposit my wife's 
gown as a security for the small remainder of rent and fees. I had 
not now wherewithal to purchase a pennyworth of bread, that, like 
the widow of Sarepta, my wife, my child, and I for this last time 
might sit down together and eat before we died. 

I pretended to have forgotten somewhat, and again hastened out 
of doors. The night had just fallen, and was still and gloomy. 
Rage, anguish, and despair gave me new strength and spirits ; and 
I turned fiercely down an unfrequented street, without any arms 
save my fury and natural fangs, with which I determined, like the 
maternal lioness, to rend subsistence for my young from the first 
I should encounter. 

I perceived a man advancing at some distance. I hastened to 
meet him ; and, coming within a few paces Stand ! I cried ; pass 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 113 

no further! Why, said he, with a fearless and benevolent voice, 
is there any thing wherein you desire I should serve you ? O save 
me! I replied; you must, you shall save me from the terrible 
damnation of seeing my wife and infant perish before me. God, 
said he, sends you this by my hands. He sees your distress, but 
disapproves your conduct. But, Clement, beware the third time ; 
another offence like this would prove fatal to you. 

He spoke, and putting five guineas into my hand he instantly 
slipped away ; for such was my sudden astonishment and confusion 
that I neither remarked nor saw what became of him. At length 
I awaked as from a trance. I stepped up to a single lamp that 
glimmered before me, and opening my hand I perceived that the 
money which I held was gold. I hurried it into my pocket, and 
turning back I began slow and pensive to move toward home. 

Ah ! I cried ; I am then known. The darkness of the night hath 
not been able to conceal me. My guilt is laid open before God and 
his angels ; and my present and past transgressions are entered into 
his book. He yet pities, he yet relieves me. He snatches me from 
the gulf wherein I had already plunged and saw no bottom; to 
show me that no extremity can pass his power, and that on this 
side of existence it is always too early to despair of his bounty. 
As soon as I got to my lodgings, I redeemed my wife's gown, and 
sent out for a frugal supper. I then stepped up-stairs, and, taking 
a chair just opposite to my wife, I sat down and continued silent, 
but dared not to look up. She eyed me through and through. My 
Hammy, says she, you are apt to meet with strange adventures. 
I know you not for the same person ; you are not what you were 
a few minutes ago. I found myself under the necessity of avowing 
to her all that had happened. But, gracious heaven ! through time 
and through eternity never shall I forget the reply she made. 

Hammy, says she, with the face, air, and accent of heaven's 
mildest minister, it ill becomes me to reprove a respected husband 
for the excess of his goodness to me and my child : and yet I have 
suffered more from the consideration of this excess, than from all 
our other calamities put together. I love you entirely, my Hammy ; 
but I love that part of you the most which you appear to regard 
the least. It is a part that must survive the dissolution of all the 
rest their short joys, their idle anxieties, their fierce desires, and 
empty possessions and it must thereafter be yourself to all eternity. 
I once thought, my love, that learning was the principal promoter 
of piety. But I have long since discovered that to know is not to 
feel, and that argument and inclination are often as opposite as 
adversaries that refuse all means of reconcilement. 

I will suppose you, for instance, in the depth of your knowledge, 
the wisest discoverer of the attributes of infinity. But what will 
this do for you, my Hammy? You may contemplate these great 
objects as matters with which you are no way connected. 

God, with all his omnipotence, can no otherwise make us happy 
than by connecting himself with us; and this connection can no 
way be formed but by our dependence upon him. And this de- 
pendence can no way be made but by our confidence in him ; by 
feeling that in ourselves, or the world around us, there is neither 

I 



H4 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

footing nor hold to save us from sinking for ever ; and by catching 
at God alone for the support of that existence which his bounty 
bestowed. 

It is this confidence, my dear husband, that is called by the name 
of FAITH ; of which we ought to have such a portion at least as 
might enable us to say to the worst that can befall, what the three 
Jewish captives said to the king of Babylon, " Our God is able to 
deliver us," and he will in due time deliver us from all these 
afflictions. But, though he should not deliver us, we will not forsake 
our confidence in him, neither bow to any temptation that guilt 
can set up. 

Since God, therefore, cannot communicate happiness to one who 
refuses to trust in his goodness, or to repose upon his power ; where 
he is peculiarly favourable, he blesses him with all sorts of crosses 
and disappointments. He breaks under him all the props of worldly 
confidence. He snatches trom him the helps on which his hopes 
had laid hold; that in the instant of sinking he may catch at 
his Creator, and throw himself on the bosom of that infinite 
benevolence. 

I am your loving wife, my husband, and this is your dear and 
promising infant. But, what are we further to you ? You neither 
made us, nor can you preserve us ; nor are you obliged to provide 
for us beyond your weak and finite endeavours. Commit us, then, 
to Him in whom we have our existence ; and know that should he 
permit this innocent to suffer, and my confidence in his mercy to 
fail of support, the retribution is instantly and infinitely in his 
hands. 

Here ended my Arabella ; but the sweetness of her voice con- 
tinued to vibrate in my ear. 

She laid hold of the season for making the impression she desired, 
as my mind was still affected and softened by the late adventure. 
I did not, indeed, yet behold the world or its Author in the light 
by which they are represented in the Christian system ; but, even 
in the eye of philosophy, all that my wife had said appeared 
reasonable, and conformable to the nature of a Being infinitely 
powerful, benevolent, and wise. 

In these sentiments I eagerly applied for further instruction to 
those writings that had brought life and immortality to light. 
I began at the creation, and proceeded with the deepest attention 
and delight. Another system of matter and morals, another world, 
and another God, presented themselves before me. But I shall not 
here detain you with an account of my new faith, as I may justly 
call it; for though I always had held myself, vulgarly speaking, 
a Christian, I found on examination that I had been wholly a 
stranger to the necessity, as well as the beauty, of the Christian 
dispensation; neither had I felt a single ray of its comforting 
influence. 

My wife began now to recover of her rheumatism, and hoped soon 
to be able to take in work. I determined, however, to be before- 
hand with her, if possible ; for at this time I regarded not how 
mean my occupation would be, provided I might earn any kind 
of honest bread. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 115 

Accordingly, as I rambled in search of employment, I observed 
a porter attending before the door of a tavern, clad in an ordinary 
frock, with a belt about his waist, and an apron before him. I 
thereupon went to Monmouth-street, and purchased an uniform for 
the like purpose. I then passed through several streets, till I came 
to a splendid tavern where no porter was in waiting. ^ I stepped 
over the way, where I deposited my former coat with a poor 
huckster-woman, to whom I promised some small matter for the 
trouble I gave her. I then dressed in my porterly robes, and, ap- 
plying to the chief drawer, I promised him part of my earnings 
provided he put me in speedy employment. 

I had not stayed long till I was despatched to a considerable 
distance with a letter. I was afterwards sent on a variety of 
errands and messages ; and by the close of the day I had accumu- 
lated three shillings, sixpence whereof I gave to the drawer. 1 then 
stepped in high triumph to my friend the huckster-woman. I gave 
her twopence, reassumed my former garb, and left my weeds in her 
custody. I returned home with a satisfaction to which I had been 
a stranger for a long time ; and I that night ate heartily, talked 
cheerfully, and slept in peace. 

I continued this occupation during five successive days, in one of 
which I earned to the amount of five shillings. I was now engaged 
in one of the lowest, and least lucrative, employments of life ; but 
a Divine friend was at hand, of whose favour I was confident. I 
was content ; I was cheerful ; and I felt a peace within that passed 
all the understanding I should otherwise have had of happiness, 
though I had been in possession of the crown revenues. 

Late on the fifth night of my occupation, as I was on my return, 
and within a few doors of my lodging, I was seized and assaulted by 
four men, who were porters, as I found by the sequel. I struggled 
the best I could, and got one of them under me ; but the rest fell 
upon me, and kicked, cuffed, and bruised me in a miserable manner. 
Oh ! they cried you are a gentleman ! and yet, thief as you are, 
you must steal into our business, and glean away the few pence by 
which we get our daily bread ; but we will cure you for carrying of 
burdens, we warrant you. 

They would undoubtedly have murdered me had I not feigned 
myself already dead ; but, observing that I lay without any signs of 
life, they made off in haste. 

I rose as well as I was able, and, holding by the rails and wall, 
got with difficulty home, where, crawling up-stairs, my wife helped 
to undress me, and I went to bed. 

She then sent for our old physician, who ordered me some 
potions, with outward fomentations to assuage the contusions. I 
was however seized that night with a violent fever, which continued 
upwards of three weeks, but without any delirium ; and within 
another week I was able to sit up, though still very weak and 
greatly emaciated. 

The last of our stock, with the fruits of my late employment, 
were now nearly expended on doctor, drugs, and so forth. Where- 
fore I found it necessary to abridge our domestic charge as close 
as possible ; and having sent our girl with a token for my porter's 

12 



116 TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

habiliments, I gave them to her in lieu of what remained of her 
wages, and with the help of an additional shilling discharged her. 

I was now able to bear the light, and the windows were half 
opened ; but how was I shocked on observing that my Arabella 
and my little Tommy were as pale and as much fallen away as 
myself! For Arabella had half-starved her infant, and almost 
wholly starved herself, in order to save sufficient for my sustenance 
during my illness ; yet she bore up with a sweet and smiling sem- 
blance, and in her alone was realized all that ever I have seen of the 
boasted patience of stoicism, or of the power of Christianity in 
effecting a new nature. 

Within a little time I was once more able to walk about the 
room ; when, on the day preceding that wherein our quarter's rent 
was to become due, Mrs. Jennett entered w r ith a face wherein was 
prefaced whatever insolence, hardness of heart, or contempt of our 
wretched situation could dictate. Mr. Clement, says she, if so be 
your name be Clement, I suppose I am not to tell you that to- 
morrow is quarter-day. And yet, if some people, Mr. Clement, 
can't afford to eat, I can't see how they can afford to pay rent, Mr. 
Clement ; and so, you know, 'tis every bit as comfortable to starve 
in jail as in lodgings. But this is nothing to the purpose. I am 
myself but a poor woman, and no better than richer folks. Yet, 
poor as I am, comparisons may be odious between some people and 
some people ; and then I don't come for charity, I come for nothing 
but my own, and that, you know, is the least that will satisfy any 
body. If you had any one else to befriend you but myself, you 
might a' been put up on the parish before this. But, as I was 
saying, I can't be an only friend and all friends at once. And I must 
tell you that I hate objects ; for I have so much pity in my nature 
that it pains me to look at 'em ; and, above all, I can't abide 'em 
in my own house. And so, as I told you, Mr. Constable will be 
here in the morning, and he will show you to lodgings that will fit 
you much better ; and so, Mr. Clement and Mrs. Clement, if so be 
that your names be Clement, I wish you both a mighty good- 
morning. And so away she went without waiting an answer. 

As soon as she was gone Hammy, says Arabella, our kind land- 
lady puts me in mind of the wife of honest Socrates, whom he took 
for the trial and exercise of his patience. Ah, how cringing was 
this woman ! how insolent is servility when it attains any power ! 
But what, I wonder, is become of our friends the Miss Hodginses? 
I would have sent to inquire after them, but I was petted at their 
neglect of us during our long illness. I will step there this minute, 
and borrow as much, at least, as will snatch my Hammy from the 
fangs of this fury. 

So saying, weak as she was, she dressed herself with a cheerful 
air, and going, pleasantly repeated Your servant, Mr. Clement, if 
so be that your name be Clement, I wish you a mighty good- 
morning. 

She was not long abroad, and on her return I observed a 
kind of heavenly radiance that seemed to beam throughout 
her countenance, from whence I prophesied all manner of happy 
success. But continuing silent for some time, and looking eagerly 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 117 

at me, she suddenly threw herself into my bosom, and burst into 
tears. 

Ah, Hammy ! she cried, I had hopes I was very stout ; but 
frail nature, in spite of grace, confesses me a coward. I thought 
I could have seen you perish with patience, with delight, provided 
I saw a happy immortality before you. But now that your suf- 
ferings are at hand. I find them insupportable. I tremble also for 
your faith, lest it should not support you under the impending trial. 
Yes, Hammy, all is over. All is finished, my love, and the hand of 
our God is in it. Our dear Miss Hodginses were not to blame ; the 
eldest died suddenly since we saw them, and the youngest is with a 
distant relation in the country. We have nothing further to hope, 
neither to fear, from this world. Our God has shut us out by every 
door; and will neither permit the friendship, the humanity, or 
charity of others, neither our own industry or ingenuity, to yield us 
a morsel of bread ; to convince us that we are his, and that all 
things are his ; that when he openeth his hand there is plenty on 
every side, but when he pleaseth to shut there is no resource. What 
say you, then, my husband ? Are you willing to run this last short 
course ? The prize is glorious, unspeakable, and lies within a very 
few paces of your grasp. You must run it, my husband, and your 
repugnance would but serve to make it insufferable. But patience 
and courage would give you strength to endure ; and a little further 
conformity to the will of our Disposer would turn all the bitterness 
into delight. Our time is done, our task is finished ; we are already 
brought to nothing, that our all may be in God. 

Yes, I answered, it is evident from a chain of successive proofs. 
I see the hand of God in all that concerns us ; and I am pleased 
with any instances of his notice and attention, whatever his final 
purpose may be. I will no longer struggle with his omnipotence ; 
nor make my ignorance a sounding line for his unbottomed wisdom. 
If to see you and our little innocent thus famishing by the hour ; if, 
in contemplating your wants and imagining your pains, I feel an 
anguish above what death can give ; why, let it be ; rend, heart, 
into a thousand pieces ! A period must at length be put to our 
sufferings: and all beyond shall be peace, or what God pleases. But 
do you, Arabella, do you lead the way, my patroness, my director ! 
I will endeavour to keep the brightness of your example in view ; 
that neither here, nor hereafter, I may lose sight of her, without 
whom, here or hereafter, I think I cannot be happy. 

About nine the next morning our landlady entered, followed by 
two constables and two appraisers. Thus authorized, as she ima- 
gined, the first thing she did was to search our pockets for money, 
but without effect ; as we had expended our last penny the day 
before for bread. She, however, found my wife's case of scissors, 
and other implements for her business ; and gathering up our boxes, 
linen, handkerchiefs, and a variety of articles which we never had a 
notion of converting into money, she laid them all before the 
appraisers ; who, on frequent consultation, valued the same to four 
pounds nine shillings, my wife's gown included, being nine-and- 
thirty shillings more than we owed. But this, our honest landlady 
very prudently observed, was scarce sufficient for costs and other 



118 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

damages which she had suffered, or might have suffered, or might 
yet suffer on our accounts. 

Thus we were turned out, almost naked, to the mercy of the 
elements. O, how deeply degraded below the birds of the air, the 
beasts of the forest, or even the worms of the sod, who rightfully 
claim sustenance from the earth whereof they were bred, and have 
some hole apart whereto they may creep for shelter ! 

The world, indeed, lay before us. It was wide and all-sufficient ; 
and yet nothing to our purpose. We had neither art nor part, 
concern or interest, therein. It was to us as a harbour to tempest- 
beaten mariners, who are shut out and driven thence on suspicion 
of the plague. 

All hopeless, weak, and faint, we took our way, we knew not 
whither ; without home whereto we might travel, or point whereto 
we might steer. We could think of no one living who would 
receive or acknowledge us ; and we seemed to have no way save that 
of hastening as fast as we could from the presence of mankind. 

Slow and tottering as we went, my wife and I carried our little 
Tommy by turns ; and in the smoother places he walked with the 
help of our hands. Thus, with much toil and fatigue, we got out 
of London, and reposed ourselves on a bank that lay a little off the 
causeway. Here we found ourselves greatly distressed with thirst ; 
and, getting up again, we made towards a small hut that stood 
beside the road, where they had the charity to treat us with a 
draught of cold water. With this we were wonderfully refreshed 
and recruited ; and, putting on again Hammy, says my Arabella, 
no conqueror on his triumphal entry into Eome ever exulted as I 
do in your fortitude this day. And what signifies it now that it 
comes to the test? It is but to travel, my love, till we can travel 
no further ; and then we drop, fit and ready, and ripe for eternity. 
O how sweet it is to perish with a patience that is pleased ; how 
fearful, how horrible, to die struggling and kicking against the 
Almighty ! 

As we went gently along, still mutually supporting and exhorting 
each other, I applied for alms from time to time to a number of 
passengers ; but my voice and address were so feebly importunate, 
or their attention was so engaged on distant and different matters, 
that my oratory returned as empty as it set out. 

At length I met a poor beggar-man, with a wife and seven 
children following in a train. I looked at him wistfully, and, having 
civilly saluted him, I entreated some little matter from his bag or 
his can, to keep my infant from perishing on the highway. God's 
mercy, master ! said the charitable mendicant, I am very sorry to 
see any body poorer than myself; but the truth is, that I have 
travelled a great way, and have eat and drank all except this last 
twopence-halfpenny. Here it is, master ; God's blessing go along 
with it ! I grieve, and shall grieve, that it is not two pounds for 
your sake. 

In expectation of the refreshment we should derive from this 
supply, we kept on at a creeping pace till we came to a little ale- 
house that stands about half a mile from this town. There we en- 
tered, and called for a pennyworth of bread and a pint of drink, 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 119 

with some milk for the child. While we sat to repose ourselves, 
the poor man of the house having eyed me with a kind of earnest 
compassion You look, said he, to be in much trouble ; but if your 
trouble is of a kind that may be cured, there is one Mr. Fenton at 
hand, whom God nas placed in this country, as the sun in heaven, 
to give comfort to all within his reach. 

My heart revived within me at these tidings, and was further 
prophetic of some happy revolution. Having finished our pint, and 
laid up the remainder of our bread in store, we discharged our 
reckoning, and set out on our last stage. 

The prospect of speedy relief, and the possibility that it might 
not arrive too late, gave us spirits beyond our powers, and we 
pushed on till we came nearly opposite to this house, though we 
did not then know to whom it belonged. Here, slackening our 
pace, we found ourselves growing extremely sick ; whether it was 
that we were overpowered by the late nourishment we had taken, 
or by a toil and fatigue that surpassed our abilities. 

Hammy, said my Arabella, God be praised ! it is done ; it is 
finished. I die, my Hammy ; but I would not die within the gaze 
of public passengers. Help me into the field, if you are able, my 
love ! I have no further use for charity now, save that of laying 
my limbs with decency in the ground. 

She spoke nor had I the power to answer. But, overcome as 
I was by sickness and anguish, I exerted myself to help her 
through the turnstile ; and, sitting down on the sod, I laid her 
head in my lap, where she fainted away. And there we remained 
in the situation in which your charity found us. 

Friend. Your story of Clement, my friend, is truly interesting, 
and in some passages may be edifying also. I have only to observe 
that it is too long for an episode, and that the character of your 
heroine-milliner is constrained and unnatural ; it is elevated above 
the fortitude and virtues of man himself, but quite out of the sight 
and soaring of any of her weak and silly sex. Had she been a 
princess an empress she could not have figured in your his- 
tory with greater dignity. 

Author. There lay my error, sir ; unhappily I did not reflect, 
that royalty or station was necessary to Christian resignation and 
lowliness of temper. 

Friend. Your drollery is more provoking than argumentative, I 
must tell you, sir. I was not speaking of the lowliness, but of the 
fortitude of your Arabella ; indeed it exceeds every thing that I 
have met in romance. Such an exaltation of female character is 
of evil influence among the sex : each woman will be apt to arro- 
gate some of the merit to herself; their vanity will be inflated, 
and they will rise, on the stilts of Arabella, to a presumptuous 
level with their natural lords and masters. Women unquestionably 
have their becoming qualities : in the bed-chamber, kitchen, and 
nursery, they are useful to man; but beyond these, my friend, 
they are quite out of the element of nature and common-sense. 

Author. I have sadly mistaken this whole affair, it seems ; I 
actually apprehended that woman might be admitted as a com- 



120 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

panion to man, and was intended occasionally to soften his temper 
and polish his manners. They have at times formed governors, 
legislators, and heroes. The great Pericles derived all the powers 
of his oratory, and the elegance of his taste, from the example and 
instructions of the lovely Aspasia; and the Gracchi also canght 
the spirit of their eloquence, and the fire of their patriotism, 
from their mother Cornelia. 

Friend. Pshaw ! the women you have mentioned were but as 
single luminaries, perhaps one in many centuries, who shot away 
and shone out of their appointed spheres. 

Author. Mayhap I can produce still better authority to prove to 
you, my friend, that woman was not merely intended to form and 
instruct us, to soften, and polish the rudeness of our mass ; she 
was also appointed to native empire and dominion over man. 

Friend. By all means, my dear sir ; I am quite impatient to be 
instructed in the policies and constitution of this your petticoat- 
government. 

Author. Whenever you shall be pleased to turn over to the 
third chapter of the first book of the prophet Esdras, you will 
there find it written to the following purpose : 

In the reign of Darius Hystaspes, successor to the grand Cyrus 
(whom you may have read of in romance), Darius made a great 
feast to all his princes and nobles, chief captains and governors of 
his hundred and twenty-seven provinces. 

And at the feast, three young and princely geniuses arose, and 
offered to dispute for pre-eminence before the great assembly. 
And the question turned on, What was STRONGEST? And the 
first said, WINE is strongest ; and the second said, the KING is 
strongest ; and the third said, WOMAN is strongest : and then the 
advocate for the bottle thus began : 

O ye princes ! bear me testimony that wine gives and takes 
away according to its mightiness. It takes away the strength and 
capacities of nature ; and gives powers, virtues, and talents of its 
own acquiring. 

It trips up the wrestler, and lays a giant low ; and bears the 
feeble and the fearful into the midst of the battle. 

Wine is an opener of hearts and a revealer of secrets. It raises 
hopes into certainty, and gives jollity and enjoyment in exchange 
for care. 

It unfolds the purse of the usurer and enriches the needy ; and 
frees the prisoner from his chain and the debtor from his obligation. 

It levels the rich and the poor, the high and the low, the king 
and the clown, to one temper and condition. It can set com- 
panions, friends, and brothers at variance ; and cause rivals, com- 
petitors, and enemies to embrace. 

Wine enlarges the narrow heart and thaws the frozen under- 
standing: it instructs the ignorant in arts, and to the silent and 
illiterate gives phrase and elocution. 

It can elevate the peasant from a cottage to a throne; for he 
who is drunk is as great as an emperor. 

O ye princes ! what in nature can be stronger than that by which 
all the powers of nature are inverted or surpassed ? 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 121 

And having so spoken, lie held his peace. 

Then arose the advocate for kingly dominion, and, waving his 
hand, thus addressed the assembly : 

O princes ! how short and sickly is the influence of wine ! it 
passes away as a vapour at the dawning; we recollect it with 
disgust, or remember nothing thereof. But all power that is 
stable or durable subsists in majesty. 

The king is but one man among a hundred and twenty-seven 
nations of men ; yet he overseeth, connects, and governs the 
whole. His are the honours, counsels, and strength of all his 
people. 

The sun, who from on high looketh down on the wide world, 
beholdeth not at once the extent of our king's dominion. He 
must travel for the prospect through the blue expanse of heaven, 
and leave the western nations, involved in night, when his beam 
begins to rise on their fellow-subjects in the orient. 

For the king they plough, they sow, and they reap and plant 
vineyards. For him the stars shine and shed influences upon earth, 
and the seasons change to yield our monarch variety of pro- 
duction. For him the fruits ripen, the shrubs drop their balm, 
and the blossoms breathe their odours; all winds blow incense 
to him ; and the four quarters of the world pay him tribute day 
by day. 

If he bids to build, they build ; and if he bids to lay waste, 
the nations are made desolate. Bliss and bane, life and death, 
ruin and restoration, are in the breath of his lips. 

If he cries War ! it is war ; the banners of blood are let loose 
to the wind, and the sound of the clarion kindles all men to battle. 
His hosts clothe themselves in harness, and range in terrible array ; 
and his horses begin to neigh and tear up the ground, and his 
chariots to roll as distant thunders. They move and cover the 
earth wide as the eye can reach. The forests are laid flat, the 
mountains shake beneath them, and neither the rocks nor rivers 
impede the march of his armies. They trample into dust the fruits 
of the field, and the labours of the industrious ; houses, vineyards, 
and standing corn: the villages and towns smoke and flame on 
every side. 

Yet none ask the king, Wherefore is peace, or wherefore is war ? 
for he stands exalted in ruin, and is glorified in destruction ; his 
word is the bolt of irresistible power, and his will makes the 
appointment and sanctitude of law. 

And having so said, he sat down amid the applauses of the 
whole assembly. 

Lastly, slow and bashful, arose the young advocate for the FAIR ; 
and, bowing thrice around, he let his words go forth as the breath- 
ing of soft music : 

Great, O princes ! great is the strength of WINE, and much 
greater is the strength and glory of MAJESTY. But yet there 
is a power that tempers and moderates, to which rulers themselves 
pay delightful obedience. 

Man is as the rough and crude element of earth, unmollified by 
the fluidity of water and light. Heaven therefore sent WOMAN 



122 TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

gentle, bright, and beauteous woman to soothe, form, and illumine 
the rudeness of his mass. 

She comes upon man in the meekness of water, and in the 
brightness of the morning beam; she imperceptibly infuses love 
and delight into him, and bids his affections go forth upon kindred 
and country. 

The planter who planted the vineyard, and the vintner who 
pressed the grape, were born of woman; and by woman alone 
the subject and the sovereign receive existence, with all that can 
make existence advantageous or desirable. 

She brings man forth in his weakness, and she brings him up 
to his strength ; he is fostered in her bosom, he is nourished with 
her substance, and he imbibes into his being the sweetness of 
humanity with the milk of his mother. 

Without woman, where would be father, or where would be 
child? where the relations, endearments, and connections of kin- 
dred, the charities that bind the wide world together into one 
inclusive family, the great BEOTHEEHOOD OF MAN? 

She conies not against you in the hostility of weapons, or fearful- 
ness of power. She comes in the comfort and mild light of beauty; 
she looks abashed, and takes you captive ; she trembles, and you 
obey. Yet hers is the surest of all signiories on earth; for her 
dominion is sweet, and our subjection is voluntary, and a freedom 
from her yoke is what no man could bear. 

There are no forms of human government that can exempt us 
from her sway ; no system of laws that can exclude her authority. 
Do we not study, toil, and sweat, and go forth in the darkness, and 
put our face to every danger, to win and bring home treasure and 
ornaments to our love? Even the robbers and savage spoilers of 
mankind grow tame to the civilizing prerogative of beauty. 

If men seek peace, it is to live in kindly society with woman ; 
and, if they seek war, it is to please her with the report and renown 
of their valour. 

Even the highest and mightiest the lord of lords and king of 
kings is caught in the fascinating net of his Apame. I saw her 
seated by his side ; she took the crown from his head, and gave it 
new lustre by the beauty of her brow and the brightness of her 
tresses. I saw her chide him in her playfulness, and strike him 
in her petulance, yet he pressed the hand of her pleasing pre- 
sumption to his lips ; he gazed fondly and fixedly on her : if she 
laughed, he laughed also; but if she affected displeasure, he 
spoke and looked submission, and was fain to plead and sue for 
reconcilement. 

Here ended the blooming orator. The monarch rose from his 
throne and gave loud applause, and the roofs resounded with the 
shouts and acclamations of the assembly. 

^ Wherefore it was decreed, by the laws of the " Medes and Per- 
sians," that female beauty ought to govern the world in meekness, 
and that men owed thereunto a voluntary obedience. 

Friend. Pray, my good sir, this same Esdras, is it among the 
canonical books? 



TEE FOOL OF QUALIFY. 123 

Author. I cannot affirm that it is ; but it is held as authentic, and 
very sacred, I assure you. 

Friend. It is a pity that your system of female government 
should be apocryphal; but, since you have not proved their do- 
minion to be jure divino, permit me to retain my faith, and to go 
on with my story. 



CHAPTER IX. 

ME. CLEMENT, said Mr. Fenton, I am singularly obliged and 
instructed by your story. The incidents of your life have been very 
extraordinary, and have been evidently accompanied by the atten- 
tion and control of a peculiar providence. The same providence is 
undoubtedly with, and over all, his works ; though we are not 
willing to admit him in what we call common occurrences, and 
which, we think, we can account for without his interposition. But 
in the passages of your story we see Omnipotence walking along 
with you, step for step; by sudden successes, by calamities as 
sudden, compelling you to attend to him; wrenching every other 
prop and support from your dependence; shutting every other 
prospect and resource from your sight; and never forsaking you, 
in weal or in woe, till he had fully convinced you of his fellowship 
and regard, and had reconciled you to the bitterest of the dispensa- 
tions of your Creator. 

Your story, my dear friend, has been generally conversant in 
middle or low life ; and I observed that there is scarce a circum- 
stance in it which might not have happened to any body on any day 
of the year. And yet, on the whole, I find a chain of more sur- 
prising and affecting events than I ever met with in history, or 
even romance. 

God, I see, has made use of very severe methods to call you, and, 
as I may say, to compel you to come in. But do you think, Mr. 
Clement, that any methods less severe would have been equally 
effectual ? You must admit they would not. And this demonstrates 
to me the difficulty, and almost the impossibility, of diverting any 
man from that habit of thinking and acting which he contracts from 
the people with whom he is daily conversant. In a world of saints, 
a sinner must be a devil ; but in a world of sinners, the man who 
has grace to deviate must be a saint indeed. 

Had I been in your situation on the day in which you say my 
charity relieved you, I should have thought myself very little be- 
holden to that person who would have plucked me back from my 
opening paradise, into a world of whose woes I had been so justly 
weary. No, no, my friend ; I did you and your Arabella the worst 
office, as I think, that ye will ever receive. It was not to you that 
God intended any benefit by restoring you to life ; it was to those, 
and I hope they are many in number, who are to have the advantage 
of your example and instructions. It is an advantage of which I 
also propose to avail myself; and I request you, in behalf of my 
little Harry hi particular, to accept your first retainer from our 
hands. 



124 TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

So saying, Mr. Fenton carelessly slid a purse of a hundred 
guineas into Clement's coat-pocket, and, hastily calling to know if 
supper was ready, left the room without ceremony. 

In about an hour the cloth was laid, and Mr. Fenton ordered 
his family to be called together. He had seldom seen Arabella, 
and never had noticed her, for fear of adding to that confusion with 
which he saw her oppressed at their first meeting. But now his 
senses were all open and alive for observation ; and, on her entrance, 
he saluted her as he would have received and saluted a descending 
seraph. 

She had not yet recovered her flesh or her complexion ; and Mr. 
Fenton for some time looked at her in vain, to discover those 
striking and irresistible beauties to which a whole people had borne 
joint testimony, by a voucher of public prostration and applause. 
But of all that Mr. Fenton had previously thought necessary for 
producing such extraordinary and astonishing effects, he saw nothing 
but a sentiment of lowliness throughout ; a something in face, in 
voice, and in motion, that was lovely, for no other reason that he 
could find but for its being quite impossible that it should not be 
beloved. 

Awe, gratitude, veneration, and a depth of self-debasement, 
united to oppress the heart and spirits of Arabella ; and in the course 
of conversation she frequently hesitated and blushed exceedingly. 

Mr. Fenton, with his wonted delicacy, made haste to divest her 
of the weight under which she apparently laboured. Madam, said 
he, with a diffident voice and downcast look on his own part, why 
this constraint, why all this blushing, my dear Mrs. Clement ? in- 
deed it is a compliment that we cannot deserve. 

Ah, sir ! cried Mrs. Clement, it is a compliment which I would 
very gladly spare, if I could help it. But I must be a very guilty 
body, to be sure ; and my faults I find must be very much my 
enemies, when they are ready to fly in my face every moment. 

Why, Mrs. Clement, said Mr. Fenton, do you hold blushing to be 
any evidence of guilt? Certainly, sir, said Arabella; it can be 
nothing but a consciousness of somewhat amiss that ought to give 
shame, to any sensible person. Mr. Sergeant Clement, cried Mr. 
Fenton, pray, what is your judgment on the case in hand ? 

In truth, sir, said Clement, it is a case to which I am not pre- 
pared to plead. I have, indeed, heard many and various opinions 
on the subject, though generally coinciding with that of my Arabella. 
And more particularly in conversations of ribald entendre, I have 
heard it affirmed that the blushing of a woman is a sure proof of 
her understanding much more than became her. 

Hold there, cried Mr. Fenton, the mere understanding of good 
or evil can no more be a fault in the creature than in the Creator : 
the offence of guilt bears no reference to knowledge, but consists in 
the approbation of evil alone. A woman therefore, who blushes 
at what she disapproves, blushes not for herself, but for the faults 
of her rude and ill-mannered company, who have not the grace to 
blush for themselves. 

When I speak here of blushing, I would not be understood, by 
any means, to include the flushing of vanity, or the reddenings of 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 125 

anger, or any such like turbulent and irregular motions. I mean 
no other than that ready expression of shame, which, as our Arabella 
sweetly hinted just now, arises from an apprehension of something 
being amiss in ourselves, or others. But who or what is it that 
apprehends in this case? Is it guilt that is afraid or ashamed of 
guilt ? No, surely. It is virtue alone that can fear or be ashamed 
of the neighbourhood of its adversary. 

I will take an instance from a person who is actually guilty of 
something very enormous ; and who blushes on his being questioned 
or suspected of the transgression. His blushing here demonstrates 
his sensibility; and his sensibility demonstrates some principle 
within him, that disapproved and reproached him for what he had 
committed. And so long as this spark or principle remains un- 
quenched in the bosom ; so long as the wicked themselves can feel 
compunction, and be ashamed of wickedness ; so long their recovery 
is not to be despaired of. 

It is therefore, from the fountain of virtue alone, that this flush 
of shamefacedness can possibly flow ; and a delicacy of compunction, 
on such occasions, is a sensitive plant of virtue in the soul, that 
feels, shrinks, and is alarmed on the slightest apprehension of 
approaching evil. 

Well, sir, said Arabella, allowing all that you have advanced in 
behalf of blushers (and that is doing them more favour than I fear 
they deserve), can it amount to more than this; that however 
faulty they may be, they still have goodness enough to acknowledge 
their guilt; or, in other words, that they have the justice to be 
ashamed of themselves ? 

Yes, madam, said Mr. Fenton, it amounts to much more, and you 
know that it does. But you are a wicked little sophister, and de- 
serve to be punished, by our yielding to you the cause that you 
have undertaken against yourself. 

When I observed that nothing but virtue could undesignedly 
express a disapprobation of vice, I ought further to have observed, 
that the greater and the purer, the more excellent and more vivid 
that this virtue is, the more apt it will be to take alarm at the bare 
apprehension of having said or done, or of being suspected to have 
said, or done, or thought of any thing amiss, or contrary to its own 
nature. 

As far as a guilty person loves and is reconciled to guilt, it be- 
comes a part of himself, and he cannot blush at it. But goodness 
will blush in a closet, in a desert, in darkness, on fearing it was in 
danger to have said or done any thing unbecoming or disgustful to 
its own sensibilities. 

But again, where such a delicate virtue is accompanied by lowli- 
ness, there needs not any thing amiss, nor the slightest apprehension 
of any thing amiss, to excite this sweet confusion in the soul and 
in the countenance. Humility will blush to be found hi the pre- 
sence of those whom it reveres; it will blush to be thought of 
either too meanly or too highly by those whose favourable opinion 
it wishes to merit. 

This graceful effusion of a virtuous and humble heart is, as I once 
hinted, the highest, and generally the most grateful compliment 



126 TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

that the person can pay to the company ; as it is an expression of 
deference, and a comparative acknowledgment of superior merit. 
But it is more peculiarly amiable in your sex, Mrs. Clement ; it is 
that shamefacedness so grateful to God and man, and which in 
scripture is called the most becoming clothing and best ornament 
of a woman. 

However, my dear child, as this emotion is generally attended 
with some little matter of pain, the present company are too much 
your friends to receive any kind of pleasure from a compliment 
as unmerited as it is wholly unnecessary. And, in truth, there is 
but one thing that I can think of for which Mrs. Clement ought 
to blush. 

Pray, sir, don't hold me in pain ; what is it, I beseech you ? 
It is for being a reproach almost to her whole sex. 

Ah, sir ! cried Arabella rising, smiling and blushing, and curtsy- 
ing down to the ground, excuse me if I don't stay to hear myself 
so abused; and, turning away, she swam and disappeared in 
an instant. 

As soon as she was gone, Clement took out his purse of a 
hundred guineas. And pray, sir, said he, what shall I do with all 
this money? Oh! as for that matter, said Mr. Fenton, I know 
people not half so ingenious as you are, who could quickly contrive 
to get rid of a much larger sum. Lay it out in decent clothing for 
yourself and your Arabella, and I will find some way to have you 
reimbursed. In short, Hammel, I cannot think of parting with 
you, if my fortune may serve for a sufficient cement. I will pay 
you two hundred guineas yearly while you stay with me, and I will 
settle on you one thousand pounds in case of my mortality, to put 
you into some little station of independence. 

Sir, sir ! cried Clement hesitatingly, you oppress me, you Hush, 
hush ! said Mr. Fenton, putting his hand to his mouth ; no compli- 
ments, my dear friend. It is not your thanks, but your services 
that I want; and you may readily make them more than an 
equivalent to such matters. I value the instilling of a single 
principle of goodness or honour into the mind of my dear Harry, 
beyond all the wealth that the Indies can remit. Ah, Hammel! 
why was not that brat of yours a girl instead of a boy ! She might 
one day have been the wife of my precious Harry; and I might then 
have had some of the breed of this wonderful Arabella. 

But, Hammy, continued Mr. Fenton, I would not have you, 
through any zeal or attachment to me, think of pushing my boy 
into learning of the languages beyond his own pleasure. Neither 
would I have you oppress or perplex his infant mind with the deep 
or mysterious parts of our holy religion. First, be it your care to 
instruct him hi morality; and let the law precede the gospel, for 
such was the education that God appointed for the world. Give 
him, by familiar and historical instances, an early impression of the 
shortness of human life, and of the nature of the world in which he 
is placed. Let him learn, from this day forward, to distinguish 
between natural and imaginary wants; and that nothing is estimable, 
or ought to be desirable, but so far as it is necessary or useful to 
man. Instruct my darling, daily and hourly, if possible, in a 



TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 127 

preference of manners and things that bear an intrinsic value, to 
those that receive their value and currency from the arbitrary and 
fickle stamp of fashion. Show him also, my Hammel, that the 
same toils and sufferings, the same poverty and pain, from which 
people now fly as they would from a plague, were once the desire 
of heroes and the fashion of nations ; and that thousands of patriots, 
of captains, and philosophers, through a love of their country or 
of glory, of applause during life or distinction after death, have 
rejected wealth and pleasure, embraced want and hardship, and 
suffered more from a voluntary mortification and self-denial, than 
our church seems to require in these days for the conquest of a 
sensual world into which we are fallen, and for entitling us to 
a crown in the kingdom of eternity. 

So saying, Mr. Fenton got up from table, and, observing that it 
was late, wished Clement a good-night. 

Our hero was now eight years of age, and weekly and daily con- 
tinued to be exercised in feats of bodily prowess and agility, and 
in acts of mental benevolence and service to mankind. 

Mr. Fenton had already provided his favourite with a dancing- 
master, the most approved for skill in his profession ; as also with 
a noted fencing-master, who further taught him the noble science 
of the cudgel and quarter-staff. He was now on the search for the 
most distinguished champion of the Bear-garden, in order to 
accomplish our hero in the mysteries of bruising, of wrestling, and 
of tripping ; and having in a short time procured the person de- 
sired, he purchased for his Harry a small but beautiful Spanish 
jennett, that was perfectly dressed as they called it, or rid to the 
manage, and once in every week or fortnight he accompanied his 
darling to the riding-house in Islington, where he saw him in- 
structed in all the arts and elegancies of horsemanship. 

Thus Harry had his little hands as full of business as they could 
hold. But he was naturally of an active and vivid disposition ; and 
time, unemployed, lay upon him as the heaviest and most irksome 
of all burdens. He therefore proceeded from his book to his 
exercises, and from one exercise to another, as an epicure does 
among a number of dishes, where the variety of the seasoning 
excites in him a new appetite to each. 

Within a few weeks after the late dissertation upon blushing, 
the same company being present, and dinner removed Harry, 
says Mr. Fenton, tell me which of the two is the richest, the man 
who wants least, or the man who hath most ? Let me think, father, 
says Harry. Why, sure they are the same thing ; are not they, 
dada ? By no means, my darling, cried Mr. Fenton. 

There lived two famous men at the same time, the one was 
called Diogenes, and the other Alexander. Diogenes refused to 
accept of any worldly goods, save one wooden cup to carry water 
to his mouth ; but when he found that he could drink by lying 
down and putting his mouth to the stream, he threw his cup away, 
as a thing that he did not want. 

Alexander, on the other side, was a great conqueror ; and when 
he had conquered and got possession of all the world, he fell a 
crying because there were not a hundred more such worlds for him 



128 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

to conquer. Now, which of these two was the richest, do you 
think? 

O, exclaimed Harry, Diogenes to be sure Diogenes to be sure ! 
He who wants nothing is the richest man in the world. Diogenes 
was richer than Alexander by a hundred worlds. 

Very true, my love, rejoined Mr. Fenton. Alexander had a 
whole world more than Diogenes wanted, and yet desired a hundred 
worlds more than he had. Now, as no man will allow that he 
wants what he does not desire, and all affirm that they want what- 
soever they do desire, desires and wants are generally accounted 
as one and the same thing ; and yet, my Harry, there is a thing of 
which it may be said, that the more we desire it the less we want 
it, and that the less we desire of it, the greater is our want. 

What in the world can that be, father? It is goodness, my 
love. Well, says Harry, I will not puzzle my brains about nice 
matters. All I know is, that no man has more goodness than he 
wants, except it be yourself. I do not talk of women, for I believe 
Mrs. Clement here is very good ; pray, look in her face, father do 
not you think she is very good? 

I see, Harry, said Mr. Fenton, that young as you are you are 
a perfect physiognomist. Why, pray, sir, said Arabella, is it in 
earnest your opinion, that the character of mind or manners may 
in any measure be gathered from the form of the countenance? 
Is not the world filled with stories of deceit and treachery of such 
false appearances ? You remember how Horace says, that a prudent 
mariner puts no trust in the gildings or paintings of a ship ; such, 
superficial glossings, as one might think, ought rather to be sus- 
pected of an intention to conceal the rottenness of the timber. 
And then the passage of the famous physiognomists at Athens, so 
often quoted as a proof of capacity and knowledge in this way, 
proves wholly the reverse as I take it. Their judgment of Socrates 
is opposite to truth in every instance ; they pronounced him the 
most debauched, irascible, and malicious of men ; and it is a very 
poor apology that Socrates makes for their ignorance, when he 
affirms that he was by birth the very person they deemed him, but 
that philosophy had given him a new nature ; for, if education can 
change the heart without changing the countenance, how can we 
form any conjecture of the one by the other? 

Though I insist, Mrs. Clement, that you are wrong in your 
thesis, replied Mr. Fenton, I admit that you are perfectly just in 
your inference. For if a change of mind or manners can make no 
change in the aspect, the whole science of physiognomy must fall 
to the ground. I therefore take this passage relating to Socrates 
to be a mere fiction; and I affirm that neither philosophy nor 
Christianity can make a new heart or a new nature in man, without 
making a suitable alteration in his visage. 

As the heavens are made expressive of the glory of God, though 
frequently overcast with clouds and tempests, and sometimes break- 
ing forth in thunders that terrify, and lightnings that blast; so 
the general tenor of a human countenance is made expressive of 
the nature of the soul that lives within, and to which it is ordained 
an involuntary interpreter. 



TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 129 

Many persons have made it the study of great part of their lives 
to counteract Providence in this honest appointment ; to shut 
this window, by which an impertinent world is so apt to peep in, 
and spy what they are about; and, as far as possible, to make 
the expressions of their countenance to belie every sentiment and 
emotion of the heart. 

I have known hypocrisy, treachery, pride, malice, and lust, 
assume the opposite semblance of saintship, fidelity, lowliness, 
benevolence, and chastity. But it is painful to keep the bow of 
nature long bent; its elasticity will still struggle to have it restored ; 
and a skilful discerner, at the time of such delusion, will often 
detect the difference between a real character and the acting of a 
part. For when nature dictates, the whole man speaks ; all is 
uniform and consenting in voice, mien, motion, the turn of each 
feature, and the cast of the eyes. But when art is the spokesman, 
and that nature is not altogether suppressed, the turn of the eye 
may contradict the tongue, and the muscles of the face may coun- 
teract each other in their several workings. And thus I have 
known an expression of resentment remain on the brow, while the 
face laboured to invest itself with a smile of complacence ; and 
I have known the eye to burn with ill-governed concupiscence, 
while voice, action, and address united in the avowal of chaste 
and honourable regards. 

I perceive, sir, said Mr. Clement, by your own account, that he 
must be a very learned proficient in the study of physiognomy who 
can decide, with any kind of certainty, on an art that requires 
such attention and penetration. 

I beg leave to differ, answered Mr. Fenton. The science is much 
more obvious than you may imagine ; and I fancy there are very 
few persons who do not trust, without reflecting, to their own skill 
in this way; and who do not inadvertently form a character to them- 
selves of almost all the people with whom they are conversant. 

I am persuaded that there is not a single sentiment, whether 
tending to good or evil in the human soul, that has not its distinct 
and respective interpreter in the glance of the eye, and in the 
muscling of the countenance. When nature is permitted to express 
herself with freedom by this language of the face, she is understood 
by all people; and those who never were taught a letter, can 
instantly read her signatures and impressions ; whether they be of 
wrath, hatred, envy, pride, jealousy, vexation, contempt, pain, fear, 
horror, and dismay; or of attention, respect, wonder, surprise, 
pleasure, transport, complacence, affection, desire, peace, lowliness, 
and love. 

Now, all persons are born with propensities (whether they be 
mental or constitutional) to some passions and affections, rather than 
to others. I will take two instances ; the one of a male infant, who 
is born with a propensity to pride and arrogance ; the other of a 
female infant, who is born with a propensity to bashfulness and 
lowliness. In either case, it is evident that, from the first occasion 
that may serve to excite these several affections in these several 
infants, the sentiments of their souls will be suitably and intelligibly 
expressed in their aspects ; and every further occasion of renewing 



130 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

the same impressions will render them more obvious and legible to 
every eye. Insomuch that, if no future influence, arising from 
accident or education, shall check the pride of the one, or divert 
the lowliness of the other, the male will be seen to look on those 
about him with an habitual self-sufficiency and contempt of his 
species ; and the female will be seen to regard human-kind with 
an amiable diffidence and a complacent respect. 

Let us see, however, how far education may be able to change 
these sentiments ; and how far a change of sentiments may pro- 
duce a change of face. 

If the scorner should be so happy as to meet with worthy tutors, 
wise and diligent to inculcate the insufficiency of all creatures, and 
more particularly the wants, weaknesses, and vileness of pur lapsed 
natures, and that no honour can belong to man in this state of 
depravity ; but, above all, should this scorner prove so happy as to 
be educated in the never-failing school of Christian meekness even 
the school of adversity, of pain, sickness, depressing poverty and 
mortification his lofty crest by degrees will be effectually un- 
plumed; his sufficiency and high-mindedness will sink to an humble 
prayer and look-out for relief; and he will respect even the 
wretched, because he will acquire a social sense and fellow-feeling 
of their wretchedness. 

Here then is another man, as new made and as different from 
his former self as he can possibly be supposed from any other of the 
human species. But will this total change of sentiment produce no 
change of aspect, think ye ? Will this benevolent and lowly man 
retain the same front of haughtiness, the same brow of over- 
bearance, the same eye of elevation, the same lip of ridicule, and 
the same glance of contempt? It cannot be said, it cannot be 
imagined. 

When God, by his inspired penmen, expresses his detestation of 
a lofty look, was he quarrelling, do you think, with the natural and 
unavoidable cast of an unhappy countenance? No, no, my dear 
friends. In condemning a proud aspect, he condemned a proud 
heart ; forasmuch as he knew that a loftiness of look and a sauci- 
ness of soul could not be divided. 

But to clear up this question from any remaining doubt, let us 
suppose that the female infant, with bashful and lowly propensities, 
is just brought down, blushing and trembling from the nursery. 
Let us suppose her education to be taken hi hand by a mamma of 
figure and fashion, and by other dames of quality, whose estimate 
of happiness is measured merely by the mode. She now becomes 
instructed in more instances of self-denial than such as, dictated 
and tuned by Christianity, would have sainted her for eternity. 
She is taught to suppress her natural feelings and inclinations, and 
to bridle the impulses of an affectionate and an humble heart. She 
is taught to prize what she dislikes, and to praise what she dis- 
approves ; to affect coldness and distance to inferiors whom she 
regarded, and to proportion her appearance of inclination and 
respect to the station of the party. 

As I have been ear-witness to several of these quality-lectures, 
I might give you many familiar instances of their nature and 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 131 

tendency. Fie, Harriet, says my lady, what does the girl blush 
at? You are handsome and well-shaped, my dear, and have 
nothing to be ashamed of that I know. No one blushes nowadays 
except silly country girls who are ignorant of the world. But do 
not let your face be a town-crier, Harriet, to let every body know 
what you have in your mind. To be ashamed, my girl, is the 
greatest of all shames. 

Again, my dear, I warn you that you must not be so fond of the 
Miss Colosses, who used to visit you in the nursery. For, though 
they are good sort of girls, their parents are people in but middling 
life, and we never admit them when there's company in the house. 
And then there's the Miss Sinclairs, how low you curtsied to them 
yesterday, and what a rout you made about welcoming and enter- 
taining them ; but let me have no more of that, for though they 
are rich, they are cits and people of business ; and a nod of your 
head, or inclination towards a curtsy, with some Yeses and Noes, 
when they ask you a question, will be matter enough of salute and 
discourse from you to them. 

I must further advise you, Harriet, not to heap such mountains 
of sugar, nor to pour such a deluge of cream into your tea ; people 
will certainly take you for the daughter of a dairymaid. There is 
young Jenny Quirp, who is a lady by birth, and she has brought 
herself to the perfection of never suffering the tincture of her tea 
to be spoiled by whitening, nor the flavour to be adulterated by a 
grain of sweet. And then you say you cannot like coffee, and I 
could not but laugh, though I was quite ashamed at the wry faces 
you made the other day, when you mistook the olives for 
sweetmeats. But these things, my child, are relished by persons 
of taste, and you must force yourself to swallow and relish 
them also. 

I was talking a while ago of young Lady Jane Quirp. There's a 
pattern for you, Harriet ; one who never likes or dislikes, or says 
or does any thing a hair's-breadth beyond the pink of the mode. 
She is ugly, it is true, and very ill-natured ; but then she is finely 
bred, and has all the becoming airs of a miss of distinction. Her 
you must love, my child, and to her you must pay your court ; for 
you must learn to love and prefer such matters and persons alone, 
as will serve, in the beau monde, to render you noted and respected 
for the accomplishments in vogue. 

These lessons and efforts, in time, have their influence. Miss 
comes to accommodate her taste and relish of things to the taste 
and relish of those whom she is proud to resemble. She now is 
ashamed of nothing, but in proportion as it is below the top of the 
mode ; and she blushes at no indecency that fashion is pleased to 
adopt. Her whole soul and essence is futilized and extracted into 
show and superficials. She learns that friendship in high life is 
nothing but compliment, and visits, intimacies, and connections, 
the polite grimace of people of distinction ; that to talk elegantly 
upon nothing is the sum of conversation ; that beauty and dress are 
the constituents of female perfection ; and that the more we de- 
preciate and detract from others, the more eminently we ourselves 
shall shine forth, and be exalted. She is foUowed by fops, she is 

K2 



132 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

worshipped by fortune-hunters. She is mounted aloft upon the 
wings of flattery, and is hardened against public opinion by self- 
conceit. While she beholds a circling group of the tailor's creation, 
admiring the harmony of her motions, the fineness of her com- 
plexion, and the lustre of her ornaments, the same vanity that bids 
her to be desirous of conquest, bids her also to despise them : but, 
for the vulgar world, she regards it as the dust beneath her steps, 
created to no end, save to be looked down upon, and trodden 
under foot. 

Will ye now affirm, or can ye conceive, that any trace of native 
bashfulness and lowliness should remain in the frontlet of this 
piece of court-petrifaction ? No such trace can remain. 

As I observed to ye before, that every affection of the human 
soul has its distinct and respective interpreter in the countenance ; 
I am further to take notice, that each of those many interpreters 
hath its respective set of tubes and fibres leading thereto, through 
which the blood and spirits flow on their respective emotion. Thus, 
whatever the general tenor of a person's temper may be, such as 
joyous or melancholy, irascible or placid, and so forth ; the vessels 
relative to these affections are kept open and full by an almost 
constant flow of the blood and animal spirits, and impress such 
evident characters of that person's disposition as are not to be 
suppressed except for a time, and that too by some powerful and 
opposite passion. For the muscles, so employed, grow stronger 
and more conspicuous by exercise ; as we see the legs of a chairman, 
and the shoulders of a porter, derive bulk and distinction from the 
peculiarity of their occupation. 

Now I will take the argument in the strongest light against my- 
self. I will suppose a man to be naturally of a melancholy cast of 
countenance ; that he has the additional unhappiness of a bilious 
constitution ; and that he is confirmed in this look and habit of 
despondence by a train of distressful circumstances, till he arrives 
at his twentieth or thirtieth year. I will then suppose that his 
habit of body and temper of mind are totally changed by medicine, 
a flow of success, a happy turn of reason and resignation, or perhaps 
of complacence in the divine dispensations. He now grows sociable, 
benevolent, cheerful, always joyous when in company, and placid 
Vvhen alone. I ask, on this occasion, will ye continue to see the 
same cast and habit of melancholy in this man's countenance ? No 
more than ye can see the gloom of last winter in the smiling serene 
of a summer's evening. For some time I admit it will be difficult 
for the set of joyous muscles and glances to overpower their adver- 
saries who have so long kept the field ; but, in the end, they must 
prevail ; they will receive constant supplies from within, and the 
passages for their reinforcement will lie opened more and more, 
while their opponents daily subside, give place, and disappear. 

What I have observed with respect to melancholy, may be 
equally affirmed of any other affection whose opposite gets an 
habitual empire in the mind. I say habitual, because there are 
some persons of such variable and fluctuating tempers, now furious, 
now complacent ; now churlish, now generous ; now mopingly 
melancholy, now merry to madness ; now pious, now profane ; now 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 133 

cruelly hard-hearted, now meltingly humane that a man can no 
more judge of what nature or disposition such people are, than he 
can determine what wind shall predominate next April ; and yet, 
when the wind blows, he can tell by every cloud and weathercock 
from what point it comes, and may as easily decipher the present 
temper by the aspect. 

But, sir, said Arabella, might not nature impress, as in the case 
of Socrates, such conspicuous characters of vice (in his peculiar cast 
of countenance and strong turn of muscling) as no internal virtues 
should be able to retract? 

By no means, madam, answered Mr. Fenton. For if such cha- 
racters are impressed by nature on a countenance, independent 
of any such characters in the mind, this would first overthrow 
the whole system of the physiognomists, who judged of the mind 
by the countenance alone ; and secondly, it would overthrow the 
opinion of Socrates himself, who allowed that his countenance 
had received such impressions from the natural bent and disposi- 
tion of his mind. But again, if the mind has really a power to 
impress her own character or likeness on the countenance, what 
should take away this power? why does not she retain it? Why 
should not a total change of character in the soul, make some 
suitable change of character in the aspect? It does, madam, it 
does make a total change. And there are thousands of faces in 
yonder sanctified city, that once expressed all the sweetness of 
bashful modesty, and yet are now as much hardened and bronzed 
over with impudence as the face of the statue at Charing-cross. 

In the soft and pliable features of infancy and youth, the mind 
can express itself with much more force and perspicuity, than in 
the features of people more advanced in years. The nerves and 
fibres, in our early age, are all open, active, and animated ; they 
reach to the outward surface of the skin ; and the soul looks forth, 
and is seen through them, as a Spanish beauty is seen through a 
veil of gauze. But time destroys many of these intelligible fibres ; 
it also obstructs others, and it renders the remainder less sus- 
ceptible of those offices and mental impressions for which they 
were ordained, till the surface of the countenance grows so callous 
and rigid, that the beauties of the soul can no more be discovered 
through it, than the luminaries of heaven through an atmosphere 
of clouds. Scarce any thing, save sudden passion, can then be 
discernible, like the flashes of lightning that break through the 
gloom. 

For this very reason, my dear Mrs. Clement, were it possible 
for you to advance in virtues as you advance in years, you will 
however grow less amiable in the eyes of mortals, as your beauties 
will be more and more shut in from their observation. 

This brings me to my last and most important remark on the 
nature and power of beauty itself. And here we must note, 
that, though nothing can be afiectingly lovely and detestable that 
does not arise from some sentiment of the soul, there is yet, in 
many faces, such a natural symmetry or disproportion as is 
generally called by the name of beauty and ugliness. Thus, in 
some countenances, you perceive a due relation and agreement 



134 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

between the parts ; while in others the forehead may overwhelm 
the nether face ; or the mouth threaten to devour the other 
features; or the nose may appear as a huge steeple that hides 
a small church ; or as a mountain that is the whole of a man's 
estate ; insomuch that as some may be said to want a nose to 
their face, in the present case they may be said to want a face 
to their nose. But this species of beauty and ugliness excites no 
other kind of pleasure or disgust, save such as we receive from 
two pieces of architecture, where one is executed with propriety, 
and the other is obviously out of all rule. And, to continue the 
simile, if people should be seen looking out of the windows of 
those two buildings, we may come to detest and avoid the first, 
and to love and frequent the latter, for the sake of those who 
live therein. And just so it is with regular faces that express 
a deformity of soul, and with disproportioned features that may 
however be pregnant with the beauty of sentiment. 

By beauty, therefore, I do not mean the beauty of lines or 
angles; of motion or music; of form or colour; of numerical 
agreements or geometrical proportions ; nor that which excites 
the passion of some pragmatical inamoratos for a shell, a tulip, 
or a butterfly. All these have, undoubtedly, their peculiar beauty; 
but then that beauty has no relation to the power or perception of 
that which contains it ; it is derived from something that is alto- 
gether foreign, and owes the whole of its merit to the superior 
art and influence of God or man. 

In the designings of sculptors, of painters, and statuaries, we 
however see very great and truly-affecting beauty. I have, at 
times, been melted into tears thereby ; and have felt within my 
bosom the actual emotions of distress and compassion, of friend- 
ship and of love. I ask, then, what it was that excited these 
sensations? Could any lines, colourings, or mere symmetry of 
inanimate parts, inspire affections, of which in themselves they 
were incapable ? No ; they could only serve as the vehicles of 
something intended to inspire such sensibilities, nothing further. 
We must therefore look higher for a cause more adequate to such 
extraordinary effects; and the first that presents itself is the 
designer, who must have conceived amiable sentiments within 
himself, before he could impress their beauty on these his inter- 
preters, in order to excite suitable affections in others. 

Here then it is evident, that whatever we affect or love in the 
design, is no other than the sentiment or soul of the designer, 
though we neither see nor know any thing further concerning 
him. And thus a sculptor, a painter, a statuary, or amiable 
author, by conveying their sentiments in lasting and intelligible 
characters to mankind, may make the world admirers and lovers 
of their beauty, when their features shall be rigid and incapable 
of expression, and when they themselves shall no longer exist 
among men. 

From hence it should seem, as indeed I am fully persuaded, 
that mind can affectingly love nothing but mind ; and that 
universal nature can exhibit no single grace or beauty that does 
not arise from sentiment alone. 



TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 



135 



The power of this sentimental beauty, as I may say, is in many 
cases great, amazing, and has not yet been accounted for, that I 
know of, by any philosopher, poet, or author, though several have 
made it their peculiar study and subject. We have seen and read 
of many instances where it carries people, as it were, quite put of 
themselves, and gives them to live and to be interested in the 
object of their affections alone. They will run to fight, bleed, 
suffer, and even to die in its defence ; and in its absence they will 
pine and despair, and attempt to destroy themselves, rather than 
bear to be divided from what they love in a manner above their 
own existence. 

This is wonderful, perhaps mysterious, and may possibly be in- 
volved in impenetrable darkness. Let us try, however, if we can 
throw any probable lights upon it. 

"We have already seen that human artificers can impress the 
beauty of their own sentiments on their inanimate works. Sup- 
pose, then, that God should be barely the same to universal nature 
that a finite designer is to the piece he has in hand. He finds 
that the stuff or material which he is to form and to inform, is 
in itself utterly incapable of any thing that is desirable. He 
therefore finds himself under the necessity of imparting to his 
works some faint manifestation or similitude of himself; for 
otherwise they cannot be amiable, neither can he see his shadow 
in them with any delight. On matter, therefore, he first impresses 
such distant characters of his own beauty as the subject will bear; 
in the glory of the heavens, in the movement of the planets, in the 
symmetry of form, in the harmony of sounds, in the elegance of 
colours, in the elaborate texture of the smallest leaf, and in the 
infinitely-fine mechanism of such insects and minims of nature as 
are scarce visible to eyes of the clearest discernment. 

But when God comes towards home, if the phrase may be 
allowed ; when he impresses on intelligent spirits a nearer resem- 
blance of himself, and imparts to them also a perception and 
relish of the beauty with which he has formed them he then 
delights to behold, and will eternally delight to behold his image, 
so fairly reflected by such a living mirror. Yet still they are no 
other than his own beauties that he beholds in his works; for 
his omnipotence can impress, but cannot possibly detach, a single 
grace from himself. 

I am not quite singular in this opinion. I have somewhere read 
the following stanza : 

'Tis goodness forms the beauty of the face, 
The -One of virtue is the line of grace. 

Here is also a little poem, lately published on a lady who was 
beholden to the graces of her mind alone for all the attractions 
of her person and countenance : 

What is beauty ? is it form, 



No It is internal grace, 

Pregnant in the form and face; 



136 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

The sentiment that's heard and seen. 
In act and manners, voice and mien; 
It is the soul's celestial ray 
Breaking through the veil of clay : 
'Tis the Grodhead in the heart, 
Touching each external part ; 
Wrapt in matter else too bright 
For our sense, and for our sight. 
BEAUTY (envy be thou dumb) 
Is DIVINITY in 

Here we reach at the nature of that enchantment or magnetism, 
with which some persons are so powerfully endued as to engage 
the liking of all who barely behold them ; an enchantment often 
attractive of friendship, affection,, passion, to tenderness, languish- 
ment, pain, sickness, and death. 

Here also we discover why the bliss which we reach after eludes 
our grasp ; why it vanishes, as it were, in the moment of enjoy- 
ment, yet still continues to fascinate and attract as before ; for- 
asmuch as the BEAUTY after which we sigh, is not essentially in 
the mirror where we behold its similitude. Thus, Ixion is said 
to have clasped a cloud, without reflecting that it was but a bare 
resemblance of the real divinity who had excited his passion. 

This will at once account for all the wonderful effects of beauty. 
For, if nothing but God is lovely, if nothing else can be beloved, 
he is himself the universal and irresistible magnet, that draws all 
intelligent and affectionate beings, through the medium of creatures, 
to the graces of their Creator ; till the veil shall finally be taken 
away, and that he himself shall appear, in his eternal, unclouded, 
and unspeakable beauty, infinitely lovely and infinitely beloved. 

But I have out-talked my time, says Mr. Fenton, rising and 
looking at his watch. I am engaged for an hour or two above 
street, and wish ye a good-evening. 

On a day while Mr. Fenton was abroad, Ned, who would not will- 
ingly have changed his unluckiness for the heirship of an estate, 
happened to take a little ramble through the town. He held a stick, 
to the end of which he had a long ferule of hollow tin, which he 
could take off at pleasure ; and from the extremity of the ferule, 
there arose a small collateral pipe, in an angle of about forty-five 
degrees. He had filled this ferule with puddle water ; which by 
sudden pressure of the stick, he could squirt out to double the 
height of his own stature. 

On his return, he saw an elderly gentleman advancing, whose 
shadow, being lengthened by the declining sun, attended with a 
slow and stately motion. As Ned approached, he exclaimed with 
a well-counterfeited fear Look, look! what's that behind you? 
Take care of yourself, sir ; for Heaven's sake, take care. 

The gentleman, alarmed hereat, instantly started, turned pale, 
and looked terrified behind him, and on either side, when Ned, 
recovering his countenance, said O sir, I beg pardon, I believe it 
is nothing but your shadow. What, sirrah, cried the gentleman in 
a tone highly exasperated, have you learned no better manners 
than to banter your superiors ? and then, lifting a cane switch, he 
gave our merry companion a few smart strokes across the shoulders. 

Friend. This, I presume, must be some very respectable per- 






TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 137 

sonage, some extraordinary favourite of yours ; since, within a few 
lines, you style him three or four times by your " most venerable 
of all titles, the title of a gentleman." 

Author. Sir, I would not hold three words of conversation with 
any man who did not deserve the appellation of gentleman by many 
degrees better than this man does. 

Friend. Why, then, do you write or speak with such acknow- 
ledged impropriety? 

Author. I think for myself, but I speak for the people. I may 
think as I please, for I understand my own thoughts ; but, would I 
be understood when I speak to others also, I must speak with the 
people ; I must speak in common terms, according to their common 
or general acceptation. 

There is no term in our language more common than that of 
gentleman ; and, whenever it is heard, all agree in the general idea 
of a man some way elevated above the vulgar. Yet, perhaps, no 
two living are precisely agreed respecting the qualities they think 
requisite for constituting this character. When we hear the 
epithets of a "fine gentleman, a pretty gentleman, much of a 
gentleman, gentleman-like, something of a gentleman, nothing of a 
gentleman," and so forth ; all these different appellations must in- 
tend a peculiarity annexed to the ideas of those who express them ; 
though no two of them, as I said, may agree in the constituent 
qualities of the character they have formed in their own mind. 

There have been ladies who deemed a bag- wig, a tasselled waist- 
coat, new-fashioned snuff-box, and sword-knot, very capital in- 
gredients in the composition of a gentleman. 

A certain easy impudence acquired by low people, by being 
casually conversant in high life, has passed a man through many 
companies for a gentleman. 

In the country a laced hat and long whip make a gentleman. 

With heralds, every esquire is indisputably a gentleman. 

And the highwayman, in his manner of taking your purse, may, 
however, be allowed to have much of the gentleman. 

Friend. As you say, my friend, our ideas of this matter are very 
various and adverse. In our own minds, perhaps, they are also 
undetermined; and I question if any man has formed to himself 
a conception of this character with sufficient precision. Pray was 
there any such character among the philosophers ? 

Author. Plato, among the philosophers, was " the most of a man 
of fashion ;" and therefore allowed at the court of Syracuse to be 
the most of a gentleman. 

But, seriously, I apprehend that this character is pretty much 
upon the modern. In all ancient or dead languages we have no 
term any way adequate whereby we may express it. In the habits, 
manners, and characters of old Sparta and old Eome, we find an 
antipathy to all the elements of modern gentility. Among those 
rude and unpolished people, you read of philosophers, of orators, 
patriots, heroes, and demigods ; but you never hear of any character 
so elegant as that of a pretty gentleman. 

When those nations, however, became refined into what their an- 
cestors would have called corruption ; when luxury introduced, and 



138 TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

fashion gave a sanction to certain sciences, which cynics would have 
branded with the ill-mannered appellations of debauchery, drunken- 
ness, gambling, cheating, lying, &c., the practitioners assumed 
the new title of gentlemen, till such gentlemen became as plenteous 
as stars in the milky way, and lost distinction merely by the con- 
fluence of their lustre. 

Wherefore, as the said qualities were found to be of ready acqui- 
sition, and of easy descent to the populace from their betters, ambition 
judged it necessary to add further marks and criterions for severing 
the general herd from the nobler species of gentlemen. 

Accordingly, if the commonalty were observed to have a pro- 
pensity to religion, their superiors affected a disdain of such vulgar 
prejudices, and a freedom that cast off the restraints of morality, 
and a courage that spurned at the fear of God, were accounted the 
distinguishing characteristics of a gentleman. 

If the populace, as in China, were industrious and ingenious, 
the grandees, by the length of their nails and the cramping of 
their limbs, gave evidence that true dignity was above labour or 
utility, and that to be born to no end was the prerogative of a 
gentleman. 

If the common sort by their conduct declare a respect for the 
institutions of civil society and good government, their betters 
despise such pusillanimous conformity, and the magistrates pay be- 
coming regard to the distinction, and allow of the superior liberties 
and privileges of a gentleman. 

If the lower set show a sense of common honesty and common 
order, those who would figure in the world think it incumbent to 
demonstrate, that complaisance to inferiors, common manners, com- 
mon equity, or any thing common, is quite beneath the attention 
or sphere of a gentleman. 

Now, as underlines are ever ambitious of imitating and usurping 
the manners of their superiors, and as this state of mortality is 
incident to perpetual change and revolution ; it may happen, that 
when the populace, by encroaching on the province of gentility, 
have arrived to their ne plus ultra of insolence, debauchery, irre- 
ligion, &c., the gentry, in order to be again distinguished, may 
assume the station that their inferiors had forsaken, and, however 
ridiculous the supposition may appear at present, humanity, equity, 
utility, complaisance and piety, may in time come to be the dis- 
tinguishing characteristics of a gentleman. 

Friend. From what you have said, it appears that the most 
general idea which people have formed of a gentleman is that of a 
person of fortune, above the vulgar, and embellished by manners 
that are fashionable in high life. In this case, fortune and fashion 
are the two constituent ingredients in the composition of modern 
gentlemen; for, whatever the fashion may be, whether moral or 
immoral, for or against reason, right or wrong, it is equally the duty 
of a gentleman to conform. 

Author. And yet I apprehend that true gentility is altogether 
independent of fortune or fashion, of time, customs, or opinions of 
any kind. The very same qualities that constituted a gentleman 
in the first age of the world, are permanently, invariably, and in- 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 139 

dispensably necessary to the constitution of the same character to 
the end of time. 

Friend. By what you say, I perceive that we have not yet 
touched on your most reverable of all characters. I am quite 
impatient to hear your definition, or rather description, of your 
favourite gentleman, 

Author. The very first time you tire, I will indulge you, if you 
desire it. 



CHAPTER X. 

NED was not of a temper to endure much without attempting at 
retaliation ; and, directing the pipe of his ferule to the front of his 
adversary, he suddenly discharged the full contents in his eyes and 
face, and upon his clothing ; and straight taking to his heels, he 
hoped to get in at the door before the stranger could clear his sight 
to take notice where he sheltered. 

Ned however happened, at this time, to be somewhat over- 
sanguine in his expectations. Mr. Snarle, for that was the name of 
the party bespattered, had just cleared one eye in season to remark 
where his enemy had entered; and hastening home, he washed, 
undressed, and shifted his linen and clothes, with less passion and 
fewer curses by the half, than he conceived to be due to so out- 
rageous an insult. 

Mr. Snarle had himself been a humourist in his time, and had 
acquired a pretty competence by very fashionable means ; such as 
gambling, bearing testimony for a friend in distress, procuring in- 
telligence for the ministry, &c. &c. He had, some years ago, been 
bullied into marriage by the relations of a young termagant. She 
was neither gentle by nature, nor polished by education ; she liked 
nothing of her husband except his fortune ; and they lived together 
hi a state of perpetual altercation and mutual disgust. 

Old age, and a quarrelsome companion for life, seldom happen to 
be sweeteners of the human temper ; and Mr. Snarle had now ac- 
quired such a quantum of the infirmities both of body and mind, 
as might justly apologize for a peevish disposition. He had lately 
taken a handsome house on the hill for the benefit of air. As soon 
as he had reclaimed himself from the pickle into which Ned had 
put him, he sent to inquire the name and character of the owner 
of that house where he had taken refuge ; and, being sufficiently 
apprised of what he wanted to know, he walked toward Mr. 
Fenton's, hastening his pace with the spirit and expectation of 
revenge. 

Mr. Fenton had arrived but a little before, and, desiring to know 
Mr. Snarle's commands, he was informed, in terms the most aggra- 
vating and inveterate, of the whole course and history of Ned's 
misbehaviour. The delinquent thereupon was called up to instant 
trial. He honestly confessed the facts, but pleaded, in mitigation, 
the beating that Mr. Snarle had already given him: but as Mr. 
Fenton did not judge this sufficient to reform the natural petulance 
of a disposition that otherwise was not void of merit, a rod was 



140 TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

immediately brought, and Andrew was ordered to horse, and Frank 
to flog the criminal in presence of the party aggrieved. 

During this operation, Mr. Snarle observed that Frank's hand did 
not altogether answer to the benevolence of his own heart ; where- 
upon he furiously snatched the rod from him, and began to lay at 
Ned with might and main. Hereat Mr. Fenton ordered Andrew 
to let the boy down, and, observing that he would no further in- 
terfere in a cause where the appellant assumed judgment and execu- 
tion to himself, he carelessly turned his back upon Mr. Snarle, and 
left him to cool his passions by his evening's walk homeward. 

Poor Ned was more afraid of Mr. Fenton's displeasure than he 
would have been of a full brother to the whipping he had got. 
But Mr. Fenton was too generous to add the severity of his own 
countenance to the weight of Frank's hand, and Ned was quickly 
reinstated in the good graces of the family 

His genius, however, returned with an involuntary bent toward 
obtaining satisfaction for the injuries he had received from Mr. 
Snarle, provided he might retaliate without fear of detection ; and 
he was not slow in contriving very adequate means. 

There was a villager in Hampstead, about ten years of age, who 
had conceived an uncommon kindness for Ned on account of his 
sprig-htliness, his wit, and good-humour. To this condoling- friend 
he had imparted his grievances ; and on him alone he depended for 
execution of the project proposed for redress. 

On a certain moonless night they mustered four tame cats, and 
having bound some fuse round three or four inches of the ex- 
tremity of each of their tails, they lodged them together in a bag ; 
and somewhat after supper-time, when all the town was silent, 
they marched softly and cautiously to the house of Mr. Snarle. 
There Ned's friend with his knife dexterously picked away the 
putty from a pane of the window of a side-chamber, where no light 
appeared ; and having put fire to the fuse of each tail successively, 
they slipped their cats one by one in at the window, and again 
having pegged the pane into its place, they withdrew to a little 
distance to watch the issue. 

The poor cats remained silent, and universally inoffensive, while 
they felt no damage, But as soon as the fire had seized on 
their tails, they began to speak to you in a language wholly 
peculiar, as one would think, to sentiments and sounds of diabolical 
intention. 

Mr. and Mrs. Snarle had been jangling over the fire in an 
opposite parlour, when their dispute was suddenly settled by this 
outcry, as they imagined, of a legion of infernals. They instantly 
started up, and cast a countenance of pale and contagious panic at 
each other. But George, the footman, a strong and bold fellow, 
having just before entered on some business to his master, turned 
and run to the chamber from whence the peal came. He threw 
open the door with his wonted intrepidity; but this was as far 
as mortal courage could go; for the cats spying a passage whereby, 
as they conceived, they might fly from their pain, rushed sud- 
denly and jointly on the face and breast of George, and back he 
fell with a cry of terror and desperation. On however went the 



TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 



141 



cats, and, flying into the parlour, one fastened a claw in each cheek 
of Mr. Snarle ; and as his lady screamed out and clapped her hands 
before her face, another fastened with four fangs on her best Brussels 
head, and rent and tore away after a lamentable manner. 

The chambermaid and cook, hearing the uproar from the kitchen, 
were afraid to ascend, and still more afraid to stay below alone ; 
they therefore crept softly and trembling up-stairs. The torture 
the cats were in did not permit them to be attached to any single 
object. They had quitted Mr. and Mrs. Snarle, and now flew about 
the parlour, smashing, dashing, and overturning piers, glasses, and 
china, and whatever came in their way, as though it had been the 
very palace of Pandemonium itself. 

George was again on his legs ; his master and mistress had eloped 
from the parlour, and met the two maids in the middle of the entry. 
They concluded, nem. con., to get as speedily as they might from 
the ministers of darkness, and would willingly have escaped by 
the street-door ; but, alas ! this was not possible ; one of the cats 
guarded the pass, and, clinging to the great lock with all his 
talons, growled and yelled in the dialect of twenty fiends. The 
stairs, however, remained open, and up they would have rushed, 
but were so enfeebled by their fright that it could not be clone 
in the way of a race. 

Having scaled as far as the dining-room, they all entered and 
bolted the door, and Mr. Snarle, opening a window, saw a large posse 
of neighbours who had gathered below. What is the matter, sir ? 
cried one of them ; what is the meaning of this horrible uproar 
and din? one would think that hell was empty, and that all its 
inhabitants were come to keep carnival in your house. 

O, a ladder, a ladder ! cries Mr. Snarle ; deliver us, good people, 
good Christian people ; a ladder, we beseech thee ; a ladder, a 
ladder ! That, indeed, cries a wag, is the last good turn an honest 
fellow has occasion for. 

The ladder was soon brought, and this panic-stricken family were 
helped down, and charitably conducted to the great inn of St. George 
and the Dragon ; where, with the help of sack-whey, warm beds, 
and their remaining terrors, they got a hearty sweat, and were 
somewhat composed by ten o'clock next morning. They then got 
up, and, having breakfasted on a pot of milled chocolate, they 
hurried to London without adventuring to send to the haunted 
mansion for any change of clothes or linen ; for they would rather 
have put on garments that had been dipped in the blood of Nessus, 
than have touched any thing in a house in which, with the furni- 
ture, plate, bedding, and other appurtenances, the devil, as they 
conceived, had taken legal and full possession. 

In truth, there was scarce an inhabitant of the whole town of 
Hampstead who differed in opinion on this head ; insomuch that, 
as day after day began gradually to shut in, all people who had 
occasion to pass by the dwelling of the late ejected Mr. Snarle, 
kept more and more aloof to the opposite side of the way, in 
proportion as their apprehensions increased with the darkness. And 
all things in the house remained as safe from depredation, as though 
they had been guarded by a regiment of dragoons. 



142 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

The cats, in the mean time, lived plentifully and at free cost on 
the cold meats which they found in the kitchen and larder ; and, 
as the anguish of their tails was now no more remembered, they 
kept undisturbed possession of their new acquisition; so that, 
during their residence, not even a mouse was stirring. 

As Mr. Fenton could not but be frequently apprised of these 
prodigies and alarms that kept all Hampstead waking, and nightly 
grouped every family into a single room ; he compared, in his own 
mind, the discomfiture and banishment of the unfortunate Snarle, 
with the circumstances of the provocation which Ned had received. 
He found that all answered, as well in point of time, as to Ned's 
natural imluckiness and talents of invention ; yet he could scarce 
conceive how a child, little more than eight years of age, should be 
capable of contriving mischiefs so formidable in their execution, 
and so extensive in their consequences. Now Ned was so happy, 
on this singular occasion, that nothing transpired ; wherefore, as 
Mr. Fenton could produce no manner of proof, he was too delicate to 
ask any questions on the case ; lest, on one hand, he should tempt 
the boy into a lie, or, on the other, be obliged to chastise or check 
him for faults that his generosity might induce him to confess. 

Matters, therefore, with respect to Ned, preserved their state of 
tranquillity ; though Mr. Fenton would often view him with an eye 
of wonder and suspicion, and could hardly bring himself to believe 
that a boy of his extraordinary genius should be no other by birth 
than a beggar's brat. But here pardon me, Mr. Fenton, if I dissent 
from your opinion. With humble deference to your judgment in 
other matters, I conceive that an infant begot on a dunghill, 
brought forth in a pigsty, and swathed with the rotten remnant 
of the covering of an ass, may have talents and capacity above 
the son of an emperor. 

Friend. The singularity of your sentiments often strikes me 
with astonishment. Do you really think in a way apart from all 
other people? or is it a distinction that you affect? Here you set 
yourself at fisticuffs with universal persuasion, with historical facts, 
and with the experience as well as opinion of all ages. You seem 
wholly to have forgot the circumstances that attended the birth 
and discovery of Cyrus, of (Edipus, of Eomulus and Kemus, with a 
thousand other instances ; whereby it is evident that the beauty, 
prowess, and virtues of great and glorious ancestors naturally 
devolve upon their offspring. 

Author. The great Teutonic theosopher, Jacob Behmen, affirms, 
that a father begets the soul as well as body of his child ; and this 
strongly coincides with your judgment of the matter. All animal 
nature also concurs in the same position; and the offspring of a 
lion, an eagle, and an ass, invariably partake of the qualities of 
their progenitors. 

In the very early ages of mankind, when honour and empire, 
precedence and station, were assigned to superior merit alone, to 
prowess in the field, or wisdom in the council ; it is but natural 
to suppose that the more immediate descendants of such heroes or 
patriots inherited in a great measure the beauty, strength, genius, 






THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 143 

and disposition of those from whom they sprung. But some 
thousands of years are now passed, my good sir, since all this matter 
has been totally reversed, and the world affords but very rare 
intances where washerwomen or shepherds, where a Catherine of 
Russia, or Kouli-Kan of Persia, or Theodore of Corsica, by the 
mere force of genius, have raised themselves from obscurity to 
dominion. These instances also are very far from making any thing 
in favour of your argument ; though, unquestionably, were you to 
write their romance, you would, agreeaMe to your thesis, derive 
their respective pedigree from the queens of "Utopia, or some 
emperors in terra australis incognita. 

When time was young, when men were respected and advanced 
(as I said) according to their personal distinctions and accomplish- 
ments, uncommon beauty, strength, and agility of body, informed 
by superior genius and talents, were accounted genuine proofs of 
a royal or noble descent; but in process of years, when art had 
introduced luxury, and luxury had introduced corruption among 
the great, a feeble distempered frame, informed by a perverse, pusil- 
lanimous, and impatient temper, became an indication by no means 
improbable of the genuine descent of a child of quality. 

Friend. My dear friend, be cautious; to speak lightly or de- 
gradingly of dignity and station does not become people of a 
certain sphere. 

Author. With all deference and due submission to those who sit 
in the seat of Moses, or in the throne of Caesar, when we speak as 
philosophers we should speak independent of vulgar prejudice. 

I am not insensible of that internal respect which the world is 
pleased to pay to external lustre. If one man acquires a crown, 
another a red hat, and another a coronet, by means that deserved 
the gibbet of Haman, they instantly become the presumptive 
proprietors of I know not what catalogue of fine qualities and 
accomplishments. Wherefore, as I am so singular, so perverse, or 
so unhappy, as to differ from the judgment of so wise a world in 
this matter, it is the more incumbent upon me to bring proofs that 
are self-evident, at the same time that I treat so reverable a subject 
with all possible delicacy. 

In the first ages of ACOENS, when all that sustained the simple 
nature of man lay open and in common, like light and air, as people 
knew of nothing further that was to be had, they thought there 
was nothing further to be desired. As they had no wishes, they 
felt no wants; and neither pride, envy, covetousness, nor debauchery 
could commence, before they contrived the distinctions of property 
and materials of intemperance, and thereby contrived the causes 
of quarrel and corruption. 

But, as Horace say, " quum oppida coeperunt munire" when they 
began to build and set out landmarks, to plough and to sow, to 
spin and to weave, to handle the file and hammer ; in proportion 
to the advancement of invention and arts, on necessity con- 
venience arose, upon convenience elegance, upon elegance luxury, 
new desires increased and multiplied with the means of gratifi- 
cation; real wishes became the offspring of imaginary wants; 
as those wishes waxed warm, the passions were enkindled; and 



144 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

the vices, lastly, grew in mathematical proportion to the growth 
of the passions. 

All histories, as well profane as sacred, in every age, in every 
nation, and in every instance, bear unquestionable testimony to the 
above state of facts ; and hence ensues the necessity of our growing 
worse and worse, till the pinnacle of art shall put a limit to desire, 
till invention shall be exhausted, and no longer prolific of new 
wants and additional wishes in man. 

But so long as untried allurements, so long as untasted pleasures, 
so long as new objects can be set up to our imagination in our 
eager pursuit after happiness on earth, our wishes will inflame our 
impatience to reach the prize ; in proportion to that impatience 
our endeavours will be exerted ; in proportion to such exertion, the 
fences of law and morals will be broke through or trampled down ; 
and in proportion to the insufficiency of moral restraints, all sorts 
of fraud and violence, of licentiousness and corruption, of debauchery 
and profligacy, must prevail throughout the world. 

Friend. From what you say, I should conclude that people of 
wealth, of station, and power are the least impassioned and the 
most virtuous of all living : forasmuch as they are already in 
possession of what their inferiors so earnestly continue to thirst, 
and to chase, and to labour after. The great are above temptation, 
the world has nothing further to exhibit for their seduction ; and in 
this light also they are become the most respectable of all people. 

Author. Whenever you can make it evident that, to humble the 
spirit of man, you ought to place him in authority ; that, to con- 
vince him of personal defaults and infirmities, you ought to enclose 
him with sycophants and servile dependants ; that, to make him 
temperate, you should seat him at the table of Lucullus ; and that, 
to humanize his disposition, you should remove him as far as possible 
from a sense of the miseries of his fellow-creatures ; when, to cure 
a man of distempers incident to his nature, you would place him in 
the midst of adventitious contagion then, and not till then, will 
wealth, station, and power be productive of reformation and virtue 
in man. 

Your error lay in supposing that sensual appetite and spiritual 
ambition would cease and abate on gratification or indulgence. But 
this is not possible. The spirit of man is a deathless desire ; its 
cravings cannot be satiated till it is possessed of some object that is 
adequate to its nature ; and, as this world has no such object to 
exhibit, gratifications only serve to provoke to further desire, or 
finally to sink us into utter despondence. And this makes the moral 
that was intended by the philosophers, when they fabled that the 
son of Philip broke into a passion of tears on finding that no 
more worlds remained for him to conquer. 

Your pardon yet, I pray With respect to your opinion, that 

the descendants of the mighty and the exalted inherit the qualities 
and excellences of their progenitors, you speak as though this 
earth, and all that was thereon, were invariably permanent ; where- 
as the knowing-ones will tell you that the one and the other are 
subject to annual, and even diurnal, revolutions. 

Perhaps there is not a beggar or slave upon earth whose some 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 145 

time progenitor was not a prince or an emperor : perhaps there is 
not a prince or emperor upon earth whose some time progenitor 
was not a slave or a beggar. Have you, then, the discernment to 
perceive in the beggar the lineaments of the prince, or in the prince 
to retrace the lineaments of the beggar? You have not, sage sir. 
I will tell you a story. 

The Cardinal Campejus, or some such great cardinal, happened to 
have a dispute with the Duke of Modena. Altercation rose high. 
Do you know, says the prince in passion, that your father was no 
better than my father's hog-herd? I know it full well, coolly 
answered the cardinal ; and I am persuaded that, had your high- 
ness been the son of my father, you would have continued of the 
same profession to this day. 

In such a world as this, all things are in perpetual change, 
rotation, and revolution; it is nature's process. As the summer 
and winter gradually succeed and encroach upon each other ; or as 
the sun dawns and arises from darkness till he reaches the mid-day 
fervour of his culminating beam, and thence declines till he sets in 
utter gloom ; even so mighty nations, as well as families, have their 
commencement, ascent, and summit, their declension, decay, and 
period. The virtue of all nations and families begins in poverty, 
thence arises to industry, genius, honour, perhaps to conquest and 
empire there's their zenith ; but then comes on the load of pon- 
derous wealth, that gradually weighs them down from this meri- 
dian, to indulgence, sensuality, guilt, corruption, prostitution, slavery, 
perdition. 

Let us now, with the eye of philosophy, consider two men in the 
most contrasted state that this world can admit suppose a king 
and a beggar. Here the king is more highly fed and more gaily 
clothed than the beggar ; but if these are advantages deserving 
estimation, we behold both this luxury and lustre surpassed by the 
bee in the garden, and the lily in the valley. Further, whatever 
the native qualities of the king or beggar may be, independent 
of the said external or personal distinction, we may, however, be 
assured, that an education in the midst of sensuality and decep- 
tion, of the exhibition of temptations and gratification of lusts, of 
parasites and panders, obeisance and prostration, of corporal in- 
dulgence and mental imposition, can be no very good friend to the 
virtues. 

If we carry the comparison further than this, we find the body of 
the king to be as frail, as obnoxious to pains, disease, and in- 
clemencies, even as naked, poor, and perishable, as that of a 
beggar. 

But if we take the eye of faith to see further than with that of 
philosophy, we behold their souls alike immortal, of equal dignity 
and extent; we see creatures resembling the Creator himself 
breathed from his own spirit formed in his own image and 
ordained to his own beatitude and eternity. Here all other dis- 
tinctions fall away and lose their respect as an instant would do 
in comparison of ages, or a molehill in comparison of yon boundless 
expanse ; and here we find a beggar, whom the king himself is bound 
to reverence as being the unquestioned heir of a KING, in coni- 

L 



146 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

parison of whom all other kings are but as beggars. How utterly 
vile and contemptible is all dignity and dominion to such an heir- 
ship as this ! an heirship hourly approaching, perhaps just at hand, 
when the magnificent ruin of man shall be rebuilt, when his weak- 
ness shall put on power, his corruption put on glory, and his mortal 
be wholly swallowed up of immortality ! 

Friend. I confess that, for once, you have convinced me. Give me 
leave to proceed. 



CHAPTER XI. 

SOME time after this, Mr. Fenton privately took Ned into his 
closet, and calling him a good boy, and giving him a few shillings to 
buy playthings, desired him to give the best history he could re- 
member of himself and his adventures before he met with Harry. 

Sir, said Ned, the first thing that I remember of myself is my 
going from house to house a-begging with my mammy. I dreamed 
indeed that I was once in a fine house, and among fine people, but 
I don't know where nor when ; and so I believe, as I say, it was 
only a dream. 

Do you remember your father, Ned? No, sir, I never had a 
father that I know of. My mammy was very cross to me, and 
used to take from me all the money and victuals that I begged, and 
that was a great deal, for I never let people rest till they gave me 
something. And so, sir, as I was saying, my mammy was very cross 
to me, and used to half-starve me, and gave me a beating for every 
hour in the day. 

Did she teach you your prayers, Ned? No, sir, I believe she had 
no prayers to teach me ; for she used to swear and scold sadly. 
And so, sir, as I was telling you, we begged from house to house, 
sometimes in a town and sometimes in the country, till the day she 
ran away from me. 

How came your mammy to run away from you, Ned? Why, sir, 
we were begging in your town, and had got some halfpence, and 
filled our bag. And so we heard a man shouting behind us, and 
my mammy turned and saw him running after her very fast, and so 
she threw down her great bag on the ground, and made the best 
of her way to the next hedge, and got through it, sir ; and so I 
never saw any more of her. Then, sir, I fell a-crying and roaring 
terribly to be left alone, and to have nobody in the world who 
would have any thing to say to me ; and I wished for my mammy 
again, bad as she was to me ; and I strove to follow her through 
the hedge, but was not able. And so I saw a great house on one 
side, and I was very sad when I went to it : and there it was that 
I met my own young master, and he put clothes upon me with his 
own dear hands, and he took me to himself, and he is ever since so 
kind to me that it troubles me very much ; for I can do nothing at 
all for him, you know, sir, and that grieves me more than all the 
world. 

Well, Neddy, says Mr. Fenton, do not cry, my child. Be a good 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 147 

boy and mind your book, and be sure you tell no lies, nor do 
mischief to any body ; and I will take care of you, and be a father 
to you myself. But tell me, Ned, would you know the woman you 
call your mammy, if you should see her again ? Yes, yes, sir ! cried 
Ned. There was not a day of my life but she gave me reason to 
remember her ; I should know her from all the world, if I was not 
to see the face of her for a hundred years to come. 

I find, Ned, you are not over fond of your mammy. No, indeed, 
sir, answered Ned. I love Master Harry's little finger, and I would 
love yourself if I dared, sir, better than a thousand such mammies 
as mine was ; and that, I suppose, is very naughty ; for all good 
children, they say, love their fathers and mothers. Well, Ned, says 
Mr. Fenton, if you happen at any time to see her among the great 
numbers of beggars that come to our door, don't you speak to her, 
or show that you take the least notice of her ; but come and tell 
me, or honest James in my absence, that we may take care of her, 
and force her to confess whether she is in reality your mother 
or not. 

While Mr. Fenton was speaking, Andrew entered with tidings 
that a chariot was overturned not twenty yards from the door, and 
that he feared the people in it were much hurt. Mr. Fenton's 
humanity was much alarmed at the news ; he ordered the servants 
to follow him, and instantly hurried out to give all the assistance 
he could to the strangers. 

The chariot happened to be overturned by the slipping out of 
one of the linen-pins that kept the wheel on the axle-tree. The 
company had already got out. They were an agreeable young 
couple, Mr. Fielding and his wife, who had come from London on 
purpose to take an airing on the hill. Mrs. Fielding had suffered 
nothing except from her fears ; but Mr. Fielding's right arm was 
something bruised, by his endeavouring to preserve his lady in 
the fall. 

Mr. Fenton appeared the greatest sufferer of the three, and 
addressed the strangers with a countenance that convinced them 
how feelingly he was interested in their safety. He left Andrew to 
have the chariot set to rights; and, having conducted his new 
guests to his own house, he ordered up a bottle of sack and some 
Naples cakes to the parlour. 

When they were all seated, and the glass had gone round I find, 
sir, said Mr. Fielding, that people are apt to be disgusted with 
what they call accidents, and which may afterward turn out to 
their greatest advantage. Perhaps I should never have known 
what true humanity was, if our carriage had not been overturned 
this day. If you knew all, said Mr. Fenton, with a tender blunt- 
ness, you would be far from laying any humanity at my door ; since 
I rejoice at an accident where the damage is all yours, and the ad- 
vantage that arises from it is all my own. 

I would hold fifty to one, cried Mrs. Fielding, that this is the 
very Mr. Fenton we have heard so much about. Indeed, madam, 
said Mr. Fenton, you surprise me much ; if I had the pleasure of 
ever knowing you, there is something in that face I should not 
have readily forgot. 

L2 



148 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

No, sir, said Mrs. Fielding. I speak from information. I never 
had the happiness of being known to you till now. We have a 
fosterer in this village, Rose Jenkins, a poor widow, one of those 
many persons you have down in your list. She was nurse to our 
only child; while he lived and was with us, she was a constant 

visitant, but as soon as soon as (Here Mrs. Fielding hesitated, 

her lip trembled, and her eye glistened with a filling tear.) I say, 
sir, as soon as a very sad affair happened, the poor woman came 
near us no more. One day, as we were taking the air through 
this town, I thought I saw a face that was familiar to me. I called 
to the coachman to stop. It was my old nurse. She had a family 
of small children, and had fallen sadly to decay before you came, 
Mr. Fenton, to settle in the town. I chid her for becoming a 
stranger to us. Ah, madam! said the kind creature the tears 
bursting from her eyes how could I go near a place where every 
thing would put me in mind of my dear lost child ? She still con- 
tinued to weep and I wept for company 1 put a guinea in 

her hand, and insisted on her coming to see us. She did so. It 
was then, Mr. Fenton, that we learned your name and character ; 
and you must expect the mortification, now and then, of hearing 
a little of those many things that are spoken to your advantage. 
I am sorry, madam, said Mr. Fenton, that my nothings should 
be talked of, lest it should intimate that other people are less 
ostentatious. 

Mrs. Fielding was still affected by what she had been saying ; 
and though Mr. Fenton wished to know what the sad affair was 
at which she had hinted, he declined asking any questions, for fear 
of renewing her affliction. 

Mr. and Mrs. Clement had walked abroad, upon a visit, with their 
pupil Harry ; so that Mr. Fenton and his friend Ned, with Mr. and 
Mrs. Fielding, made the whole of the present company. 

You are happily situated, sir, says Mr. Fielding. I blame myself, 
and all others who have any independence, and yet live in the city. 
Health, pleasure, and spirits are all for the country. Did any 
poets or philosophers ever place their golden eras or golden scenes 
amidst such a town as London ? A man can scarce be himself ; he 
is confused and dissipated by the variety of objects and bustle that 
surrounds him. In short, sir, I am like many others, the reverse 
in persuasion of what I am in practice ; I live in a city, although I 
detest it. It is true that I am fond of society and neighbourhood ; 
but experience has shown me that London is not the place in which 
I can enjoy it. 

No, sir, said Mr. Fenton ; if I was a lover of solitude, if I wished 
to be the most recluse of all anchorites that bid adieu to the com- 
merce of mankind, I would choose London for my cell. It is in 
such a city alone that a man may keep wholly unknown and un- 
noticed. He is there as a hailstone amidst a great shower ; he 
jumps and bustles about a while, then lies snug among his fellows, 
without being any more observed than if he were not upon earth, 
till he melts away and vanishes with the rest of his fraternity. 

I am not for a cell, sir, replied Mr. Fielding. I love society, but 
yet a society that is founded on friendship ; and people in great 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 149 

cities are so divided and dissipated by the multitude of soliciting 
objects and acquaintance, that they are rendered incapable of a 
particular attachment. I imagine, however, that in a well-peopled 
and civilized part of the country, a man might make an election of 
persons deserving his esteem, such as he would wish to live with in 
a happy interchange of kind offices and affections. This, indeed, 
is my plan for my remainder of life ; but the lawsuits, in which I 
am at present involved, will not permit me to go in search of my 
Utopia. 

At law ! exclaimed Mr. Fenton ; then, sir, you are much to be 
blamed, or much to be pitied. 

I hope rather to be pitied than blamed, rejoined Mr. Fielding. 
Four suits descended to me on the part of my own father, and three 
on the part of the father of my wife ; and my adversaries, on all 
sides, are such cocks of the game, that no overtures can induce 
them to listen to any terms of compromise or accommodation. 

If matters of wealth or property, said Mr. Fenton, are really 
matters of valuable estimation in life, it is much to be lamented 
that there is no place on earth wherein property can be said to be 
fixed or ascertained. Throughout the regions of Mahomet and 
Asiatic despotism, life and property are alike tenures at the will 
of the ruler. Again, throughout the European continent, no man, 
indeed no nation, can be assured of their possessions, exposed as 
they are to the ambition and avarice of their almost perpetually 
invading neighbours. Lastly, in these northern islands, whose de- 
fence nature herself appears to have undertaken by a guardianship 
of circling rocks and seas ; this does not however defend us from 
intestine convulsions and changes. Think what a general change 
of property has been made in Great Britain during the two very 
late revolutions; I am told that, in a neighbouring country, the 
alienation has been nearly universal; perhaps a third revolution 
is also at hand. 

It is affirmed that the civil constitution of England is the best 
calculated for the security of liberty and property of any that ever 
was framed by the policy of man ; and originally, perhaps, it might 
have been so, when twelve simple and impartial men were appointed 
for the speedy trial and determination of life and property. 

Our ancestors, unquestionably, were at that time unblessed by 
the liberal and learned profession of the long robe ; they would not 
otherwise have committed the disposition of property (a matter 
held so much more valuable than that of life) to a few men, who 
could have no virtue under heaven to recommend them, save the 
two illiterate qualities of common sense and common honesty. 

Those were ages of mental darkness, and no way illumined, as 
we are, by those immense and immaculate volumes of refined and 
legal metaphysics that now press the shelves of the learned, and 
are read with such delight. A man in those times had no play for 
his money; he was either stripped or enriched of a sudden. 
Whereas now, in the worst cause, hope is left during life ; and hope 
is said to be the greatest cordial in this vale of human controversy. 

It is greatly to be lamented that the learned in our laws are not 
as immortal as the suits for which they are retained. It were 



150 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

therefore to be wished that an act of parliament might be especially 
passed for that purpose ; a matter no way impracticable, considering 
the great interest those gentlemen have in the House. In truth, it 
seems highly expedient that an infinity of years should be assigned 
to each student of the belles lettres of our laws, to enable them to read 
over that infinity of volumes which have already been published ; 
to say nothing of the infinity that are yet to come, which will be 
held equally necessary for understanding the profession, of critically 
distinguishing and oratorically expatiating on law against law, case 
against case, authority against authority, precedent against pre- 
cedent, statute against statute, and argument against reason. 

In matters of no greater moment than life and death, juries, as 
at the beginning, are still permitted to enter directly on the hearing 
and decision ; but in matters so sacred as that of property, our 
courts are extremely cautious of too early an error in judgment. 
In order, therefore, to sift and boult them to the very bran, they 
are delivered over to the lawyers, who are equally the amrmers and 
disputers, the pleaders and impleaders, representers and misrepre- 
sented, explainers and confounders of our laws ; our lawyers, there- 
fore, maintain their right of being paid for their ingenuity in putting 
and holding all properties in debate. Debated properties conse- 
quently become the properties of the lawyers, as long as answers 
can be given to bills, or replies to answers, or rejoinders to replies, 
or rebutters to rejoinders ; as long as the battledores can strike and 
bandy, and till the shuttlecock falls of itself to the ground. 

Soberly and seriously speaking, English property, when once 
debated, is merely a carcase of contention, upon which interposing 
lawyers fall as customary prize and prey during the combat of the 
claimants. While any flesh remains on a bone, it continues a bone 
of contention ; but so soon as the learned practitioners have picked 
it quite clean, the battle is over, and all again is peace and settled 
neighbourhood. 

It is worthy of much pleasantry and shaking of sides to observe 
that, in intricate, knotty, and extremely perplexing cases, where the 
sages of the gown and coif are so puzzled as not to know what to 
make of the matter, they then bequeath it to the arbitration and 
award of two or three plain men ; or, by record, to the judgment of 
twelve simple honest fellows, who, casting aside all regard to the 
form of writs and declarations, to the lapse of monosyllables, verbal 
mistakes and misnomers, enter at once upon the pith and marrow 
of the business, and in three hours determine, according to equity 
and truth, what had been suspending in the dubious scales of 
ratiocination, quotation, altercation, and pecuniary consideration, 
for three-and-twenty years. 

Neither do I see any period to the progress of this evil ; the 
avenue still opens, and leads on to further mischiefs ; for the dis- 
tinctions in law are, like the Newtonian particles of matter, divisible 
ad infinitum. They have been dividing and subdividing for some 
centuries past, and the subdivisions are as likely to be subdividing 
for ever ; insomuch that law, thus divisible, debateable, and de- 
layable, is become a greater grievance than all that it was intended 
to redress. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 151 

I lately asked a pleasant gentleman of the coif if he thought it 
possible for a poor man to obtain a decree, in matter of property, 
against a rich man. He smiled, and answered according to scripture, 
that " with man it was impossible, but that all things were possible 
to God." I suppose he meant that the decrees of the courts of 
Westminster were hereafter to be reversed. 

Perhaps, sir, said Mr. Fielding, neither our laws nor our lawyers 
are so much to blame, as the people who apply to them for pro- 
tection, for justice, satisfaction, or revenge. Might not the parties, 
who adventure on the course of litigation, begin where they are 
most likely to end their career, in the award of a few persons, or a 
verdict of twelve neighbours ? 

But the nature of man is prone to contention and quarrel. There 
is a certain portion of yeast or fermentation in his mass, that will 
have vent in some way ; and our courts of law are the most obvious 
receptacles for the ebullitions of pride, avarice, envy, resentment, 
and wrathfulness, the insolence of temper, and overflowings of 
fortune. 

Mr. Scruple, an attorney, a very singular man in his way, was 
lately recommended to me as a person equally qualified for allur- 
ing or compelling my litigating opponents to an accommodation ; 
and he told me an exceeding pleasant story, as well respecting 
the process and forms of our courts of law, as respecting the con- 
tentious disposition of our neighbours. 

Some time since, "Walter Warmhouse, a substantial farmer in 
Essex, was advised by Sergeant Craw, that he had an unques- 
tionable right to a certain tenement in the possession of Barnaby 
Boniface, his next neighbour and gossip, who fattened by the dint 
of good ale and good humour. 

Barnaby, who equally hated debate and dry bowels, offered to 
leave the matter in question to any honest neighbours of Walter's 
own choosing; but Walter, proud of a weighty opinion and as 
weighty a purse, rejected the proffered compromise with scorn, 
and took a mortal aversion to honest Barnaby, because he refused 
to surrender his possessions on demand. 

Walter Warmhouse accordingly began the attack in form ; but 
Mr. Scruple, who had the uncommon conscience to remember that 
Barnaby had once recovered his purse from a highwayman, de- 
termined as far as possible to preserve the property of his old 
friend. For this purpose he kept warily and cheaply on the de- 
fensive; and, while he held a watchful eye over the motions of 
the adversary, he followed him close through a thirteen years' 
labyrinth of law-forms; and, what with exceptions to bills and 
replies, expensive commissions for examination of witnesses, de- 
murrer, imparlance, and essoign, with hearings and re-hearings, 
defer of issue thereon, costs of suit and costs of office, he pretty 
nearly exhausted both the purse and the patience of the valorous 
plaintiff, Walter Warmhouse. Whereupon his prudent patron, 
the good Sergeant Craw, deemed it high time to consent to a 
motion for referring the case to the arbitration and award of 
certain umpires, though not of his client's choosing, as at first 
proposed. 



152 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

Soon after this order, Sergeant Craw had occasion to travel to 
the farther parts of Essex, and his road led to the concerns of 
his old client, Walter Warmhouse. Here Walter happened to 
meet him, and warned him of the manifold dangers of the way, 
and of the numbers of thieves and highwaymen that infested the 
passages that lay just before him. And pray, then, very smoothly 
says the sergeant, is there no way through your fields, Mr. Warm- 
house? There is, sir, said Warmhouse, as good as any in Eng- 
land. And may I not be permitted to pass ? Most safely, and a 
thousand welcomes. 

Hereupon client Warmhouse opened the gate that led from the 
road into the fields, and in issued the equipage of his learned 
advocate and kind patron. 

Goodman Warmhouse was mounted on a round, ambling nag, 
and rode much at his ease by the chariot of his malefactor. They 
chatted, as they went, about the prices of cattle and improvement 
of lands, the fall and rise of grain, the necessity of industry, and, 
above all, of the advantage of good enclosures, which, as the 
sergeant observed, were emblems of the English laws, and secured 
every man's property from question or encroachment. 

While thus they beguiled the way, Walter led his respectable 
patron through this field and that field, and through yon gate 
and the other gate, and now went ahead like a fox, and now 
doubled like a hare ; till, having mazed it and circled it for the 
space of three hours, he finally conducted the sergeant to the 
very gate at which he had first entered. 

How, how ! exclaims the sergeant, methinks we are just where 
we set out ; we have not gained an inch of ground by the many 
miles we have travelled ! 

Quite as much, replied Walter, in a journey of three hours, as 
your honour gained for me in a journey of thirteen years ; and I 
leave you as you left me just where you found me. 

Your story, cried Mr. Fenton, is as pleasant as it is apt ; and 
reminds me of an observation made by Henry IV. of France, that is 
equally pertinent to the subject. 

A certain judge of a court of law in that kingdom had grown 
aged on the bench, and honoured by the innumerable sentences 
which he had passed, and which were all deemed conformable to 
the most perfect measure and dispensation of equity. The gainers 
of the several suits applauded his discernment and justice to the 
skies, and even the losers allowed that they had no right to com- 
plain. The fame of his wisdom and integrity reached the throne. 
The monarch was curious to see and judge of so peculiar a cast 
and character, and he sent for him under colour of thanking him 
for the great honours which he had done to his regency. 

After a most gracious reception, and some compliments at the 
levee, the prince took him apart, and in confidence said : 

"My lord judge, the infinite complaints that come before me 
from all parts of the kingdom, respecting the erroneous or 
iniquitous sentences daily passed by your fraternity, cast the 
highest lustre on the singularity of your conduct, and give me an 
eager curiosity to know by what measures you have been enabled 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 



153 



to content all parties. I adjure you, then, by all that you re- 
verence, to disguise nothing from me on this head. You have not 
any thing to fear from my censure of means that have proved 
so very successful, and you have all things to hope from my 
approbation." 

The judge thereupon cast himself at the feet of his prince, and 
rising, addressed him thus : 

" To you, my sovereign, as to heaven, I will open my whole soul. 
In the first place, in order to enable myself to give a guess whether 
the judgments to be pronounced might be right or wrong, I gave 
all possible attention to the merits of each case during the 
process ; I daily took minutes of the pleadings on either side ; I 
enlarged and commented on those minutes while matters were 
fresh in my memory ; and I never interrupted any cause till it 
had run itself out of breath through the circuit of forms and due 
course of law. 

" In the next place, may it please your majesty, I never took 
bribe or present of any land, or from any hand, lest favour or incli- 
nation should insensibly tempt me to cog, or give a partial turn 
to the final cast. 

" Thus prepared, as soon as matters were ripe for a decree that 
is to say, as soon as the respective lawyers had agreed among them- 
selves that nothing more was to be said, or any thing more to be 
got, on either side of the question I summoned up the repugnant 
merits so equally and impartially, with respect to circumstance, 
evidence, and ordinance of law, as induced both parties, now 
wearied and wishing for rest, to think that the decree must in- 
evitably be given against themselves; and, having appointed a 
certain hour for uttering the fatal sentence, I got up under visible 
concern and retired. 

"From the bench, so please your graciousness, I withdrew to 
my closet; and, having locked myself up, I called upon my tutelary 
and never-erring directors in the solution of all knots and un- 
winding of all intricacies. In short, I went to a little drawer and 
took out my box and dice." 

"Box and dice!" exclaimed the monarch, half starting from his 
seat. 

" Yes, sire," replied the judge ; " I repeat it, box and dice. And 
if your majesty will be pleased to attend for a few moments, I trust 
to convince you of the propriety of this proceeding. 

" Humanum est errare. This, my liege, is a maxim that has never 
yet been controverted by precept or by practice ; and it is as much 
as to say that life is a mere labyrinth of errors, in which all men are 
appointed to travel and to stray. 

"Nothing save number and measure is yet determined upon 
earth nothing is certain, save that two and two make four, and 
that lines are equal, or differ according to their dimensions. 

"All men, further than this, depend upon reason as their en- 
lightener and director in the search of truth ; and yet reason itself 
has nothing whereon it may rest or depend. It first doubts, and 
then proceeds to examine ; it calls in evidence and arguments on 
this side and on that side, pro and con; it compares, canvasses, 



154 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

and discusses ; sifts and boults matters, suppose to the very bran ; 
it endeavours to poise the scales of its own uncertainty, and now 
recovers some lapsed circumstance and casts it into this scale, and 
again throws some new proof or discovery into that scale, and so 
changes its opinion from day to day ; while prejudice and partiality 
stand invisibly at its elbow, and at length determine the long-sus- 
pended balance by casting their own weights into one scale or other, 
according as interest or pleasure would wish to preponderate. 

"Truth, so please your supremacy, has been sunk in so very 
deep a well as to mock the five-inched fathom of mere human ra- 
tiocination, whether it be a dealer or retailer of physics or meta- 
physics ; of the distinctions in law, or the distinctions in philosophy; 
and I flatter myself that I alone, the least and most unlikely of all 
your majesty's subjects, have hit upon a method for fishing up 
truth, by a line which I acknowledge is not of my own twisting. 

" Within my memory, and nearly within that of your majesty, 
particular laws have been in force for trial by combat, and trial by 
ordeal ; and though at present those laws are held to have been 
iniquitous and wholly absurd, they could not have been instituted 
without just and ponderous reasons. They related, my liege, as my 
sentences do, to the interposition of Providence in the Jewish lots, 
whereby all doubts, however general, could be speedily ascertained; 
where the nation drew lots according to tribes, the tribes accord- 
ing to families, and the families by individuals, till the criminal 
was detected. 

"Thus, in trial by combat, I have known and read manifold 
instances, wherein guilty courage and prowess have been foiled by 
the weak and fearful ; and, in trial by ordeal, heaven never failed 
to guide the steps of the hood-winked innocent between the 
narrow intervals of the burning ploughshares. And thus, con- 
scious of my own infirmity and blindness, I have referred all my 
decrees to a power of better discernment ; and he never failed to 
determine according to truth." 

" Indeed," said the monarch, " I cannot wholly disapprove your 
method, when I reflect on your motive. And, according to your 
account, when I think on the plague and anxiety, loss of time and 
loss of fortune, to which my subjects are put by these professors of 
the law, you have clearly convinced me, my good lord judge, that 
it would be infinitely better to cast dice at the beginning, than to 
give the most righteous judgment at the end of any lawsuit." 

While the gentlemen were thus plunged in the bottomless gulf 
of the law, Mrs. Fielding beckoned Ned to a remote part of the 
room, and was greatly taken with his lively and innocent chat. 

Pray, Mr. Fenton, said she, is this your son ? No, madam, said 
Mr. Fenton, we know not to whom he belongs, poor fellow ; and 
I am persuaded, from many circumstances, that he was stolen in 
his infancy from his true parents. 

Mrs. Fielding instantly coloured like scarlet ; and casting at her 
husband an eager and animated look Gracious heaven! she ex- 
claimed, who knows, my dear, but this may be our precious, our 
lost and long-lamented boy, to whom Providence this day has so 
wonderfully conducted us? 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 155 

Madam, said Mr. Fenton, it is thought that hundreds of children 
are yearly spirited away from their parents, by gipsies, by beggars 
to excite charity, and by kidnappers to carry to the plantations ; 
but I hear of very few that ever have been restored, except in 
romance. Pray, had you any particular memorandum or mark 
whereby you would know him to be your child, on the presumption 
of his being found ? 

Alas ! no, sir, said Mrs. Fielding ; he was scarce two years old 
when his nurse got leave to go and see a relation, the only visit, 
poor woman, that she made from the time she took my child to the 
breast. She left him in the care of the housemaid, who used to 
caress him with particular tenderness. He stood with her at the 
door ; some one called her in suddenly, but, quickly returning, my 
child was gone ! 

Ah ! could the wretches who took him have guessed at the heart- 
rending anguish which that loss cost me, it were not in the nature 
of barbarians, of brutes, of fiends themselves, to have imagined a 
deed of such deadliness. For three days and three nights life 
hovered like a flame that was just departing, and was only retained 
by my frequent and long swoonings, that for a time shut up all 
sense and recollection. Neither do I think that my dear husband 
suffered much less than myself, however he might constrain and exert 
his spirits to keep up, as it were, some appearance of manliness. 

We despatched criers throughout the city, and through all the 
neighbouring towns, with offers of vast recompense to any who 
should discover and restore our child to us ; and we continued for 
years to advertise him in all the public papers. But, alas ! he must 
have been taken by some very illiterate wretches who could not read, 
and who never heard of the rewards that were offered ; their own 
interest must otherwise have engaged them to return him. Pray, 
Mr. Fenton, how did you come by this pretty boy? 

Here Ned assisted Mr. Fenton to give a detail respecting him- 
self of the circumstances already recited ; and Mr. Fenton men- 
tioned the precaution he had taken for seizing his former mammy 
if ever she should make her appearance. 

If heaven should ever bless me with more children, said Mr. 
Fielding, I have determined to fix some indelible mark upon them, 
such as that of the Jerusalem letters, that in case of accident, I 
may be able to discover and ascertain my own offspring from all 
others. Such a precaution, said Mr. Fenton, is more especially 
incumbent on those who send their children abroad to be nursed, 
where it is practicable for fosterers to impose a living infant in the 
place of one who has died ; or, by an exchange, to prefer a child of 
their own to an inheritance : for the features of infancy generally 
change to a degree that shortly leaves no trace of the original cast 
of countenance; and it is common with parents to leave their 
children at nurse for years, without seeing or renewing the memory 
of their aspects. 

Mr. Fenton, says Mrs. Fielding, will you give me your interest in 
this sweet foundling? I will regard him as my own child; I will 
be good to him for the sake of the one I have lost. Tell me, my 
dear, will you come and live with me ? What say you, Ned, says 



156 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

Mr. Fenton, would you like to go and live with that lady? Oh, 
sir ! cried Ned, could I find in my heart to leave Master Harry and 
you, to be sure I would give the world to be with this dear lady. 
So saying, he catched at her hand and pressed it eagerly to his lips. 
Mrs. Fielding found herself surprised and agitated by this action; 
and taking him in her arms, and repeatedly kissing him, the gush of 
passion which she had some time suppressed broke forth, and she 
shed a plenteous shower of tears upon him. 

Word being now brought that the chariot was put to rights, and 
at the door, Mr. and Mrs. Fielding took a tender farewell of Mr. 
Fenton and Ned, and set off for London. 

As we propose, after the manner of the celebrated Vertot, to drop 
all the heavy and inanimate parts of our history, and to retain 
nothing but the life and spirit thereof, we take the liberty to pass 
over a few months, during which nothing material happened, save 
that our Harry increased in stature, and in all personal and mental 
accomplishments. 

It was the latter end of August, the weather fair and pleasant, 
when Harry issued forth to his little Campus martius, accompanied 
by Neddy and the faithful James. 

He was there met by his customary companions in arms ; and 
they had nearly settled their courses and exercises for the evening, 
when a young phenomenon of nobility made his appearance like 
a phoenix among the vulgar birds, attended by two servants in 
flaming liveries. 

All the boys except Harry, and Ned who kept close to him, 
immediately approached the glittering stranger, and paid their 
respects with admiration and a kind of awkward obeisance, while 
Harry eyed him askance with a half sullen and half disdainful 
regard ; and, notwithstanding the native benevolence of his temper, 
felt no kind of complacence in his bosom toward him. 

The young nobleman, to make a parade of his wealth, and at the 
same time to indulge his petulance of disposition, took a handful of 
sixpences and shillings from his pocket, and throwing them among 
the crew, cried A scramble, boys a scramble ! 

Hereupon a scuffle-royal instantly ensued. All of them, save 
three, eagerly grappled at the pieces that had fixed their eye ; while 
each, at the same time, seized and struggled with his fellow. Our 
hero, meanwhile, observed all that passed with a distinguishing 
attention. But, as the cause of quarrel was quickly conveyed from 
sight, nothing worse happened than a few trips and boxes, to which 
the parties had been accustomed, and therefore did not resent ; in- 
somuch that my lord was wholly defeated of the benevolent 
intention of his generosity, and looked upon himself as defrauded of 
his coin. 

To compensate this disappointment, and to make surer for the 
future of his dearly beloved mischief, he took a crown-piece from his 
pocket, and, holding it up to the full view of the assembly, he pro- 
claimed it as the prize of victory between any two who should step 
forth on the spot and engage in a boxing-match. At the word an 
unknown champion sprung forward, instantly stripped, and chal- 
lenged the field. 






THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 157 

This unknown had arrived but that very morning with his parents, 
who came to settle at the village. He was by nature a very valiant 
but very quarrelsome boy. He had, consequently, been engaged in 
a number of occasional combats, wherein he had generally come off 
victorious ; and this gave him as full an assurance of conquest as 
though his brow had already received the wreath. 

The stranger in bulk and stature exceeded the field, and no one 
had yet offered himself an antagonist; when Harry stepping up, 
thus addressed him in a gentle but admonishing accent : 

I find, sir, you are a stranger ; you are therefore to be excused 
for behaving amiss, as you are yet unacquainted with the laws of 
this place. But I must now be so free to inform you, that whoever 
quarrels here or boxes for money must afterwards take a turn with 
me for nothing. As well before as after, briskly replied the ad- 
versary ; but I scorn to take you at an advantage prepare yourself, 
and strip ! You must first show me, rejoined Harry, that you are 
worth stripping for. 

The unknown instantly fired at what he held to be a boastful 
insult, and leaping forward, aimed a punch at Harry's stomach with 
all his force ; when Harry, nimbly catching the right wrist of his 
adversary in his left hand, and giving him at the same instant a 
sudden trip with his right foot, and a stroke across the neck with 
his right arm, the strange hero's heels flew up, and his shoulders 
and head came with a squelch to the earth. 

As this unfortunate champion lay astonished, dismayed, and 
wholly disqualified by his fall from further contention, Harry 
generously stepped forward and offered to raise him. But, turning 
from him, he painfully and slowly arose, and, muttering something 
not intelligible, he walked away with a sullen but much abased 
motion. 

Harry's companions hereat began to set up a cry of triumph and 
derision after the vanquished. But Harry suddenly stopped them, 
and cried For shame, my friends ; he is a brave boy, and deserves 
to be honoured, though a stranger to our ways, and I hope, in my 
heart, that he may not be hurt, nor discouraged from coming among 
us any more. 

Our young nobleman meanwhile had observed all that passed, and 
considered our hero with an envious and indignant attention ; when 
Harry, calling to him the three boys who had declined to partake 
of the scramble for my lord's money My good boys, cries he aloud, 
you had the honour to refuse to quarrel, and tear your companions 
and friends to pieces, for the dirty matter of a few sixpences, and 
the first part of your reward shall be many sixpences. 

So saying, he put his hand in his pocket, and, taking out three 
crowns, made a present of one to each. Then feeling a secret touch 
of self-approbation, he turned to my lord's servants, and addressed 
them in an accent and with an action rather too highly elevated : 
Go, he cried, my friends; take your young master home to his 
father and mother, and tell them from me, that since they have 
already made him a lord, I wish the next thing they do would be 
to make him a GENTLEMAN ! 
What, you scoundrel ! cried my lord ; do you tell me to my face 



158 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

that I am not a gentleman ? and flying instantly at Harry, he gave 
him a smart stroke on the left cheek. Harry had just begun to 
recollect his error ; but, being- again kindled to quick resentment, 
he half repressed and half enforced a sudden punch which he 
reached at the nose of his lordship, who, giving a scream, fell back- 
ward, and measured his length on the field. 

The two servants immediately stooped to raise their bleeding 
master ; and one of them, highly exasperated to see his lord in that 
condition, turned furiously upon Harry in order to chastise him. 
But Jack Freeman, his fellow-servant, straight caught him by the 
arm, crying Hold ! Patrick hold ! Kemember fair play and Old 
England ! 

So saying, he suddenly stooped, catched at our hero's hand, and 
pressed it warmly to his lips, and cried O, my noblest child, how I 
envy the happiness of those who serve you ! then turning he took 
his lord by the hand, and straight led him away from the field 
of battle. 

Friend. Apropos to your turning a lord into a gentleman. When 
your hero gave that just, though over- haughty reproof to the 
insolence and petulance of the gay stranger, had he not a clear 
conception of the character of your true gentleman? 

Author. If he had not a positive, yet you see he had a negative 
apprehension of the matter. If he could not say what it was to be 
yet he could tell you what it was not to be a gentleman ; and 
he clearly perceived that neither finery, grandeur of equipage, title, 
wealth, superior airs, aifectation of generosity neither a mischief- 
making temper, nor a taking delight in the broils, conflicts, passions, 
and pains of others, were any constituent qualities in this venerable 
character. 

Friend. I beseech you then, at this interval, to satisfy my im- 
patience, and to make good your promise, that you would give me 
a detail of the qualities that entitle a man to this supreme of 
denominations. 

Author. That perhaps may be done with better effect to the 
understanding as well as the heart, by instancing and exemplify- 
ing, rather than defining. 

The greatest of great poets, in his character of Hector, has given 
us the lineaments of the first and most finished gentleman that we 
meet in profane history, admirably and amiably instanced in his 
attachments to his country, in his filial affections, in his conjugal 
delicacies, in his paternal feelings, in his ardour for his friends, 
in his humanity to his enemies, and even in his piety to the gods 
that he worshipped, (no deduction from his courage, according to 
ancient arithmetic !) 

Some time after the battle of Creasy, Edward the Third of 
England, and Edward the Black Prince, the more than heir of his 
father's renown, pressed John King of France to indulge them with 
the pleasure of his company at London. John was desirous of 
embracing the invitation, and accordingly laid the proposal before 
his parliament at Paris. The parliament objected, that the invi- 
tation had been made with an insidious design of seizing his person, 



TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 159 

thereby to make the cheaper and easier acquisition of the crown, 
to which Edward at that time pretended. But John replied with 
some warmth That he was confident his brother Edward, and more 
especially his young cousin, were too much of the GENTLEMAN to 
treat him in that manner. He did not say too much of the king, 
of the hero, or of the saint, but too much of the GENTLEMAN to 
be guilty of any baseness. 

The sequel verified this opinion. At the battle of Poictiers King 
John was made prisoner, and soon after conducted by the Black 
Prince to England. The prince entered London in triumph, amid 
the throng and acclamations of millions of the people. But then 
this rather appeared to be the triumph of the French king than 
that of his conqueror. John was seated on a proud steed royally 
robed, and attended by a numerous and gorgeous train of the 
British nobility; while his conqueror endeavoured, as much as 
possible, to disappear, and rode by his side in plain attire, and 
degradingly seated on a little Irish hobby. 

As Aristotle and the Critics derived their rules for epic poetry 
and the sublime, from a poem which Homer had written long be- 
fore the rules were formed or laws established for the purpose ; thus, 
from the demeanour and innate principles of particular gentlemen, art 
has borrowed and instituted the many modes of behaviour which 
the world has adopted under the title of good manners. 

One quality of a gentleman is that of charity to the poor ; and 
this is delicately instanced in the account which Don Quixote gives 
to his fast friend, Sancho Pansa, of the valorous but yet more pious 
knight-errant, Saint Martin. 

On a day, said the Don, Saint Martin met a poor man half-naked, 
and, taking his cloak from his shoulders, he divided it and gave him 
the one half. Now, tell me at what time of the year this happened? 
Was I witness? quoth Sancho ; how the vengeance should I know 
in what year, or what time of the year, it happened? Hadst 
thou, Sancho, rejoined the knight, any thing within thee of the 
sentiment of Saint Martin, thou must assuredly have known that 
this happened in winter ; for, had it been summer, Saint Mai-tin 
would have given the whole cloak. 

Another characteristic of the true gentleman is a delicacy of be- 
haviour toward that sex whom nature has entitled to the protection, 
and consequently entitled to the tenderness, of man. 

The same gentleman-errant, entering into a wood on a summer's 
evening, found himself entangled among nets of green thread, that 
here and there hung from tree to tree ; and, conceiving it some 
matter of purposed conjuration, pushed valorously forward to break 
through the enchantment. Hereupon some beautiful shepherdesses 
interposed with a cry, and besought him to spare the implements 
of their innocent recreation. The knight, surprised and charmed 
by the vision, replied Fair creatures ! my province is to protect, 
not to injure ; to seek all means of service, but never of offence, 
more especially to any of your sex and apparent excellences. Your 
pretty nets take up but a small piece of favoured ground ; but did 
they enclose the world, I would seek out new worlds whereby I 
might win a passage rather than break them. 



160 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

Two very lovely but shame-faced girls had a cause of some 
consequence depending at Westminster, that indispensably required 
their personal appearance. They were relations of Sir Joseph 
Jekyl, and on this tremendous occasion requested liis company 
and countenance at the court. Sir Joseph attended accordingly ; 
and the cause being opened, the judge demanded whether he was 
to entitle these ladies by the denomination of spinsters? No, my 
lord, said Sir Joseph, they are lilies of the valley ; they toil not, 
neither do they spin ; yet you see that no monarch, in all his glory, 
was ever arrayed like one of these. 

Another very peculiar characteristic of a gentleman is the giving 
place, and yielding to all with whom he has to do. 

Of this we have a shining and affecting instance in Abraham, 
perhaps the most accomplished character that may be found in 
history, whether sacred or profane. 

A contention had arisen between the herdsmen of Abraham and 
the herdsmen of his nephew, Lot, respecting the propriety of the 
pasture of the lands wherein they dwelt, that could now scarce 
contain the abundance of their cattle ; and those servants, as is 
universally the case, had respectively endeavoured to kindle and 
inflame their masters with their own passions. 

When Abraham, in consequence of this, perceived that the 
countenance of Lot began to change toward him, he called, and 
generously expostulated with him as followeth 

" Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, or 
between my herdsmen and thy herdsmen: for we be brethren. 
If it be thy desire to separate thyself from me, is not the whole 
land before thee ? if thou wilt take the left hand, then I will go 
to the right ; or if thou depart to the right hand, then I will go to 
the left." 

Another capital quality of the true gentleman is, that of feeling 
himself concerned and interested in others. Never was there so 
benevolent, so affecting, so pathetic a piece of oratory exhibited 
upon earth, as that of Abraham's pleading with God for averting 
the judgments that then impended over Sodom. But the matter 
is already so generally celebrated, that I am constrained to refer 
my reader to the passage at full ; since the smallest abridgment 
must deduct from its beauties, and that nothing can be adued to 
the excellences thereof. 

Honour, again, is said in scripture peculiarly to distinguish the 
character of a gentleman ; where it is written of Shechem, the son 
of Hamor, " That he was more honourable than all the house of 
his father." 

This young prince, giving way to the violence of his passion, had 
dishonourably deflowered Dinah, the daughter of Jacob. But his 
affections and soul cleaved to the party whom he had injured. 
He set no limits to his offers for repairing the wrong. " Ask me," 
he said to her kindred, " ask me never so much dowry and gift, 
and I will give according as ye shall say unto me ; but give me 
the damsel to wife." 

From hence it may be inferred, that human excellence or human 
amiableness doth not so much consist in a freedom from frailty, as in 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 161 

our recovery from lapses, our detestation of our own transgressions, 
and our desire of atoning by all possible means for the injuries 
we have done, and the offences we have given. Herein, therefore, 
may consist the very singular distinction which the great apostle 
makes between his estimation of a just and of a good man. For 
a just or righteous man, says he, " one would grudge to die ; but 
for a good man, one would even dare to die." Here the just man is 
supposed to adhere strictly to the rule of right or equity, and to 
exact from others the same measure that he is satisfied to meet ; 
but tho good man, though occasionally he may fall short of justice, 
has, properly speaking, no measure to his benevolence ; his general 
propensity is to give more than the due. The just man condemns, 
and is desirous of punishing, the transgressors of the line prescribed 
to himself; but the good man, in the sense of his own falls and 
failings, gives latitude, indulgence, and pardon to others ; he judges, 
he condemns, no one save himself. The just man is a stream that 
deviates not to the right or left from its appointed channel, neither 
is swelled by the flood of passion above its banks ; but the heart of 
the good man, the man of honour, the gentleman, is as a lamp 
lighted by the breath of God, and none save God himself can 
set limits to the efflux or irradiations thereof. 

Again, the gentleman never envies any superior excellence ; but 
grows himself more excellent, by being the admirer, promoter, and 
lover thereof. 

Saul said to his son Jonathan, " Thou son of the perverse rebel- 
lious woman! do not I know that thou hast chosen the son of 
Jesse to thine own confusion ? for as long as the son of Jesse liveth 
upon the ground, thou shalt not be established, nor thy kingdoms ; 
wherefore send and fetch him unto me, for he shall surely die." 
Here every interesting motive that can possibly be conceived to 
have an influence on man, united to urge Jonathan to the destruc- 
tion of David : he would thereby have obeyed his king, and pacified 
a father who was enraged against him; he would thereby have 
removed the only luminary that then eclipsed the brightness of his 
own achievements ; and he saw, as his father said, that the death 
of David alone could establish the kingdom in himself and his 
posterity ; but all those considerations were of no avail to make 
Jonathan swerve from honour, to slacken the bands of his faith, 
or cool the warmth of his friendship. O Jonathan! the sacrifice 
which thou then madest to virtue was incomparably more illustrious 
in the sight of God and his angels, than all the subsequent glories 
to which David attained. What a crown was thine, " Jonathan, 
when thou wast slain in thine high places ! " 

Saul of Tarsus, afterwards called Paul, had been a man of 
bigotry, blood, and violence ; making havoc of, and breathing out 
threatenings and slaughter against all who were not of his own 
sect and persuasion. But when the spirit of that Infant, who laid 
himself in the manger of human flesh, came upon him, he acquired 
a new heart and a new nature ; and he offered himself a willing 
subject to all the sufferings and persecutions which he had brought 
upon others. 

Paul, from that time, exemplified in his own person all those 

M 



162 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

qualities of the gentleman which he afterwards specifies in his 
celebrated description of that charity, which, as he says, alone 
endureth for ever. 

When Festus cried with a loud 'voice, " Paul, thou art. beside 
thyself, much learning doth make thee mad ; " Paul stretched the 
hand, and answered, " I am not mad, most noble Festus ; but speak 
forth the words of truth and soberness. For the king knoweth 
of these things, before whom also I speak freely ; for I am per- 
suaded that none of these things are hidden from him. King 
Agrippa, believest thou the prophets? I know that thou believest." 
Then Agrippa said unto Paul, " Almost thou persuadest me to be a 
Christian." And Paul said, " I would to God that not only thou, but 
also all that hear me this day, were not only almost, but altogether 
such as I am except these bonds." 

Here, with what an inimitable elegance did this man, in his own 
person, at once sum up the orator, the saint, and the gentleman ! 

From these instances, my friend, you must have seen that the 
character, or rather quality of a GENTLEMAN, does not in any de- 
gree depend on fashion or mode, on station or opinion; neither 
changes with customs, climates, nor ages. But as the Spirit of God 
can alone inspire it into man ; so it is as God is, the same yesterday, 
to-day, and for ever. 

Friend. It is a standard whereby I propose, for the future, to 
measure and judge of all my acquaintance. But let us return to 
our little gentleman-monitor. 



CHAPTER XIT. 

NEVER did Harry feel himself so deeply mortified, so debased in 
his own eyes, as when my lord's footman, in terms and with an 
action so uncommonly respectful, had stooped and kissed his hand. 
His heart, but just before, had whispered to him that the manner 
in which he had admonished the young nobleman expressed more 
of the pride and insolence of his own temper than any friendly in- 
tention to reform the faults of another ; and he already began to 
suspect that the manner in which he had dispensed his own bounty, 
showed the same ostentation which he meant to reprove, and with 
which he had been so highly offended in his lordship. 

Thus disgusted with himself, and consequently with all about 
him, he turned away from his companions, walked silent and home- 
ward, and, passing softly through the hall, withdrew to his own 
chamber. 

James had followed Harry at such a distance as just to keep him 
in sight, and entering where his master sat reading in the parlour, 
Mr. Fenton inquired eagerly after his boy. James cast at his 
master a look of much solemnity, and shaking his head in token of 
concern Ah, sir! said he, I am sorry to tell you that Master 
Harry, to-day, was not altogether so good a boy as I could have 
wished. Indeed, I observe of late that at times he is apt to be 
very sudden and passionate. I doubt, sir, we shall have woful doings 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 163 

by and by ; he has terribly abused and battered the son and heir 
of the Earl of Mansfield, one of the worthiest noblemen in all 
England. To be sure we shall have sad complaints against him. 
I was present at all that passed ; and truly Master Harry was very 
much in fault. 

You delight me you transport me ! cried Mr. Fenton ; my only 
affliction was that he had no faults. I want him to have faults 
such faults as may make him feel them. But tell me minutely, as 
particularly as you can, how this affair happened. James then gave 
a special detail of what we have recited. Whereupon Mr. Fenton 
exclaimed O, my noble, my generous, my incomparable boy! 
Where is he ? Let me see him ! What is become of him ? 

Upon inquiry, Mrs. Susan reported that she had seen him stealing 
softly up-stairs. Mr. Fenton then, taking his book in his hand, 
stole up after his Harry ; and, opening his chamber-door with the 
least noise possible, saw him seated, in a dejected attitude, in a far 
corner of the room ; and, looking attentively at him, perceived that 
he had been in tears. 

He thereupon took a chair, and gently seating himself beside 
him What is the matter, my Harry ? he said ; what ails my love ? 
Don't ask me don't ask me, sir ! cried Harry ; I dare not tell 
you indeed I dare not. You would love me no longer ; you would 
nate me if I should tell you. Hate you, my darling! cried Mr. 
Fenton, that is quite impossible ; I can never hate you, my Harry. 
But come, be free with your friend; tell me openly and honestly 
for what do you think I should hate you ? For my faults, sir ; for 
my faults. To be sure, there is not in the world so bad a boy as 
myself; and, what is worse than all that, when I think and mean 
to do better than ever, something comes in the way and spoils the 
whole, and so turns all the good that is in me into nothing but 
naughtiness. 

Here Harry could contain no longer, but burst into a passionate 
gush of tears and sobs ; and Mr. Fenton tenderly embracing him, 
and taking him on his knee, and clasping him to his bosom, gave 
way to the kindred emotion that swelled in his own breast, and 
mingled his joyful tears with those of his Harry. 

As soon as the passion of these two friends had subsided, Harry 
began to take new courage from the caresses of his dear father, who, 
as he sensibly felt, would never hate or forsake him, however he 
might condemn and detest himself. 

Well then, sir, says he, since you are so very good, I will trust 
you with my story, so far as it has to say to the little that I can 
remember of my faults in it. 

You must know that I had no sooner got into your field that you 
gave me for our plays than a young master came up to us, so grandly 
dressed and attended, and with such a saucy air, that he seemed 
to say in his own mind All these are but dirt in comparison of 
myself. 

As I looked at him, he brought to my mind the story you once 
told me of Hercules, who was poisoned by his fine coat. So I began 
to pity him, and, I believe, to despise him too ; and that, you know, 
was not right ; for you told me that whoever despises another grows 

M2 



164 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

worse than the one he despises, and falls below him, while he thinks 
to set himself above him ; but that did not come into my head at 
the time. 

And so, sir, to show us all that he did not matter money, or that 
he loved mischief the better of the two, he took out a handful of 
silver and threw it among my companions, to set them by the ears ; 
and this provoked and began to make me very angry with him; 
and thus one fault brought me into another after it, like Water 
my chickens come clock. 

But this did not satisfy my young lord for they called him lord 
but he must take out a crown, and offer it to any two of my 
companions that would box for it. So a stranger that was just 
come offered to box any one in the company for it ; but I do not 
repent of my beating him, because he was the challenger. 

But the worst is yet to come, sir. There were some of my com- 
panions who refused to join in the scramble for the money, and 
that pleased me very much ; and so, to reward them, I took out 
a handful of money and gave them a crown apiece. But, you know, 
I need not have taken out more money than I meant to give them, 
if it was not partly to show my lord that I had as much money as 
himself; and so I got myself up to the head and ears in the very 
same fault that I found with him. 

Now comes the worst of all. For, growing proud and conceited, 
as if I had no one fault in the world, and as if the like of me was 
only fit to reprove others and teach them their duty, I desired the 
fine master to take himself home, and, since he was a lord, to learn 
also to be a gentleman. Upon that he gave me a blow, which I 
deserved very well ; but I did not matter his blow a fillip if I had 
not thought it an affront before my companions. So my passion 
began to rise, and I gave him half a stroke, but unluckily it hit him 
full in the nose, and I am afraid he is hurted very sadly. 

Besides all, father, I know well enough there will come sad com- 
plaints against me, and so I shall bring trouble and disturbance 
upon you ; and that is grief upon grief. 

Do not fear for me, Harry, I shall do well enough, says Mr. 
Fenton. But, Harry, you have not told me near as great news as 
you thought to do. I knew all along that you had a very naughty 
boy within you ; but I forbore to tell you so, because I rather 
wished you should make the discovery yourself; and now, God be 
praised ! you have found out the secret. 

And what good will it do me, sir, to know that I am bad, when 
I do not know how to make myself better? for to-day I thought 
and meant to be very good, and yet found myself in the end to be 
worse than ever. But as you say, to be sure I have been very bad, 
though I hardly knew any thing of the matter till now. I now re- 
member how I had like to murder poor Mr. Vindex with the sword, 
and a hundred other things if I could bring them to mind. "What 
shall I do then, sir oh ! what shall I do to grow good ? 

I will tell you, my Harry, says Mr. Fenton. And as you have 
generously intrusted me with one secret, that of having a very bad 
boy within you ; it is but fair that I should intrust you with another 
secret, which is that of having an exceeding good boy within you. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 165 

What, two boys in one, sir, how can that be ? It is even so, my 
darling ; you yourself told me as much. Did you not say that, this 
very day, the one was struggling and fighting within you against 
the other? that the one was proud, scornful, ostentatious, and 
revengeful ; the other humble, gentle, generous, loving, and for- 
giving? and that when the bad boy got the better, the good boy 
took him to task, and reprimanded and severely rebuked him, and 
made him cry bitterly? 

What you say, indeed, sir, is something very like it ; only I can- 
not think how one boy can be two boys. Do you remember, Harry, 
what you read last night in the Old Testament about Bebekah, the 
wife of Isaac, when she was with child ? Yes, very well, sir. As 
how she was with child with twins, "and the children struggled 
together within her ; and she said, If it be so, why am I thus ? and 
she went to inquire of the Lord." Very right, my love ; and I now 
say to you what God then said to Rebekah. I do not mean that 
you have two boys within you, of the bodily bulk, features, and 
shape of yourself; but that you have two different spirits or prin- 
ciples within you, which, like Esau and Jacob, have quite different 
and adverse natures, inclinations, and desires ; the one prompting 
and hurrying you into all that is evil, the other inviting and leading 
you into all that is good. So you see, Harry, and you have felt 
that, like Eebekah, you have your own Esau and your own Jacob 
struggling within your bosom: and the war between them shall 
never cease, till the one shall have wholly conquered and subjected 
the other. 

To make this matter plainer and clearer to you, my darling, I 
will tell you a pretty story out of the book that is in my hand. 

Cyrus was a king and a great conqueror, but in his private 
capacity a very virtuous man. On a day, some of his captains, just 
returned from an expedition, informed him that they had brought 
him the greatest wonder in the world, a young princess called 
Panthea, whom they had taken captive, and whose charms exceeded 
all that could be imagined of woman. 

Cyrus, as I told you, was virtuous. He was already married; 
and he dreaded running the risk of being seduced from his honesty 
by the dangerous allurements of this enchanting beauty. He there- 
fore obstinately, though reluctantly, forbid her approach; and 
denied himself the pleasure he might have taken in beholding her. 

His own honour, however, and the respect due to the quality and 
accomplishments of the lady, demanded all possible attention and 
precaution in her behalf. For this purpose he summoned his chief 
captains and favourites. He asked which of them would adventure 
to take the charge of this young beauty ; and he promised the highest 
rewards to those who should honourably discharge their trust, but 
threatened his deepest displeasure to any who should betray it. 

All of them shrunk at the apprehension of taking upon them 
the personal custody and care of a beauty, whom their great and 
virtuous monarch had not even dared to look upon ; and no one 
had offered to undertake this perilous commission till a valiant and 
noble youth, named Araspes, stood forth. 

From my infancy, O Cyrus ! said the graceful adventurer, I have 



166 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

been educated in the school, and brought up at the feet, of the 
divine Zoroaster. I am accustomed from my childhood to combat, 
conquer, and scorn all sensual seducers. I hold virtue in mine eye 
as its only object ; my heart esteems and affects it as my only 
good ; the nature thereof has become one with my nature ; and I 
do not remember the time wherein I have been tempted to 
deviate from rectitude, or sink beneath the calls of honour. I 
cannot therefore but smile at the fear of my companions. Their 
courage at a breach or in the field is unquestionable. I have seen 
them face a thousand deaths ; I have seen them rush into dangers ; 
and yet they dread the sight of a single and weakly female. For 
me she can have no terrors, since I am out of the power and 
reach of her allurements. I will undertake the charge of this for- 
midable creature at the risk of my honour, at the risk of my life, 
and more than all, at the risk of the favour of Cyrus. 

Cyrus had long loved the person, and contemplated and admired 
the virtues of this youth. He therefore, with joy and confidence, 
committed the precious deposit to his trust ; in full assurance that 
the person and honour of Panthea could nowhere be so safe as in 
the protection of Araspes. 

The young hero had in reality all the virtues that he boasted. 
His education under so beloved and respectable a master ; his early 
and long habit of opposing and rejecting the smallest incitement to 
vice ; and the delights which he was accustomed to feel in the 
sentiments and practice of what his judgment approved had in a 
manner so wholly lulled his naughty self to sleep, that he did not 
so much as dream that he had an enemy within him. 

This, my Harry, was his heavy misfortune, and the sad occasion 
of his fall. For, not knowing that his evil Esau was still alive in 
his bosom ; not knowing that he had any one to oppose or to 
struggle with he kept neither watch nor guard, and so lay naked 
and open to the mischief that came upon him, as I am going to tell 
you. 

On his seeing the lady who was committed to his trust, he felt 
no emotion nor sentiment save that of wonder, as in beholding the 
most perfect of the works of his Creator ; and he took a pleasure 
in providing that she should be treated and accommodated with 
all possible attention and respect, as due to so accomplished and 
pre-eminent a being. 

As the nature of his commission gave him frequent occasion of 
being near and about the person of his amiable ward, new beauties 
grew daily visible and open to his eyes. But, above all, in con- 
versing with her, the music of her accents and the elegance of her 
sentiments fell insensibly on his soul, that drank them up as a dry 
ground drinks up the invisible dew of the evening. 

His occasions for attending her, and doing little offices and ser- 
vices about her, now daily increased without seeming to do so. 
"When he was called, and intended to go elsewhere, his feet imper- 
ceptibly carried him to the presence of Panthea. His slumbers 
were short, uneasy, and broken; and at meals he knew not 
whether or on what he fed. 

At length his eyes opened to the calamity of his condition. But 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 167 

at the moment wherein he perceived his love, he found himself 
too far gone for the possibility of a return. He was as a mariner 
who had haled his boat upon land, and, thinking himself secure, 
had fallen asleep therein ; but while he slept, a spring-tide came 
silently on and covered the shore, and gained upon the beach, 
and swelled under the boat, and heaved it from land, and turning, 
bore it farther and farther to sea. Then awakened the helpless 
mariner, unprovided of sail or oar, or of any means to effect or 
attempt a return. He saw his lost estatehe stretched his arms 
towards the land ; but while he reached it with his eyes, he found 
himself carried by an irresistible power still more and more distant 
from the sight. 

Thus fared it with the wretched, lost, fallen away Araspes. He 
awakened to his condition he looked around, but found himself 
helpless. He would have struggled he wished his return to 
virtue ; but his wishes were sickly as feeble as a dream ; and he 
felt himself borne away, by a secret and subtile force, from that 
honour of which he now barely retained a distant prospect. 

The imbosomed fire that preyed upon him at length became 
insufferable, and he desperately determined to seek relief. He 
threw himself at the feet of the object of his love, avowed the 
ardour of his passion, and besought her pity. 

The princess replied in a mild but resolute accent I do pity 
you, Araspes ; I pity you the more, as it is all that my power can 
ever do for you. Two insurmountable barriers oppose your desires 
the one is my honour, the other my inclination. I am already 
married to a young hero the prince and patron of his people the 
most accomplished of his sex and an honour to human nature ; 
he is my first and last love he possesses my heart wholly; but 
were it emptied of him, it would not be emptied of its virtue, 
and the thoughts of any other would be an offence to my soul. 
Be advised then, Araspes, depart from temptation, and seek in 
absence a cure for the indiscretion of your love. 

Confused, astonished, speechless, Araspes lost at once the little 
that remained to him of virtue and reason. He knew not what he 
did he would have proceeded to violence, when the princess sud- 
denly drew a poniard and pointed it at her bosom ; whereat 
Araspes straight withdrew, overwhelmed with shame, disappoint- 
ment, and despair. 

As soon as he had retired, the princess took a little tablet, 
whereon she inscribed the following words : 

"To CYBUS. 

" Your favourite has betrayed his trust ; he would have offered 
violence. Think what is due to your own honour, as well as 
that of "PANTHEA." 

This she despatched to the monarch by one of her faithful 
mutes. As soon as Cyrus had perused it, he sighed, and dropped 
a tear, as over the departed virtue of his best beloved friend. He 
instantly sent for Araspes. Araspes durst not disobey. He came, 
indeed, but then he did not dare to look upward. 



168 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

After a silence on both sides, Cyrus cried out Whoever thou 
art, account to me for my friend, account to me for his virtue a 
virtue that I deemed to be impassible, unassailable. Whereupon 
Araspes made the following most memorable of answers. 

As you are but lately entered on your Greek, my Harry, I will 
first read the passage to you, and then give you the sense of it, 
word for word : 



Avo, & Kt)pe (ra(pa>s e^o> ^v^as. Ov yap $rj ^ila ye ovaa, ap.a dyadrj 
re can KOL KaKrj, ov8' a/ia KaXuv re KCU alvxpav epyow epa, KCU ravra. 
a.fj,a /3ou\erai re KOI ov /SouXertu TrpdrTtiv. *AXXa drjXov on dvo ecrrov 
^/v^a, KOI orav p.ev f) dyaOrj XP^ T H> Ka ^a irpa.TTf.rai, orav de f) Trovrjpa, 
TO. alfT 



" O Cyrus ! it is manifest that I have two souls ; for if I had 
but one soul it could not be at once both good and evil not a 
lover at the same time of what is honest and dishonest ; it could 
not at once desire and be averse to the same thing. It is, there- 
fore, most evident that we have two souls; and when the good 
soul hath the dominion, good works are performed ; but evil works 
when the evil soul predominates." 

Here, Harry, you see there were two men in one man, which is 
the same thing as there being two boys in you. For the soul is 
the man, Harry ; and the body is but as a sign, to give notice to 
others that such a man dwells within. 

But, sir, says Harry, since, as you say and as I find, I have two 
different boys or souls within me; pray, how came they to be 
different? did the same God that desired to make the one soul 
good, desire also to make the other soul evil? 

Your question, my darling, is very proper, though very deep. I 
will however endeavour, to the best of my power, to accommodate 
my answers to the weakness of your capacity. 

God, who is nothing but goodness, cannot possibly desire any 
kind of evil; and therefore cannot be, immediately, the author 
thereof. But he can make or create such poor little insignificant 
beings as you and I are, Harry ; though all that God himself can 
do in our behalf cannot possibly make us good, or excellent, or 
perfect, any otherwise than by informing us with his own goodness 
and perfections. 

This would lead me, my love, to the unfolding that capital secret 
of which you are not yet susceptible ; a secret upon which this 
world, sun, moon, and stars, with all the worlds upon worlds that 
lie beyond them, depend and hang, as your hat would hang upon 
yonder nail. 

The angels that are now in heaven are great, good, perfect, and 
glorious beings ; because they are filled with the greatness, good- 
ness, glory, and perfection of God. For they know that of them- 
selves they are nothing ; and that in themselves they are no other 
than empty and dark creatures, mere sensible capacities prepared 
for the reception, the feeling, and enjoyment of the light, virtue, 
and blessedness of their bountiful Creator. 

How the spirit of man came to be, in itself, so much worse than 






THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 169 

an empty and dark creature ; how it came to be filled and polluted 
with all manner of evil, with selfishness, pride, covetousness, 
abominable lusts, envy, hatred, malice, revengefulness, and wrath- 
fulness ; how it further came to have a different spirit begotten 
within it, informing its heart and turning the chords thereof to 
sentiments of humility, charity, purity, love, patience, and peace 
this, Harry, is the great secret, of which you are not yet capable ; 
the secret, as I told you, whereon the world now hangs, whereby 
it has been changed, and whereby it will be renewed. 

In the meantime, let it suffice for you to feel and to know, that 
your dark spirit, so filled as I said with evil, is yourself, my Harry 
is all that you have of the creature within you ; and that the 
good spirit, which is begotten within your evil spirit, is breathed 
into you by the power and spirit of God himself, in order to 
oppose and conquer the evil, and enlighten the darkness, and 
purify the foulness of your selfish or creaturely spirit, that you 
may finally become as the angels that are in heaven, filled with 
the purity, glory, and blessedness of your God. 

Know therefore from henceforward, and let the sense of it sink 
into your soul, my darling, that all the evil which is in you belongs 
to yourself, and that all^the good which is in you belongs to your 
God : that you cannot, in or of yourself, so much as think a good 
thought, or form a good wish, or oppose a single temptation or evil 
motion within you. From hence learn to be humble, and to think 
meanly of yourself, and not ascribe to yourself any kind of goodness 
or virtue, for that would be sacrilege ; it would be to rob God of his 
peculiar property of goodness. From hence further learn, never to 
prefer yourself to others, or to think better of yourself than of any 
one living ; for, so far as you are a creature, no one can be viler or 
faultier than you are, however God may be pleased, through his 
mercy and bounty to you, to be better in you than in others. 

Never exalt yourself, my Harry; neither in company nor conversa- 
tion of any kind say, I did this or I did that, or, I said this, or I 
said that ; for in exalting yourself, you exalt your own proud and 
evil spirit above the good and meek spirit of God that is in you. 
Let all praise mortify and be a reproach to your conscience, but take 
blame with patience and pleasure ; in so doing you will approve your- 
self a lover of justice, as well as a lover of your own reformation. 

Lastly, my love, turn your whole will and affections from your 
own evil spirit, to the spirit of God that is in you ; for that is the 
utmost that any man can do toward his own salvation. Eeject, 
ppurn, and detest every motion to evil ; embrace, cherish, and take 
to your heart every motion of good ; you will thereby acquire the 
never-ending glory of having joined with God in the combat and 
conquest that he is desirous of obtaining over all the guilt, unclean- 
ness, and depravity, into which your nature is fallen. 

Here Andrew came up with notice to his master that the Earl of 
Mansfield was below, and requested to speak with him. At this 
Harry coloured up, and cried Did not I tell you, sir, what trouble 
I should bring upon you ? Do not be alarmed, my dear, says Mr, 
Fenton ; do you stay here. If there is a necessity for your ap- 
pearance, I will send you word. 



170 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

The father of young Lord Bottom was in every respect the 
reverse of his son. He had come on foot without attendants, was 
dressed in a plain napped coat, and had the mien and appearance 
of an honest country grazier. 

My lord, says Mr. Fenton, I should think myself greatly honoured 
by this visit, if I was not so much concerned at the occasion of it. 
I am truly grieved that my son should have done such great offence 
to young Lord Bottom. Sir, says the earl, I find you have quite 
mistaken the intent of my visit ; I am come to thank your son for 
the just and noble lesson which he gave to mine : and which he 
has so forcibly impressed upon his memory, as will not, I trust, 
permit him to forget it in a hurry. My lord, replied Mr. Fenton, 
my little fellow is very sensible of his misbehaviour in this buisness. 
He was the first to chide himself: and he told me the story, very 
much, I assure your lordship, to his own disadvantage. 

Mr. Fenton, rejoined the earl, after what I have heard of your boy 
from one Jack Freeman, a very faithful and intelligent servant of 
mine, I am quite impatient to see him, and there is nothing 
generous which I am not willing to believe concerning him. My 
wife, indeed, is not at all times in my way of thinking. She has 
taken her young lord with her to town, to the doctor's ; and I am 
concerned at the violence of the resentment which she expressed on 
this occasion, as it may be a means of deferring that acquaintance 
and intimacy which I heartily wish to cultivate with the family of 
Mr. Fenton. But where is this wonderful boy? I request to 
see him. 

Harry, hereupon, was immediately called down. As he appre- 
hended that he was sent for to be severely chidden, a little resentful 
haughtiness arose in his mind, and strengthened it against the 
violence of the reproofs that he expected. He therefore entered 
with an air that no way favoured of mortification, and made but a 
cold though solemn bow to the earl. 

Bless me, exclaimed my lord, what a striking resemblance! I 
never saw two faces or persons so much alike. There is no dif- 
ference, Mr. Fenton, between you and your son, except what age 
has made. Mr. Fenton smiled, and my lord continued. I always 
had a notion that your heroes were huge fellows ; but here I think 
we have got heroism quite in miniature. Can this be the one who, 
as I am told, with a trip or a blow, overthrows and demolishes all 
before him? Come to me, my dear, and give me leave to salute 
you. 

Harry respectfully approached ; and my lord, taking him in his 
arms and warmly kissing him, said I thank you, my little man, 
for the generous lesson which you gave to my very naughty boy ; 
and for the difference which you taught him to make for the 
future, between the sauciness of a lord and the sentiments of a 
gentleman. 

Harry felt himself at once disconcerted, abased, and wholly cut 
down, by this compliment from his lordship. At length recovering 
himself he answered You mean, to be sure, sir, to reprove me the 
more by what you have said ; but, if you are in earnest, I am sure 
it is a very bad lesson which you teach me, sir, when you praise me 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 171 

for my faults, and so encourage me in them. Faults ! my dear, 
cried the earl, I heard of none such ; what do you mean by your 
faults ? I mean, sir, that when I told your son as much as that he 
was not a gentleman, it showed that I was still less of the gentle- 
man myself ; and I very well deserved the blow which he gave me 
for such an affront ; and I am ready to ask his pardon whenever 
you please, my lord. No, no, my man, cried Lord Mansfield, you 
shall never disgrace yourself so much as to make any submissions to 
my naughty boy. I shall think it no disgrace, quick and affect- 
ingly replied Harry, to make submissions to any one who is son to 
such a gentleman as my Lord Mansfield. 

My lord for some time looked with astonishment at the child ; 
when, eagerly catching and pressing him to his bosom, he cried out 
On my honour you are the sweetest as well as the noblest fellow 
I was ever acquainted with ; and, sir, I shall think it an honour to 
be admitted among your friends, and that's what I would not say to 
many in Old England. Mr. Fenton, continued the earl, if you will 
give yourself the trouble to inquire out my little lodge on the hill 
you will oblige me ; though I envy your character, I shall be glad 
of your acquaintance. So saying, Lord Mansfield got up after his 
blunt manner, and precipitately withdrew. 

On the following evening Mr. Fenton took Harry and Mr. 
Clement into his study ; and taking from his pocket-book a number 
of bank-bills Mr. Clement, says he, I here make my Harry a 
present of fifteen hundred pounds, reserving only to myself the 
privilege of advising how it may be laid out and secured for him to 
the best advantage. 

To-morrow morning you and he are to set out on foot for London, 
and there to take lodgings as near to the Fleet-prison as you can 
conveniently be accommodated. You are then to apply to the keeper, 
and to give him a gratuity for making out a written list of all the 
prisoners under his custody, with their quality and condition 
annexed, as also the sums respectively due, and the terms during 
which they have been in confinement. 

You are then to inquire from him the several characters, dis- 
tresses, and merits of all the prisoners of note, and to make an 
entry thereof in a separate paper ; but then you are not to depend 
altogether on his report. You are to go from room to room, to 
converse with the prisoners apart, and to inquire from each the 
characters, fortunes, and disasters of the others. 

This inquisition, in all likelihood, will take you up above a fort- 
night. But, above all, remember that those among them who are 
most affected by the distresses of their fellows, ought to be the 
principal objects of your own charity and relief. 

Let five hundred pounds of this money be appropriated to the 
enlargement of such prisoners as are under duresse for sums not 
amounting to ten pounds. You will thereby free the captive ; give 
means of bread to the hungry ; and restore to your country many 
members that are worse than useless, that are also a dead-weight 
and encumbrance upon her. Let the remaining thousand pounds 
be applied to the enfranchisement or relief of those prisoners of 
note, whose cases and calamities call for singular compassion. And 



172 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

be sure to keep an account where your money may fall short of 
such valuable purposes ; and, as far as five hundred pounds more 
will reach, we will supply the defect. 

Hereupon Harry caught his patron about the neck, and re- 
peatedly kissing him, cried sir, how happy, how very happy 
you make me ! O, that we had money enough to employ every 
fortnight the year round like this sweet fortnight ! 

The very next morning our travellers set out on their generous 
expedition. But we forbear to say any thing relative thereto till 
their return; as they themselves are the best qualified, and in 
truth have the best right, to give the particulars of their own 
extraordinary adventures. 

Our Harry and his friend Clement had not been gone above an 
hour, when Mr. Fenton received a card from the Countess of Mait- 
land, requesting his company to coffee in the evening. She was 
widow to the late earl, a very lovely woman, had taken the most 
sumptuous house on the hill, and was resorted to by numbers of 
the first figure, from among whom she was perfectly qualified to 
make a selection, exceedingly entertaining to herself, of the sensible, 
the elegant, and the ludicrous. 

Mr. Fenton attended my lady precisely at the time appointed. 
"When he entered, she was writing a note at her desk. On turning 
her eye to the door, she was suddenly struck with the grace of his 
figure, the sweetness of his aspect, and the ease of his deportment. 
She was further struck with a recollection as of something very 
interesting, but which had happened at a vast distance, or of which 
she had dreamed. Her heart was affected; she coloured up, and 
again turned pale, without being yet able to move from her chair. 
At length recovering, and rising and advancing toward him Mr. 
Fenton, says she, this is a very singular favour a favour for which 
I have long wished. This, sir, you know, is my third time of asking, 
but my two former cards were not so happy as to bring you. 
Madam, said he carelessly, I am but a very poor visitor ; however, 
I could not refuse myself the honour of attending your ladyship's 
summons, at least for once. I have been now, said the countess, 
three months on the hill. Within that time I have applied to all 
my acquaintance, in order to get some of them to introduce me to 
you ; but none of them were so fortunate as to know your name. 
To be known, madam, replied Mr. Fenton, a person must have been 
in some way considerable ; indeed it is no way disagreeable to my 
own inclinations to pass the short remnant of an insignificant life as 
little noticed as possible. Much company then came in, and the 
evening was spent in agreeable conversation; and, on the party 
breaking up, each member of it gave distinct pressing invitations to 
Mr. Fenton, which he as politely excused himself from attending 
to at present. 

On the following morning, as he sat in his study, some one tapped 
at the door ; and, on being desired to walk in, who should enter 
but Lady Maitland in an agreeable dishabille. 

Mr. Fenton, said she (deeply blushing and hesitating), I, I you 
must think it very odd I say, sir, 1 should not have intruded upon 
you, thus out of all form, perhaps indecently, unseasonably. Please 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 173 

to toe seated, madam. The business I come upon, sir, is so very 
interesting-, so concerning to my peace, that 1 could not refuse 
myself this opportunity of breaking in upon you. Be assured, my 
dear madam, that the greatest pleasure you can do me is to let 
me know, as soon as possible, \vherein I can serve you. 

Here the countess, looking eagerly and inquisitively on him, put 
her hand in her bosom, took out a picture, and alternately surveying 
the one and the other Yes, she cried, it is, it must certainly 
be so. Then, reaching out the picture, Can you tell me, sir, said 
she, for whom this was drawn, or rather do you remember to whom 
you gave it? 

Mr. Fenton took the picture, looked at it, and started ; when, 
recollecting ideas and passages as from afar off, he exclaimed 
Good God ! is it possible, can you be my little Fanny Goodall ? 
Yes, my dearest cousin, answered the countess, as surely as you 
are the still too amiable Harry Clinton. 

Hereupon they both rose suddenly, and Mr. Fenton, catching 
his quondam Fanny in his arms, pressed her to his bosom with 
warm and kindred affection. But the agitation of the countess was 
too big for utterance ; till, resuming her chair, she gave scope to 
her passion, and burst into a violent flood of tears. 

After a mutual and affecting silence Ah ! cries Mr. Fenton, in 
a voice expressive of much emotion, how am I, my lovely cousin, 
to interpret these tears? Am I to consider them as further proofs 
of your ancient aversion to me, or as kindly and dear instances 
of your returning affection? The countess answered not, and 
Mr. Fenton continued: 

You may remember, my cousin, that I had very few relations. 
My only brother ever continued to behave himself towards me as 
an alien and an enemy ; and my only uncle and guardian, who in 
his later years became your father, was no way agreeable to my 
taste or disposition. In you, therefore, from your infancy in 
you alone, my amiable cousin I had centred all my sensations 
of fatherhood, brotherhood, all the affections and tender feelings 
that naturally arise from kindred and consanguinity. How have 
I been delighted with your infantine prattle ! how have I exulted 
in your opening charms ! On the death of my first wife you were 
my only consolation ; and in your innocent caresses and attractive 
endearments I felt a sweetness of emotion that I never felt before. 

On my return from France, with what transports did you receive 
me ! we grew, as it were, in our embracements to each other. You 
were then, as I apprehend, about ten years of age. But on my next 
visit you refused to be seen by me. Soon after you were taken ill. 
I daily went with an aching heart to inquire after your health ; but 
your mamma peremptorily refused me admission to your presence, 
till, on your recovery, you were conveyed from me, and secreted 
into the country. 

Though this unkindness went near my heart, it did not alter my 
affections ; I still continued to inquire after you, I still continued 
to be interested in you, and I preferred my ardent wishes and 
prayers to heaven for your prosperity. 

Mr. Fenton, said Lady Maitland (you have unquestionably your 



174 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

reasons for choosing to be so called), I am very sensible, sir, I say, 
of your extraordinary partiality to me from my earliest years. Your 
tenderness, as you mentioned, was that of the fondest of fathers 
or brothers. You knew the degree and kind of affection that was 
suitable between such relations, and you kept yourself precisely 
within the limits. But, alas! for my part I knew no such dis- 
tinctions. I was as a piece of virgin wax, warmed and willingly 
yielding to the first kindly impression. You made that impression, 
my cousin you made it deep and entire. As I had but the one 
heart, so I had but the one love ; and that love was all your own, 
without distinction or degree. 

Gracious heaven ! exclaimed Mr. Fenton, what is this you tell 
me, madam ? Is it possible that, at your years, you should actually 
conceive a passion for one who might almost have been your grand- 
father ? Ah ! if that be the case, what have I not to answer for 
indulging you and myself in those innocent caresses, which at that 
time fondly constituted the most pleasing sensations of my life. 

Alas! replied the countess, if you have any thing to answer 
for on that account, the charge indeed is very weighty which 
I have to bring against you. 

I was not eight years old when I begged this picture from you, 
which you generously enriched with this circlet of diamonds. 
Soon after, you went to France ; and during your absence this 
picture was my constant companion, whom I caressed, whom I 
talked to, and to whom alone I made my complaints in all my little 
matters of grievance. 

I know not by what instinct or kind of cunning it was, that I 
endeavoured to conceal my affection for this your resemblance, and 
never made my court to it but when I was alone. 

The morning after your visit, on your return from Paris, as I was 
carelessly performing the business of my little toilette before the 
glass, I took out your picture, and surveyed it with new and 
increasing delight. In the mean time I did not know that my 
mamma stood behind me, attentive to all my motions, that were 
reflected to her by the mirror. She heard me talk to your picture, 
she saw me kiss it, and eagerly press it to my bosom. At last I 
turned my eye to the glass, and perceived a piece of her image ; 
whereon I started, coloured, and trembled, and was thrown, I knew 
not why, into the utmost confusion. 

Ah, Fanny ! cried my mother, what is this that I see ? your 
young heart, my child, is certainly affected. Unquestionably you 
love your cousin Clinton. 

Ought I not to love him, madam? does he not love me as well 
as I love him ? No, no, my darling ! said my mother, I would to 
heaven that he did. Your cousin Clinton indeed is worthy of all 
love, but then he has lately given away his heart to another. He 
is married, my Fanny And cannot he love me still, for all 
that, madam? By no means, my sweet innocent. When once a 
man marries, he vows, and swears, and obliges himself to love 
nobody living but his wife; and what is more, my Fanny, it is 
accounted very naughty in any girl to think of loving such a one 
afterwards. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 175 

What emotions did I then feel ! what a conflict of opposing 
passions ! but resentment, for the time got the upper hand. I had 
yet formed no idea of the relations of sex, or matrimony, or any 
conjugal obligation save that of love alone. But then it was suffi- 
cient to me that I had given you my whole heart ; that nothing 
less than your whole heart could satisfy me in return ; and I felt 
myself offended and outraged to the last degree, by your having 
imparted a share thereof to another. 

The day following, as I sat languid and much discomposed, as 
well by my passion as want of rest the night before, my mamma 
came up to tell me that you were below, and inquired for me. No, 
no, my dearest mamma, said I, it does not signify, I will not see 
him. Let him go to whomever he loves best. But what shall 
I say to him, my Fanny ; what excuse shall I make ? No matter 
for excuse, madam; tell him that I never desire to see his face 
any more. 

As something informed me that you could not help still loving 
me a little, T laid hold of that little love to pique, and disoblige, and 
be revenged of you for your perfidy ; and, as long as you stayed, 
the thoughts of the pain and uneasiness I presumed you were under, 
gave me vast delight. But as soon as I was told you were gone, 
my heart sunk down, as from a mount of triumph, into a depth 
of desolation. 

My mamma came up to console me. She highly applauded my 
spirit, and the resentment I had showed ; and she blamed you for 
marrying another, at a time that you pretended so much fondness 
to me. She further endeavoured to set me against your age. 
She told me that you must soon be old and ugly and wrinkled, 
and that you were much fitter to be my father than my lover. 
She also spoke to me of my vast fortune, of my beauty, and so 
forth, and that I might have my pick and choice of all the 
young and handsome earls and dukes in the nation. She opened 
to me, in a variety of glittering prospects, all the pleasures and 
advantages of wealth, title, state, equipage, with the respects and 
admiration of crowds bending around me. As she represented 
them to my imagination, I catched at each of them for comfort ; 
but, alas ! I did not find you among them, and all to me became 
empty. 

That night my tender mamma forsook her own bed, and came to 
lie in mine. I saw that she had been afflicted ; so, for fear of 
adding to her trouble, I suppressed my own emotions, and pre- 
tended to be asleep. I lay quiet by her side till toward morning, 
when I was seized with a violent fever. During my illness, I was 
told that you came daily to inquire about me ; and that, I believe, 
above all things, contributed to my recovery. One day my mamma 
came and informed me that you sat below in tears, and earnestly 
requested to be permitted to see me. O how sweet and comforting 
did those tears seem to drop upon my heart ! but, mustering all 
my little pride and remaining dignity No, no, my mamma, I 
cried, I will die first ! If he does not first unmarry himself, I will 
never see him any more. 
When I had gotten strength enough to walk about the chamber, 



176 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

my mamma and I being alone, I went to my drawer, and taking 
out your picture, and turning my head aside, I reached it to her, 
saying Here, madam, take this and lock it up from me ; for, while 
I love it and hate it so much, it troubles me to look at it. My 
mamma thereupon took it from me, and catched me to her bosom ; 
but without saying a word, she burst into tears, and straight 
quitted the room. 

As soon as it was judged that I was able to travel, my parents, 
by the advice of their doctors, took me far into the country. My 
mother in the mean time had unquestionably confided my secret to 
my father ; for, though he was naturally of a severe and backward 
temper, he became extremely tender and indulgent toward me. 

As I was the only child they ever had, their whole care and 
solicitude was affectionately employed in procuring me a variety 
of gratifications and amusements. When I was in spirits, they 
were in a kind of triumph; but my dejection was to them the 
most grievous of all oppressions. They took down my French 
mistress and music-master with them, and they collected from all 
parts the most agreeable set of misses and masters that they could 
muster; so that my time was portioned put the most happily 
that could be, between business and recreations that were equally 
pleasing. They had taken care that your name should never be 
mentioned before me ; and though at times my soul was athirst, 
and my ear opened and turned to hear tidings concerning you, yet 
a certain native bashfulness and fear of offending against decency, 
did not permit me to inquire after you. 

Thus a length of absence and a variety of dissipations, by degrees 
greatly abated the ardour of my passion, insomuch that I did not 
seem to feel any more for you. When any occasion, however, re- 
newed in me the impression of former scenes, a thrilling sort of 
chillness would run through my blood. And at other times, when 
alone and thinking of you, a swimming kind of stupor would fall 
sadly upon my soul. 

On our return to London, after five years' absence, the great 
number of people, with the novelty and variety of objects that 
crowded upon my view, amused and engaged my whole attention. 
But, when we entered the old mansion when I turned my eyes 
on the places where you sat, where you walked, where you talked 
and used to caress me you became as it were actually visible to 
my eyes ; something seemed to wring my heart ; and I was seized 
with a sickness near to fainting. I took hold of my maid by the 
arm, and with her help walked into the garden for fresh air ; but 
there too you had got before me. On the terrace, in the walks and 
alleys, where you used to run feigned races with me, and to gather 
fruit for me, and to play with me at bob-cherry, and afterwards to 
press the lips that had gained the prize. I then turned away from 
a place that afforded me no asylum from you. My mother met, and 
eagerly asked what ailed me ? Let us go, mamma, I cried ; let us 
go somewhere else, I am not able to stay in this place any longer. 
Accordingly, that very evening we removed to lodgings ; and, in 
a few days, my father took and furnished a new house. 

I shall not dwell, my dear sir, on a trivial detail of the many 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 177 

circumstances and little incidents that happened during the space 
of four succeeding years. An infinity of suitors paid their addresses 
to me or my fortune, I neither knew nor cared to which, for I con- 
tinued alike insensible to all. It is true, that during such a number 
of years, having neither seen nor heard from you, I dropped all 
thoughts of you, and scarce retained the traces or lineaments of 
your person or aspect. From the impression, however, which you 
left in my mind, I had formed to myself a dear, though confused 
image of the lovely, of the desirable, and this I looked for every- 
where, but could nowhere find any resemblance thereof. 

In the mean time my parents urged me strongly to matrimony. 
They affectingly represented that they should not die in peace, if I 
did not afford them the prospect of perpetuating themselves in my 
offspring ; such is the fond succedaneum which short-lived creatures 
propose for eking out their existence, and supplying the lot of an 
inevitable mortality, by the flattering though poor substitute of a 
name or bare remembrance ! 

At length I told my parents that, as I could not form any choice 
of my own, I would trust wholly to their judgment, and take up 
with whomsoever they should be pleased to appoint. Hereupon 
they recommended the Earl of Maitland to me. I kept to my 
promise, and we were consequently married. 

My husband was comely in his person, easy and affable in his 
temper, and a man of singular sense and letters for a lord. He loved 
me with passion; and, as I could not pay him in specie, I en- 
deavoured to supply my want of affection to him by my attention 
and assiduities. 

On the fifth year of my marriage my father died of a good old 
age ; and in four years more my dearest mother left me desolate. 
In her I lost the only object of fond affections that I had upon 
earth, and my looks tacitly reproached my husband for his want of 
power to console me. 

I believe it was equally unhappy for my lord as myself that we 
were not blessed with children. The dear and tender attachments 
that bind parents to their offspring, serve also as a subsequent and 
more affecting nuptial band for uniting those parents more in- 
timately to each other. It draws about them a new circle of in- 
terests and amities ; and, by creating a mutual confidence, forbids 
the intrusion of those jealousies that must at all times pre-suppose 
an ah'enation of regard. This, however, was not the case between 
Lord Maitland and me. We never had a child. Perhaps, in some 
constitutions, an union of souls as well as persons may be requisite 
for such an effect. 

During the two years succeeding the death of my dear mother, 
I conceived a disgust against company and entertainments. I took 
a religious turn. I looked upon this world, and all that it contained, 
as quite unworthy the regard of an immortal being. The principal 
part of my time was taken up in books and offices of devotion ; in 
which employment I alternately sunk under the most gloomy de- 
pression of spirits, and again was elevated above myself into a new 
world of joys and inexpressible openings. 

At length I was taken exceedingly ill of what the physicians 

N 



178 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

called a fever upon the nerves, which confined me to my bed above 
six weeks. During my illness, my husband was the most constant 
and assiduous of all my attendants. The affectionate sadness, the 
painful distress, the tender solicitude that was visible in all his looks 
and actions, made way into my soul with an obliging impression ; 
and, while I reproached myself for my ungrateful defect of sensibility 
toward him, love, or something tender and very like to love, took 
place in my bosom. 

As soon as I was on the recovery, my husband disappeared, with- 
out taking leave or giving me any notice ; and for three weeks I 
knew not what was become of him. At length he returned, pale 
and greatly emaciated. I had yet lost none of the tenderness which 
I conceived for him during my illness. I took him affectionately by 
the hand, which glowed like a coal of fire. Ah ! I cried, where 
have you been ? what looks are these, my lord? what is the meaning 
of all this ? He answered not ; but withdrawing his hand, and 
scarce deigning to look towards me I am not well, he faintly said ; 
I must go to my bed. 

While his servants undressed him, I stood in silent astonishment, 
vainly guessing at the cause of this extraordinary behaviour : but 
as soon as he had lain down, I took a seat by his side, and seizing 
and pressing one of his hands between mine. I broke into tears. 

After a sad and mutual silence Ah, madam ! cried my husband, 
what am I to understand by these tears ? I am willing to consider 
them as proofs of your humanity, but I cannot consider them as 
instances of your affection. You love me not, madam ; you never 
did love me. All the constancy and complacence of the most ardent 
passion, all my endeavours and assiduities, have not been able to 
procure me the smallest interest in your heart. I blame you not, 
madam ; alas ! we are not the masters of our own affections. I am 
sensible that I never deserved your love. That was a blessing re- 
served for a more amiable object. But then the tenderness and 
truth of my attachment to you, might surely have laid claim to a 
share of your confidence. Ah, how precious had such a confidence 
been to my heart ! it had stood to me in the place of your love, 
and I should not have reproached you for irresistible propensities ; 
yes, madam, I say irresistible, for I know you are virtuous. Perhaps 
it was not in your power to refuse another your love ; but then you 
might have admitted your husband to a share of your friendship. 

You have my friendship, I cried ; my tender est friendship, my 
most affectionate regards. If my love is not so ardent as you could 
wish, you however have all the love of which I am capable, and 
you possess it entire and undivided. 

What is this you tell me, madam ? I would to heaven you could 
still deceive me that I had still continued in ignorance ! But that 
is past ; it is over, madam ; my eyes are opened to my wretched- 
ness, and I die in the double want of your faith and your affection. 
I have seen your lover, lady ; I saw him four days ago from an op- 
posite window. He stood before this house in converse with an- 
other. I expected every moment, that, taking advantage of my 
absence, he would have gained admission to you. I held my sword 
ready to follow, to pierce his heart, and sacrifice him to the claima 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 179 

of my honour and my love. But he suddenly disappeared, and 
disappointed my vengeance. 

Gracious heaven ! I exclaimed, what madness is this ? Do you 
dream, or who is it that has thus cruelly imposed upon you ? You 
shall see the impostor, madam, replied my lord. So saying-, he sud- 
denly put his hand back, and taking your picture from under the 
pillow, he indignantly demanded Do you know the original of this 
portrait, lady ? Ah, I screamed, I confess it, I do know him, I did 
know him indeed : he was the idol of my heart ; I delighted in him, 
I doated upon him ! You then acknowledge, you avow it, rejoined 
my husband ; and at length you deign to make me the confidant of 
a passion which I suppose, in your favour, to have been involuntary. 
Ah ! had I been earlier apprised of my unhappiness, I might not 
have sunk under the unexpected and sudden pressure as I do at 
this day. But say who and what is this formidable rival, who robs 
me of my peace, who tears my life from me ? 

First tell me, my lord, said I, how you came by this picture ? 
I found it in your cabinet during your illness, said he, when I 
searched for your essences to relieve you from a fainting fit. I 
flatter myself that I am not of a jealous disposition. Curiosity first 
incited me to hurry it into my pocket. 1 afterwards surveyed it 
more at leisure, and some startling doubts arose. I endeavoured to 
suppress them ; I argued with myself that it might be a family 
picture, the representative of a brother or dear relation deceased. 
But then some enemy of my peace again whispered to my spirit, 
that, if this had been the case, you would not be so solicitous to 
conceal it from me ; you would rather have boasted of such an 
ornament of your lineage ; you would have been proud to exhibit 
it before all people this staggered me I confess ; and additional 
doubts and suggestions were impelled upon my soul. She reserves 
this, said I to myself, for her own eye and inspection ; to revive it, 
to gaze and dwell upon it in secret, and to please her sight with the 
favourite image that is impressed upon her heart. At each of these 
reflections I felt a sting in my bosom ; and the more I revolved and 
debated on these uncertainties, the greater strength they gained, 
and drew nearer to demonstration. Ah ! I cried, her real coldness 
and feigned regards are now equally accounted for. She deceives 
me, she imposes upon me ; and I will counterfeit in my turn till 
this mystery is detected. I then attempted, and would have con- 
strained myself, to look at you with my accustomed tenderness, but 
I found it impossible. I therefore withdrew suddenly, and without 
any notice. If ever she had a tincture of friendship for me, thought 
I, the apprehension of my loss will awake in her a sense thereof. 
I disguised myself; and, as a stranger, took lodgings over against 
you. I took my station at the window. I was on the watch from 
morn till noon, to make a thorough inquisition into your conduct 
during my absence. I shall discover her disposition, said I, by the 
visitants whom she receives ; but, during a fortnight of observation, 
I could not perceive that, of the numbers who called, any one was 
admitted. My jealous passions abated, and I began to reproach 
myself for having ever conceived them ; when, to my utter con- 
fusion, there stood full to my view, in dress, aspect, mien, attitude, 

N2 



480 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

the distinguished original of the portrait which I had in my 
pocket. 

Here I passionately broke in upon my husband's narration. God 
be praised ! I exclaimed ; he then lives, he still lives, my most dear 
and amiable cousin, though I never wish to behold his face any 
more ! My only relation, perhaps now my only friend, you are still 
living, and I trust you are happy ; and that is enough ! 

Your relation your only relation, madam cried my lord ! Is he 
so near ? Is he no nearer, no dearer to you, than consanguinity will 
warrant ? Proceed, my lord, I said ; I will then tell you all with- 
out disguise or palliation. 

I confess to you, answered my husband, that the sight of him 
struck my soul with the fullest conviction of my being betrayed. 
My jealous pangs returned with double poignancy. I was en- 
kindled ; I was set on fire ; my heart was rent several ways. A 
violent fever seized upon me, but my fury and thirst of vengeance 
supported me under it. For four days longer I held up in the 
impatient expectation of once more beholding your lover, that I 
might pierce him in a thousand places, in every seducing part 
about him. But nature at length gave way; I sunk under the 
oppression ; and I returned, once for all, to behold, to reproach, 
and to expire before you. 

O, my husband, my friend, my true lover ! I cried ; how I pity, 
how I feel for you ! I excuse your suspicions, however injurious to 
my honour, since your jealousy perhaps is not wholly without 
foundation. I did indeed love the person for whom that portrait 
was drawn, with tenderness, with passion ; but, believe me, when I 
assure you that I have not set my eyes either on the original or 
picture these twenty years. 

What is this you tell me ? exclaimed my lord. You are not yet, 
as I take it, thirty years of age. Could you love, even to passion, 
at so very early a period ? 

Here I found myself under the necessity of discovering to my 
husband the little adventures, impressions, and sentiments of my 
infancy, wherewith you are already acquainted. When I had 
finished my short narrative, he seized my hand, and pressing it 
passionately to his lips, and then to his burning bosom, he melted 
into tears. O, my Fanny ! he cried ; my most noble, my adorable 
creature ! What a combat have you fought ; what a conquest have 
you gained, of grace over nature of virtue against passion ! Can 
you excuse me ? Will you forgive me ? May I hope that you will 
restore me to the blessings of your friendship ? May I flatter my- 
self that you gave me as much as you could of your affections ? 
That, if you had been able, you would have loved me with a love 
like mine? 

I will not distress you, my cousin, by a description of the affecting 
scenes that ensued. My husband left me vastly rich, but still more 
forlorn. During the first years of widowhood, I looked upon myself 
as a friendless and unnecessary burden upon earth. Though I 
thought of you at times, it was not without a resentment and a 
tincture of aversion, for your never having deigned to inquire or 
find out whether any such person as your too affectionate Fanny 



TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 181 

Goodall was in the land of the living. At length my physicians 
and my friends (as they styled themselves) prevailed upon me once 
more to enter into the light, and air, and amusements of their 
world. I consented. I found my advantage in it. I gradually got 
rid of the grievous oppression that lay upon my spirits. Since 'all is 
vanity, thought I, let us partake of the dissipation,, and make it as 
pleasing as we can ; and accordingly you found me in the engage- 
ments which you honoured with your inspection yesterday. 

When you entered, I did not know you. The strange name of 
Fenton, as well as the alteration which years had made in you, shut 
you out almost wholly from my recollection. I felt myself, however, 
agitated, I knew not why. Something in your person and manner 
renewed in my heart impressions kindred to those which were once 
its sole concern. I could not look at you, I could not speak to you. 
without emotion. All night I lay disturbed, in vain endeavouring 
to remember when or where I had seen you. At morning, a sudden 
light darted in upon my mind. I got up and flew to your picture, 
which at once laid all open, and detected your disguise. 

You are much altered, cousin. Had I first seen you as you now 
appear, I think my young heart would not have been so deeply 
affected. The ruin, however, is still very noble, and endearingly 
renews hi me the idea of what the building once was. 

Your abstracted air, and the change of your name, seem to 
intimate some distressing situation ; but if fifty thousand pounds, or 
that sum doubled, will be of use to you, I shall for once think that 
fortune has been of advantage to me. 

My most dear and generous cousin, replied Mr. Fenton, I shall never 
pardon myself those griefs which the excess of my affection inad- 
vertently occasioned you. No brother ever loved a sister, no parent 
a child, with fonder passion. The aversion which I thought you 
had suddenly taken to me, was one of the most sensible afflictions of 
my life ; and my ignorance of what latterly became of you, can only 
be accounted for by an abstract of my own story. 

Here Mr. Fenton called for chocolate. And, after breakfast, he 
gave Lady Maitland the following affecting history of his own life 
and adventures. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

STOBY OF THE HON. MB. CLINTON. 

THE world, my lovely cousin the world is to man as his temper 
or complexion. The mind constitutes its own prosperity and adver- 
sity; winter presents no cloud to a cheerful spirit, neither can 
summer find sunshine for the spirit that is in a state of dejection. 
In my youth, every object presented me with happiness ; but, alas ! 
the time came when the universe appeared as a vault wherein joy 
was entombed, and the sun himself but as a lamp that served to 
show the gloom and the horrors around me. 

As my father and mother died before I was taken from nurse, I 
knew none of those parental tendernesses and endearments that 



182 TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

serve to humanize the soul, and give it the first impressions of social 
attachment ; neither were those sweetnesses in any degree supplied 
to me by the behaviour of an imperious brother, or of a magisterial 
guardian. As I was naturally, however, of a benevolent cast, I 
sought for those affections and amities among strangers which I had 
not found in the bosoms or faces of kin. I pass over the immaterial 
parts of my life at school and college, and hasten to the more 
important period of my apprenticeship. 

Your father bound me to Mr. Golding, a very wealthy and 
eminent merchant, who lived over against the Exchange. He had 
been some years a widower, and his only child, a daughter, was 
then at a boarding-school. 

Mr. Golding, with a plain understanding, was a man of exceeding 
honesty and a susceptible heart. At first sight he conceived a 
partial affection for me, whereof he gave me very frequent and very 
tender proofs ; and, as he stood to me in the place of a patron and 
a father, I felt for him all the fondness and attachment of a child. 

In the fourth year of my apprenticeship he called me to his closet, 
and taking me kindly by the hand Harry, says he, I love you ; 
your interest lies near my heart ; for though you are not the be- 
gotten of my body, you are the child of my affections Be quiet, 

Harry let me speak I have to talk to you of matters of conse- 
quence. I went yesterday to your uncle Goodall, to know how 
accounts stood between you ; though he is but a cold kinsman, he is 
a very faithful guardian. He has just married a very lovely young 
woman, and I would have you go and pay your compliments to 
them on the occasion. Your uncle has laid out your little penny to 
good advantage, and your 12,000 is now nearly doubled. And 
now, Harry, as your father did not behave like a father toward you 
in the dividend which he made between you and your brother, I 
propose in some measure to supply his place, and I make you a 
present of this note of 12,000, which, added to your little patri- 
mony, may enable you Oh, sir ! I cried Be quiet, child, I say 

again, till you find whether or no you shall have reason to thank me. 
I am growing old, my Harry, and by a long course of industry have 
earned a kind of title to some little rest ; I would therefore gladly 
make a composition between your application and my repose. I 
shall not be so often in the counting-house as usual. I propose to 
take you into immediate partnership. But, as I also propose that 
you shall be at three-fourths of the trouble, it is but just that I 
should offer you a proportionable advantage. Now as my capital, 
Harry, is more than five times as much as yours of 36,000, I offer 
to your acceptance a full moiety of all the profits, in recompense of 
your extraordinary attention and application. Hear me out I do 
not think that I shall lose by this bargain. The affairs of Potiphar 
prospered under the hands of young Joseph ; and I believe that 
you, also, are a favourite of your God. 

I could not speak. The good man perceived my oppression, and 
catching me in his arms, and pressing me to his bosom, he shed a 
silent tear of satisfaction upon me, and withdrew without saying 
another word. 

For several days following, Mr. Golding was employed in advising 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 183 

his correspondents that I was now become his partner and equal in 
trade, and I was wearied with congratulations on my being one of 
the principal merchants in London before I had attained my 
twentieth year. 

The obligations and advantages which this good man thus de- 
lighted to heap upon me, incited me to double application and 
sagacity, and all the eyes of Argus were opened within me for 
superintending and guarding the interests of my patron. 

I have often thought it somewhat romantic, that I should win 
both my wives by a matter of adventure ; so that their partiality 
in my favour ought, perhaps, to be ascribed to a sentiment of 
gratitude, rather than to any liking which they might take to 
my person. 

On a day in summer I rode to Barnet to settle accounts with Mr. 
Fradgil, a correspondent of my master's, who was said to be in- 
disposed at his country-seat. As I approached the town, I observed 
an elderly gentlewoman walking leisurely towards me, attended by 
an orderly train of young maidens. I observed, at the same time, 
two men in glittering apparel who hastily followed, and coming 
quickly up, put all the females to a stand, and caused them to 
gather in a group as for mutual defence. One of the men, however, 
no way daunted by the opposition of so numerous a company, rudely 
caught one of the elder misses in his arms, and repeatedly kissed 
her. Meanwhile the young lady shrieked and cried aloud for help ; 
when, riding suddenly up, I struck the ruffian to the ground with 
the heavy end of my whip. His companion hereupon drew his 
sword and turned upon me ; but, pushing my horse at him, I cast 
hi also to the earth ; then alighting, I broke their swords, and, 
leaving my gallants in a plight not suddenly to be dreaded, I 
led my horse by the bridle till I saw my fair wards all safe to their 
dwelling. 

Some months after this incident Mr. Golding called me aside. 
Harry, says he, my daughter is now drawing to woman's estate, and 
should learn something more substantial than needle-work, and 
dancing, and harpsichords, and Frenchified phrases. I therefore 
propose to take her home, where, by the help of our cook and 
housekeeper, she may be taught how to make a Sunday's pudding 
and to superintend a family. 

I regularly go to see her once in every month, accompanied by 
some male or female acquaintance, but never called you to be of 
the party, as we could not so conveniently be both from home. 

My child, though a plain girl, is very dutiful and good-natured. 
Her fortune, as you are sensible, will entitle her to the first lord 
of the land ; yet I know not how it is, I would rather that my 
girl should be happy than great. I do not wish to have her a 
fine-titled dame. I would rather, I say, see her married to some 
honest and tender-hearted man, whose love might induce him to 
domesticate with her, and to live peaceably and pleasingly within 
his family circle, than to see her mated with a prince of the blood. 

Now, Harry, as this affair of all affairs sits nearest at my heart, 
it is greatly in your power to oblige me beyond expression. On 
my daughter's coming home, I conclude we shall be beset by a 



184 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

number of courtiers ; such an Argo, when freighted with such a 
fleece, will unquestionably be held in chase by many a pirate. 
Wherefore, my son, I would have you keep a sharp and inquisitive 
eye about you, and to take good note of the manners and dis- 
positions of such suitors as my daughter shall appear to regard, as 
also to inquire minutely into their circumstances and characters. 
Your vigilance and penetration may save us from ruin. Should 
my child be made unhappy, your friend must be most miserable. 
But I depend, my dear Harry, that while I live you will prove a 
kind brother to her, and that you will prove a father to her in 
case of my mortality. Here the good man, no longer able to 
restrain his passion, put his handkerchief to his eyes and quitted 
the chamber. 

"Within a few days Mr. Golding set out, accompanied by a num- 
ber of his city friends, in order to conduct his daughter home. 
On their arrival I was deeply engaged in the counting-house, and 
it was near the time for supper before I could attend. As I en- 
tered, Mr. Golding presented me to his daughter, saying This, 
my dear, is Mr. Clinton, my partner, my friend, my son, and your 
brother. Hereupon Miss Golding coloured, and drawing back as I 
approached to salute her If I am not mistaken, sir, said she, he 
is something more to us than all you have mentioned; it would 
ill become me to forget that he is the deliverer of your daughter. 
Your deliverer, my dear Matty! how, where, when? Why, 
pray, papa, did Mr. Clinton never tell you of his adventure at 
Barnet? No, indeed, my -fcai. It is not every one who would be 
silent where so much was' to be said to their own honour. I remem- 
ber that your knights in romance, when too modest to boast of their 
own achievements, used to permit some friend or squire to deliver 
down to posterity the history of their adventures, and I take the 
liberty to be squire to Mr. Clinton on the like occasion. 

Here Miss Golding began to give a narrative of the matter 
already recited, but in terms of high praise and aggravated en- 
comium. While all abashed and confused, I withdrew, saying, that 
I did not remember to have heard of any knights who stayed to 
hear their own story. 

In truth, I was much surprised to hear Miss Golding mention 
the adventure of Bamet; for I did not recollect that I had ever 
seen her, and had taken much more note of two or three other 
misses than I had of her. 

Being re-summoned to supper, Mr. Golding met me as I entered, 
and clasping me in his arms Oh, my Harry! he cried, how won- 
derfully gracious has God been to me, in sending my best friend to 
the rescue of my only child ; in sending, at so critical and very 
fearful a conjuncture, perhaps the only person who had either 
gallantry or humanity enough to preserve her. Indeed, sir, I 
replied, you owe me nothing ; I did not even know that the lady 
was your daughter ; and I could not pride myself, in any degree, 
on an action which I thought incumbent on every man to perform. 

During supper, Miss Golding was very cheerful and agreeable. Her 
face, indeed, could not be numbered among the beauties ; but her 
person was grace and majesty, though in miniature ; her conversa- 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 185 

tion was pleasing ; and when she sung- or touched her instruments, 
for she was mistress of several, her mien and motions were music, 
each note seemed a sentiment, and we felt her fingers playing on 
the cordage of our hearts. 

For the first three months after Miss Golding's arrival, all was 
crowding and gaiety, assembly and festival, at our house. She was 
as a magnet, that drew and grouped all the peerage and gentry of 
England together. But, as business happened to be very urgent 
at this season, I was not at liberty to partake of their amusements, 
and I resigned to Mr. Golding the commission which he had given 
me respecting the parties who declared themselves suitors. 

As those suitors, in a daily and numerous succession, applied to 
Mr. Golding for his consent, his general answer was, that his good- 
liking was inseparable from that of his only child ; that he would, 
if they pleased, consult her on the occasion, and faithfully report 
to them her approbation or dissent. In the like conclusive manner, 
when Mr. Golding repeatedly questioned his daughter, she would 
take his hand between hers, and kissing it, say Oh no ! my dear 
papa, this is not the man. 

One day, as I sat alone in the counting-house, Miss Golding en- 
tered and presented me with an order from her father for 250. 
And pray, madam, said I, why this ceremony, this matter of form ? 
Sure Miss Golding may at any time command twenty times this 
sum without any order save her own intimation. Indeed ! are you 
serious, Mr. Clinton ? I am very proud, I assure you, to have so 
much credit with you ; but, Mr. Harry, how comes it to pass that 
we have so little of your company? Your father's business, 
madam, deprives me of the pleasure I should otherwise have in 
attending you. Again, sir, I am quite proud that it is your atten- 
tion to my father alone, which prevents your having any attention 
for his daughter ; so saying, she vanished. 

Immediately I was struck with a glimpse of some uncommon 
meaning in the words and behaviour of Miss Golding ; but as I 
never had looked toward the way of her affections, I passed it 
lightly over, as some matter of whim or caprice in her sex. 

Among the brilliant concourse of suitors that frequented our 
house, there was one Mr. Spelling, a young gentleman, highly 
accomplished in his person and manners, and of a most amiable 
countenance and disposition. His father, like Miss Golding's, had 
been a merchant, and like him, too, had amassed an excessive 
fortune. As he was modest, as I may say, to a degree of shame- 
facedness, he did not declare himself a lover till nearly the whole 
multitude of competitors had been discarded ; then, with a blush- 
ing diffidence, he avowed his passion to Mr. Golding, and earnestly 
besought his consent and intercession in his favour. You have not 
only my consent, replied the good old man, you have also my best 
wishes, and shall have my best endeavours for your success. How- 
ever, I must warn you at the same time, Mr. Spelling, that I will 
not do any violence to the inclinations of my child, although there 
are not two in the world whom I would prefer to you. 

I was writing in my closet when Mr. Golding came in, with an 
anxious importance in his countenance, and told me what passed 



186 TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

between him and Mr. Spelling, and asked if I did not approve the 
match. 1 do not know, sir, said I, that man in England who is so 
deserving of your daughter as Mr. Spelling. Then, my dear Harry, 
I have a commission to give you. Matilda has a great respect for 
your judgment ; I beseech you to make use of your influence with 
her, and to exert all your oratory in behalf of this young man. 
But, sir, will not Miss Matilda look on this as a matter of high 
presumption in one who has no manner of right to advise? No 
matter ; you may tell her that you did it by my desire, and that we 
are both of a mind with regard to this business. Well, sir, said 
I, since you are bent upon it, I will obey you ; but it is the first 
time that ever I obeyed you with reluctance. 

Soon after Mr. Golding left me his daughter entered, with a 
countenance visibly unquiet and confused. My papa, sir, said she, 
informs me that you have a business of consequence to impart to 
me. I hope, madam pray, be seated a moment. Indeed, my dear 
Miss Golding, this office was not of my choosing ; and I hope, I 
say, you will be so good as to pardon my presumption, in consider- 
ation of my acting by your father's command. You alarm me, Mr. 
Clinton ; pray, proceed. Mr. Spelling, madam, at length has had 
the assurance to declare his passion for you. Your father highly 
approves of Mr. Spelling for a son-in-law ; and indeed, miss, might 
I dare to speak my judgment, I know not where you could choose 
to better advantage. If that is the case, Mr. Harry, I wish that I 
also could be of the same opinion. And are you not, madam? 
what objection can you form, what exception can you have, to my 
friend Spelling? A very simple one, sir, and no better than this, 
that he is not the man who can make me happy. I am sorry for it, 
my dear Miss Golding, I am truly sorry for it ; were I to pick from 
mankind, were I to choose throughout the world, if any one can 
deserve you it is surely this same Spelling. And yet, Mr. Harry, 
I remember to have seen the man who, in every grace and merit, 
is infinitely preferable to your favourite Spelling. Where, when, 
my dear miss ? When I am brought to the torture, I may possibly 
be under the necessity of confessing. Pardon, pardon, sweet 
madam ! I meant no offence ; and yet I wish to heaven I knew. 
But that you never shall know, Mr. Harry. Pray then, madam, 
if I may adventure on one question more, has the party so highly 
favoured any knowledge of his own happiness? I hope not, Mr. 
Harry ; but of what advantage could his knowledge prove to me, I 
beseech you? Can you suppose that such a person as I have 
described could deign to look with favour on such a one as I am ? 
I do not believe, madam, that the man is in England who would 
not think himself highly honoured, highly blessed, by your hand. 
But then are you assured, miss, that this man is worthy of it? 
Ah, there lies my misfortune! he is too worthy, too noble, too 
accomplished, too lovely, too much every thing, for my wishes to 
leave any thing to my hopes. And now, Mr. Harry, that I have 
intrusted you with my secret, I hope you will not betray my con- 
fidence, and reveal it to my papa. I rather trust and request that 
you will use some other colour for reconciling him to my refusal of 
Mr. Spelling : and, to make you some amends for the mortification 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 187 

I have given you, by rejecting your advocation in behalf of your 
friend, I here engage never to marry without your approbation, 
though I do not promise, sir, that you shall dictate to my choice. 
There is one thing further, Mr. Clinton, in which you may oblige 
me ; it is to prevail on my father to dismiss these assemblies and 
revels that pester our house : indeed, they never were to my taste, 
though by their novelty, at first, they might have helped to amuse 
a little matter of melancholy that hung upon my mind ; but now 
they are grown quite insufferable to me. Here her eye began to 
fill, and, heaving a gentle sigh, she curtsied and withdrew. 

Immediately my heart was softened and affected. I saw the 
child of my friend and patron, the one in whom his hopes and 
fortunes and very life were wrapt up I saw that she was unhappy, 
that she was very unhappy, at a time that she had forbidden me 
to attempt her relief, though I would gladly have parted with half 
my fortune to have been enabled to give the object of her wishes 
to her arms. 

In the mean while, my dearest madam, it was the farthest of all 
things from entering into my imagination, that I was the very 
person who sat so near her heart. I daily saw the loveliest youths 
and titled chiefs of the land attendant on her words and smiles, and 
humbly suing for her favour ; I saw also, that her immense fortune 
and rare attractions justly entitled her to their homage; and I was 
neither vain enough, nor base enough, to attempt a competition. 

As in myself I was wholly devoid of passion, I had neither 
eyes nor apprehension for the discernment of hers. Though I had 
often seen, I seldom had any kind of converse with her ; and where 
the head is engaged and in a manner absorbed by business, there 
is neither leisure nor room for love to enter the heart. On the 
other hand, a person affected can instantly penetrate the bosom of 
the party beloved, and there discern a vacant and insensible heart, 
as legibly as a priest of Isis could decipher hieroglyphics. 

One day, as I happened to pass near her antechamber, I heard the 
warble, as I thought, of distant and ethereal music, i approached 
toward the sound ; the door was on the jar, and, gently opening 
it, I entered and stood behind her unperceived. She sat and sung 
to her lute. The words were Shakspeare's, but sweetly set by 
herself. They expressed that passage in his play of Twelfth Night, 
where it is said of Viola, 

" She never told her love, 
But let concealment, like a worm i' the bud, 
Feed on her damask cheek," &c. 

Ah ! how affectingly did her instrument answer to her voice, while 
she gently turned her sighs to the soft and melancholy cadences. 
My breast was so swelled by a mixture of anguish and compassion, 
that I could no longer wholly suppress a rising groan. Hereat 
she started and turned ; and rising suddenly, her eyes shot fire, and 
her face glowed with indignation and resentment. But, observing 
the tears that still trickled down my cheeks, her countenance was 
as suddenly changed into kindness, and she cast upon me a look 
of inexpressible complacence. 



188 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

Ah, Mr. Harry ! says she, I see, I see that you have a gentle 
and a kindred kind of heart ; and that, if ever you happen to love, 
you will love with great tenderness. Have you ever loved, 
Mr. Harry? Indeed, madam, I cannot say; my commerce has 
been very little among the ladies. If I met love on my way, or 
even found it in my heart, perhaps I should not rightly know 
what to make of it. But, my Matilda, my charming sister (your 
father has honoured me with the privilege of calling you by that 
dear, that tender name), why will you not intrust your best, your 
truest friend with the secret of your disquiet ? Whoever the object 
of your esteem may be, I here solemnly engage, at the risk of my 
life and the loss of my fortune, to bring him voluntarily to pay his 
vows at your feet. O, my sister ! I would to heaven that he had 
now been present, as I have been present, to have his soul melted 
and minted as mine has been ; his heart must have been harder 
than the stones of Thebes, if you did not attract it and move it at 
pleasure, by the touch of those fingers, and the bewitchment of 
those accents. Ah, you flatterer! she cried, with a voice tuned 
to harmony, and a face formed of smiles, you almost tempt me to 
tell you what, for the world, I would not wish that any one in the 
world should know. But I must snatch myself from the danger. 
So saying, and casting at me a vanishing glance, she was out of 
sight in an instant. 

As our suitors had now been dismissed, and our assemblies dis- 
continued, Miss Golding seemed quite pleased with our domestic 
quiet ; it gave us frequent occasions of being together ; and I 
endeavoured, by a variety of tender offices and little amusements, 
to dispel or divert the melancholy under which I thought she 
laboured. I was greatly surprised at my own success on this 
occasion; her cheerfulness returned; she discovered new and 
striking graces in her manners and conversation, and in a little 
time did not appear to want any consolation. 

One day, being on the Exchange, I was accosted by a Jew, who 
told me that he wanted a sum of money, and would either sell or 
pawn to me a jewel of great price ; it was a solitaire, composed of 
oriental pearls, with a diamond of the first water and magnitude 
in the centre. After some chaffering, we agreed for three 
thousand pieces, and I put it into my pocket-book. As my 
business detained me on the Exchange till it was late, I dined 
with two or three acquaintances at the chop-house, and did not 
return till the evening was advanced. 

On my entering I was told that Mr. Golding was abroad, and 
that Miss Matilda had just ordered coffee for some ladies in her 
dressing-room. Immediately I ran up and opened the door without 
ceremony, but was instantly struck with the look which she turned 
towards me a look that at once intimated dejection and disgust. 
During coffee I endeavoured to behave with my usual unconcern, 
but found it impossible to avoid sharing in that constraint under 
which Miss Matilda most evidently laboured; in short, a gloomy 
stifihess spread through the whole conversation, and I believe no 
two persons in company were rightly satisfied with each other. 

As soon as the cups were removed, the fair visitants got up; 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 189 

and as Miss Golding pressed them to stay, in a manner that rather 
denoted her desire of their absence, they feigned a further engage- 
ment, and very formally took their leave. 

When she had seen them to the door, and that I had handed 
them into their carriages, she turned without speaking to me, and 
withdrew toward her own apartment. I followed, and as she was 
about to enter My Matilda, my sister, said I, with a voice of 
cordial tenderness, do your Harry the favour to accept this trifle, 
as an instance of my regard for the daughter of my friend for the 
dearest object upon earth of my esteem and aifection. So saying, 
I presented her with my recent purchase. She did not, however, 
even deign to look at it ; but, surveying me from head to foot with 
an eye of strange passions, she took it and dashed it against the 
floor, and, rushing into her chamber, she shut to the door upon me, 
without speaking a word. 

I stood in an inconceivable astonishment and concern. In vain 
I searched and researched my memory for the recollection of some 
instance wherein I might have offended her; but not presuming 
to obtrude upon her, in order to question or expostulate with 
her, I retreated to my apartment under the deepest dejection 
of spirits. 

Mr. Golding did not return till it was late in the evening. He 
immediately sent for me. Harry, says he, what is the matter? 
Has any thing happened amiss ? I never saw you look so discom- 
posed. Indeed, sir, I am not as well as I could wish. Bless me, 
we had better send for a doctor. No, sir, I am in hopes it will 
soon be over. Where is Matilda? In her chamber, sir, I believe. 
He then called Mrs. Susan, and bid her tell Matilda that he 
desired to speak with her; but she answered that her mistress 
was gone to bed indisposed, and requested that she might not 
be disturbed. 

Supper being served up, we sat down in silence ; and as neither 
of us offered to take a bit, I rose, wished Mr. Golding a good-night, 
and retired to my chamber. 

After a sleepless night, my servant entered in a visible alarm, 
and told me that Miss Golding was extremely ill, and that almost 
all the physicians in London had been sent for. 

Very unhappy were many succeeding days. I saw my friend, my 
father, the man I loved above the world I saw him in a depth of 
distress that bordered on distraction, and I found my heart wrung 
with inexpressible anguish. 

Though I was constant in my inquiries after Miss Golding, yet 
I purposely avoided appearing in her presence, lest the sight of 
one so obnoxious should add to her distemper. At length the good 
old man came to me, wringing his hands Will you not go, Harry, 
says he will you not go and see Matilda before she dies? The 
doctors tell me they have tried all the powers of medicine, but that 
they do not yet know what to make of her sickness. 

My dear sir, said I, it is then no longer time to conceal from you 
what I know or conjecture concerning this matter. Miss Matilda 
herself intrusted me with the secret, but under the strictest 
injunctions of silence ; the extremity of her case, however, ought 



190 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

to dispense with all such engagements. Your daughter loves, 
sir she loves with passion ; but who the object of her affection 
is, I cannot imagine. Let it be your part to discover what she so 
industriously hides from the world ; she will refuse nothing to the 
authority, or rather to the tenderness, of such a parent. 

Here Mr. Golding left me, but returned in about an hour. His 
whole frame seemed to labour with something extraordinary. You 
were right, Harry, he cried ; you were right in your conjectures ! 
My prayers and my tears have at length prevailed ; with difficulty 
I have wrung the secret from her. O, my son ! it is greatly in 
your power to befriend us. Would you not do something for the 
relief of a family who doat upon you as we do ? would you not do 
something for your old friend, who loves you as fondly as ever 
father loved a child ? Something for you, sir? said I. Yes, every 
thing all things that are possible to be done. But pray, sir, do I 
know the party ? You do, Harry, you do, he cried ; for, as the 
prophet said unto David, Thou art the man ! 

Me, sir ! I exclaimed. Impossible ! she cannot bear my sight ; 
she hates me she detests the ground I go upon. Not so, said 
he not so ; she loves the very dust upon which you tread. Some- 
thing surely is due in mitigation of the calamities which you have 
occasioned. We lie at your mercy, Mr. Clinton, my precious 
daughter and myself; it is yours to bid us live or die at your 
pleasure ; to crush us into nothing, or to restore us to existence, 
to health, to enjoyment. Will it hurt you, my son, to do us these 
great benefits ? is it a matter grievous to give happiness to those 
whose excessive love to you is their only misfortune ? A princely 
fortune attends you. We and all we have are yours, Mr. Clinton. 
We are desirous of depending on your bounty alone. Let the 
extremeness of my daughter's affection for you excite something 
more kindly than hatred in your breast. If not for her sake, yet 
for mine, my beloved Harry, let me beseech you to constrain your- 
self before her, to affect some little tenderness, some appearance of 
regard, that may revive her, awhile at least, from the deplorable 
state under which she languishes. 

While he spoke, I was agitated by unutterable emotions, and he 
might have proceeded much further before 1 should have had the 
power to reply. At length, I cast myself on my knee, and catch- 
ing his hand to my bosom Ah, my friend, my father, my dear 
father! I cried; am I then no better than a barbarian in your 
sight? To me would you impute such sentiments of cruelty and 
ingratitude ? Take my hand, sir, take my heart, dispose of them 
as you please. All that I have, and all I am, is yours and your 
daughter's, without any kind of reserve for any other person 
breathing. 

The good man caught me in his arms, and pressed me to his 
breast hi a long and speechless ecstasy; then, taking me by the 
hand, he led me in silence to his daughter's apartment. 

As we entered she turned her eyes toward the door, and her pale 
and languid countenance was straight suffused with a short-lived 
red. I was so affected by the condition in which I beheld her, that 
I scarcely was able to reach her bedside, where, kneeling down, 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 191 

I gently took one of her hands, and pressing it between mine, 1 
bathed it in a silent shower of tears. 

Ah, my papa ! she faintly cried, I fear you have betrayed me ; 
Mr. Clinton is certainly informed of my weakness. I am informed, 
said I, my lovely, my all-beloved sister : I am informed that I am 
permitted to hope for a happiness that is infinitely above my merit ; 
but it shall be the delightful business of my life to deserve it. 

My dear, said Mr. Golding, I perceive you are something 
flustered ; your constitution is too weak for such emotions as these. 
For the present, your brother Harry must leave you. To-morrow, 
I trust, you will be better able to support our company. 

Hereupon I took her hand, and, impressing upon it a tender and 
warm kiss, I just ventured to look up, and saw her fine eyes 
suffused with a glittering tear, and her countenance bent upon me 
with a look of indescribable sweetness and delight ; but Mr. Golding, 
to prevent the effects of too tender a scene, instantly took me by 
the arm and led me away. 

As he perceived that my spirits had been much disturbed, he 
ordered a bottle to his own chamber, and told me that he requested 
some further converse with me. As soon as we had taken our 
seats, he looked earnestly upon me, then seized me by the hand, and 
looked at me again. But, suddenly getting up, he turned and 
stepped to the window, and breaking into tears, he there wept and 
sobbed for good part of an hour. 

As soon as he was somewhat composed, he resumed his seat. 
Mr. Clinton, says he, are you really sincere in your professions with 
respect to my daughter? Shall I be rid of my doubts at once? 
May I venture to ask you a question on which my own life, as well 
as that of my child, may depend ? Should it please the Almighty 
to raise her from her present bed of sickness, is it actually your 
intention to make her your wife ? 

Here I demanded with some warmth Is that a question, sir, at 
this time ? What reason have I given you to suspect my honour 
or my truth? I do not suspect you, my Harry, I do not suspect 
you ; I know you would not deceive me, but you may have deceived 
yourself. Your nature is tender and full of pity, and in the de- 
plorable state in which my girl lies, your great compassion may 
have easily been mistaken by you for love. Your friendship for 
me also may have helped to impose upon you, and you may have 
construed your regard and attachment to the father into a sentiment 
of tenderness and affection for the child. But oh, my Harry ! should 
any other woman be preferable in your eyes, or should it not be 
in my girl's power to win and wear your affections, I shall then 
have been instrumental in making you wretched; and my heart 
may as well be broken the one way as the other. No, my father, 
no ! I have no foreign Delilahs, no secret amours, no pleasures that 
shun the light. My heart is a virgin heart, and my Matilda 
possesses it without a rival. 

From the time that I was sensible of my father's partiality, a 
little matter of ambition, whether laudable or otherwise, incited 
me to attempt a distinction that would raise me toward a level with 
an only brother, who looked down with neglect and contempt upon 



192 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

me. Thence I became indefatigable in my studies at school and 
college, as also in my application under you, sir, during the first 
years of my apprenticeship, and this left me no manner of leisure 
for female attachments. Indeed, I dreaded the appearance of any 
advances from the sex, and turned from them as I would from so 
many gins or pitfalls purposely dug for my destruction. My con- 
versation, sir, has been very little among the fair ; and, excepting 
my natural propensity to the sex, I never, till very lately, conceived 
a liking for any woman. In truth, my dear father, that lady is not 
alive whom my judgment or inclinations would prefer to your 
Matilda. You need not fear my being wretched I think myself 
most happy in her affections. 

Then, said he, I pronounce her the happiest of women. And 
now, my Harry, I will tell you a secret. From the first time that 
I beheld you, I wished you for my daughter ; I wished that she 
might have charms to attract and fix your heart ; but as I feared, 
and was persuaded that this was not the case, I forbore to indulge 
myself in such flattering expectations. You know I never took you 
with me to see her at the boarding-school ; the true reason was, 
that I dreaded exposing her young and inexperienced heart to such 
a temptation, lest she should conceive and languish under a hope- 
less passion. 

On her return to town my apprehensions on your score were 
much abated, as I imagined that the great number of her gay and 
glistering suitors would divide, or at least divert, her attention 
from you, and I purposely laid all the business of our house on your 
shoulders, that she might have as little of your company as possible. 

I further had the precaution to warn my child against the danger 
of any affection for you. Matty, said I one day, among all this 
assembly of fair and fortunate youths you are free and welcome to 
choose your companion for life ; there is only one who stands ex- 
cepted only one whom you must not look upon with an eye of ex- 
pectation. Who is that, papa? My younger brother and partner 
in trade, said I. He looks much higher, Matty, than to the 
daughter of a merchant. His prospects are immense. He is only 
brother and heir to the Earl of Moreland, who is now on his travels, 
a dissolute young man, whose vices in all likelihood will quickly 
carry him off; and in such a case our Harry Clinton would be con- 
sidered as the first person in the land. 

Ah, sir ! I cried, I may bless your prohibition with regard to me ; 
it was certainly the happy, the only, cause of my Matilda's par- 
tiality in my favour. The good man smiled and proceeded. Not- 
withstanding what I said to Matty, I had not given up all thoughts 
of you myself. While she talked or sung in your presence I often 
turned my eye upon you, and thought, at times, that I perceived 
a growing tenderness in your behaviour, which further acquaintance, 
I trusted, might ripen into love. But when, in order to try you, 
I proposed your advocation in behalf of Spelling, and that you 
appeared to undertake it with readiness and pleasure, I at once 
dropped all my fond and flattering hopes concerning you, and I 
heartily wished that my child had accepted that modest and worthy 
young man. Blessed, however, be the favouring hand of thai 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 193 

Providence who, so unexpectedly, hath conducted matters to the issue 
of this hour, and fulfilled the capital wish of my life. But I will 
no longer delay carrying to my dear child the glad tidings of your 
affections : it will prove the best of balms to her wounded mind, 
and will close her eyes for this night in rest and peace of heart. 

I was scarce dressed the next morning when Matilda's favourite 
maid entered my chamber and bid me good-morrow. Mrs. Susan, 
said I, your pleasant countenance bids me presume that Miss 
Golding is better. O, vastly better vastly better, sir, I assure 
you. She slept sweetly all the night, and did not want for happy 
dreams neither, I warrant. Here is something for your good news. 
No, sir, no, I never take money from gentlemen ; my mistress's 
generosity does not leave me to the temptation. I love my mis- 
tress, sir, and I think we ought all rather to join and fee you, as 
well for yesterday's visit as for another which I hope you will pay 
her to-day. A fiddle for these old doctors ; one pretty young doctor 
is better worth than a score of them. Susan, as it should seem, had 
been an observer, and did not want for penetration, in such matters. 
Mr. Harry, she continued, I would give my last quarter's wages 
to know what charm it is that you carry about you to make all the 
pretty ladies so fond of you. In truth, Mrs. Susan, I am equally 
a stranger to the charm and to the fondness that you talk of. 
Don't tell me, sir don't tell me ! The very day of that night on 
which my mistress fell sick, here was a lady in her chariot to in- 
quire for you ; one of the loveliest young creatures I ever set my 
eyes on. I know she asked very particularly and very affectionately 
for you ; for, though it was my mistress to whom she spoke, I stood 
within hearing. It must, I cried, have been some mistake or some 
imposture ; for I assure you, Mrs. Susan, that I know of no such 
person. But, pray, be so good as to bear my compliments to your 
lady, and tell her I wait her permission to attend her. 

I forgot to tell you, madam, that, agreeable to the advice which 
Mr. Golding had given me, I went to felicitate my uncle Goodall 
on his marriage with your mother. He had already been informed 
of my recent admission into partnership, and thereupon received me 
with very unusual marks of esteem and affection. 

Your mother at that time was exceeding lovely in her person and 
manners. At every season of leisure I frequented their house, and 
she conceived a very tender and warm friendship for me ; but during 
Miss Gol ding's illness I had not been to visit them. 

Susan was but just gone when Mr. Golding came and told me that 
he believed his Matty would be pleased to see me. I instantly obeyed 
the summons. As I entered I observed that she sat up in her bed ; 
a morning gown was wrapped about her, and Susan, with the help 
of pillows, supported her behind. On my appearing her spirits 
again took the alarm. She scarce ventured a glance toward me. I 
was greatly pained by the abashment under which I saw she 
laboured, and I hastened to relieve myself as well as her from the 
distress. 

I sat down by the bedside, and gently taking one of her hands, 
without looking in her face My dear Miss Golding, said I, I hope 
you will not be jealous of your papa's affection for me. He has, 

o 



194 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

indeed, been too partial too generous towards me ; and has 
approved himself more than a father to me. He is not satisfied 
with allowing me to call you by the tender name of sister; he 
further gives me leave to hope that I may be united to you by the 
nearest and dearest of all ties. Nothing but your consent is 
wanting, my sister, to make me the happiest of mankind. You are 
silent, my Matilda ; may I venture to call you mine ? Blessed be 
your silence, my angel, I will dare then to interpret it in my own 
favour. Indeed, I should long since have made the present declara- 
tion I should long since have avowed my inclinations, my affec- 
tions, my passion for you ; but I did not presume to listen to my 
own heart on the occasion I did not suffer it to tell me how much 
you were beloved. Amidst so many suitors of the first rank and 
merit, who were justly called together by your numberless attrac- 
tions, I deemed it a flight by much too high for me to aspire at a 
competition for the happiness of your hand. 

Here, venturing to look up, I perceived that she had put her 
handkerchief to her eyes. Ah, Mr. Clinton! she cried with a trem- 
bling voice, you are very delicate, you are sweetly delicate indeed ; 
but ought I to take the advantage of this delicacy ? I see that you 
would save me from the confusion of an avowal you would save 
me from the mortifying sensibility of my own weakness. But, sir, 
you ought not to esteem that a weakness in me which I account 
my chiefest merit, and which is my chiefest pride. I am proud of 
my gratitude, I am proud of my discernment. From the moment 
that you preserved me against arms and against odds, at the great 
peril of your own life, in you and you alone I saw every thing that 
was amiable, every thing that was excellent. But then I dreaded 
lest all women should behold you with my eyes ; and, above all, 
I doubly dreaded and was fearfully assured that you never would 
have any eyes or attention for me. You have at length seen, or 
are rather informed, concerning my malady. You pity me, you 
wish to relieve me, and you would love me if you could. It is 
enough, Mr. Harry ; even this, perhaps, is quite as much of happi- 
ness as I can bear. 

Here, again, I began to profess and to protest the sincerity and 
ardour of my affections ; but she cut me short and said I know 
your sincerity, sir ; you are persuaded that you love me, because as 
yet you know not what love is. True love, Mr. Harry, by its own 
light sees into and throughout the bosom of the party beloved ; I 
am very sensible of the tenderness of your friendship for me, and 
that sensibility constitutes the whole of my happiness. I trust, also, 
that it is all the happiness I shall ever desire. To see you, to hear 
you, to have you with me, to gaze upon you while you are looking 
another way, to be permitted to attend, to serve you, to conduce to 
your satisfactions, it is a lot that will lift me above that of 
mortality, that will cause me to account myself the first among 
women. 

Ah ! I cried, can I say nothing, can I do nothing to convince you 
how dear, how exceedingly dear, you are to me ? I certainly loved 
you long before I knew what it was to be a lover. I now feel the 
united force of those imperceptible degrees by which the pleasing 



TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 195 

intruder daily stole and grew upon me. Believe me, my Matilda, 
when I presumed to present you with this as a token of my affec- 
tion, I held it for a trifle altogether unworthy of you ; accept it, 
however, I beseech you, for the sake of the giver. 

And is this the gem, says she, which I cast from me with such 
disdain ? Forgive me, my brother ; it is just so that the world 
casts from them the pearl of much mightier price. I would to 
heaven that I could reject all the pomps, pleasures, and vanities of 
this transitory world, with the same aversion that I spurned from 
me this estimable jewel ; but there is very little hope of that, Mr. 
Harry, while you yourself may be partly numbered among transitory 
things. 

Here I was quite overcome by the affection of the dear girl, and, 
urged on by a sudden transport, I caught her to my bosom with a 
force that was something too much for her weakness. On recollec- 
tion, I attempted to apologize for my indiscretion, but she sweetly 
cried Ah, Mr. Harry! never repent of such faults; may I often, 
may I daily tempt you to be guilty of them. But tell me, and tell 
me truly, Mr. Clinton ; these gems, when you first purchased them, 
were they actually intended for me ? were they not rather intended 
for your Fanny, for your own Fanny, Mr. Clinton ? What can you 
mean? I exclaimed. I know of no Fanny in the universe with 
whom I have any acquaintance. That is strange ! she replied ; 
very extraordinary, indeed ! But, lest you should think me of a 
jealous or whimsical temper, I will relate the aftair to you precisely 
as it happened. 

On the day in which I took to my bed, I was looking out at the 
parlour window, when a chariot and four horses whirled up to our 
door. I observed a single lady in it, whom I supposed of my 
acquaintance, and instantly sent Susan to request her to walk in. 
On her entering, I was greatly struck by the beauty of her figure, 
and eyed her very inquisitively from head to foot. Having curtsied 
gracefully to me Can you tell me, miss, said she, is Mr. Clinton at 
home ? No, indeed, madam, said I ; but if you will be pleased to 

intrust me with your commands It is only, miss, that I request 

to see him as soon as possible. And pray, madam, where shall he 
attend you? 0, he will know that instantly, when you tell him it 
was Fanny Goodall his own Fanny Gfoodall, who was here to 
wait upon him. Good heaven! I cried out; my aunt, my aunt, 
my aunt Goodall ; my very aunt, I assure you ! What do you say, 
what do you tell me ; your aunt, sir, can it be ? Ah ! she is too 
young and too lovely to be an aunt, Mr. Harry. The very same 
indeed, madam ; there is no other Fanny Goodall. I admit, as you 
say, that she is young and exceedingly lovely ; but still she is a 
wife, and likely soon, as I think, to be a mother. Alas ! says my 
Matilda, what a doleful jest is this ! A cruel aunt she has been to 
me, I am sure ; what days of sighs and nights of tears she has cost 
me ! Ah, that heart-breaking term, " his own, his own Fanny ; " I 
think I shall never be able to forgive her that expression ! 

As Mr. Golding just then entered, we dropped the subject we 
were upon. Why, Matty, says he, you are quite another creature 
I think I never saw yow wear so happy a face. I know you are 

02 



196 TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

come to chide me, says she, for keeping your partner from business ; 
but pay me down the portion you intended for me, papa, and I will 
reimburse you the damage of every hour of his absence. Yes, my 
love, cries the tender father, if wealth might serve for wages to a 
heart like that of my Harry, he shall be very amply paid for every 
act and instance of his affection and attention to you. Every 
hour of my life, I cried, is already her due ; she has nothing to pay 
to one who is her debtor beyond account. 

During several following days, Miss Golding recovered with 
amazing rapidity. In less than five weeks she looked plumper and 
fairer than ever ; peace smiled in her countenance ; joy laughed in 
her eyes ; her whole frame appeared as actuated by some internal 
music. And thus, all lovely and beloved, she was given up to my 
arms in the presence of my uncle and aunt and a few city friends. 

Friend. As I wish that none of your faults should pass by me 
unnoticed, so I am willing to allow you all your just praises. Your 
story of your old friend is, hitherto, very simple, natural, and domes- 
tic ; and to a mind yet undebauched, exceedingly interesting and 
affecting ; for it opens and investigates a number of little passages 
and mazes in the heart, which are quite closed, or imperceptible to 
persons of hard nerves and callous conceptions. I am free, how- 
ever, to tell you that I felt myself offended by the compliments 
which Mr. Clinton pays to himself through the mouth of your 
Matilda. It is, indeed, a very rare matter for people to speak of 
themselves with due decency and delicacy. I wish you could have 
procured some other conduit for conveying to us the history of 
your knight. Csesar, I think, is the only person who, with an easy 
though modest confidence, has successfully adventured on a detail 
of his own exploits. 

Author. I have not a word to say in Mr. Clinton's defence; 
perhaps ho may offer something for himself on the occasion. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

HEBE the countess, for the first time, broke in upon her cousin's 
narration. Happy Matilda, she cried, how distinguished was thy 
destiny ! were it but for a year, were it but for a day ; for that 
day thou didst yet enjoy the consummation of all thy wishes, a 
lot rarely allowed to any daughter of Adam ! I was not then born 
to envy her state. Sweet girl ! she deserved you ; she was after 
my own heart ; the excess of her passion for you made her truly 
worthy of you. But tell me, my cousin, how could you be so long 
ignorant of the dear girl's affection for you ? The language of love 
is so very intelligible, so expressive through every motion and 
every organ, as must with sufficient clearness have opened your 
eyes to the object. Indeed, madam, replied Mr. Clinton, she her- 
self led me away from any such apprehensions, by drawing so 
many pictures of the man whom she said she loved, all copied from 
the creature of her own brain, and covered and disguised with such 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 197 

imaginary excellences, as must have prevented myself, as well as 
every one living, from perceiving therein the smallest trace of my 
own resemblance. Do not tell me, cried Lady Maitland ; she was 
a true and a sweet painter, and I should have known you by her 
portrait in the midst of a million. But proceed, I beseech you, 
my whole soul is in your story. 

Within a few months after my marriage, continued Mr. Clinton, 
you, my cousin, first opened your fair eyes to the light, and my 
Matty and I had the honour of being your sponsors. 

Within the first year of my marriage, my girl also brought a son 
into the world, and within two years following was delivered 
of a daughter. 

The joy of the grandfather, on those events, was indescribable. 
Alas, good man! he thought that he perceived in their infant 
aspects a thousand happy promises and opening prospects. He 
saw himself, as it were, perpetuated in a descending and widening 
progeny, who, like their native Thames, should roll down in a tide 
of expanding wealth and prosperity. He wanted that all the 
world should participate of his happiness, and our house once more 
became the house of festivity. 

A number of external successes also assisted to persuade us in 
those days that felicity was to be attained and ascertained upon 
earth. The regency of Cromwell was administered with the 
strictest justice at home, while at the same time it became re- 
vered and formidable abroad, and extended its influence to regions 
the most remote. Under the protection of the British flag we 
sent our ships out to the east and to the west, and wealth came 
pouring in upon us from all quarters of the globe. 

In the mean while, my wife and I lived together in perfect 
harmony. Though my commerce and acquaintance was greatly 
extended, I had yet formed no friendships from home that par- 
took of heartfelt tenderness, except for your mamma. All my 
pleasures and desires all my world was, in a manner, confined 
and absorbed within the compass of my own walls. In the good 
old man and his daughter, and in the pledges of their endearing 
attachment to me, every wish that my soul could form was 
centred. Mutual joy sat round our board mutual peace pre- 
pared our pillows; and, during a swimming period of six years, 
I scarce remember to have experienced the smallest discontent, 
save what arose from the inordinancy of my wife's affection for me. 

While she continued to bless my arms, I thought that no one 
had ever loved with greater warmth than I loved her ; and yet, 
at times, I remarked a very striking difference between the manner 
and effects of our feelings for each other. If business detained 
me an hour extraordinary abroad, the panting of her bosom, that 
eagerness of look with which she received me, was to me a painful 
evidence of her anxiety during my absence. One evening I found 
her in fainting fits, merely because she was told that a duel had 
just happened between Lord Mohun and a person who had much 
the resemblance of her Clinton. In short, if my head or my finger 
ached I found myself under the necessity of concealing my ailment, 
and of assuming a cheerfulness disagreeable to the occasion, to 



198 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

prevent the worse consequences of her ready alarms. On the 
other hand, my affection was tranquil and serene ; it was tender 
and fervent, indeed, but without tumult or disturbance a species 
of love which I afterwards found to be by far the most eligible ; 
for every kind of passion is unquestionably a kind of suffering; 
love in God, therefore, must be wholly an action it acts infinitely 
upon others without any possibility of being acted upon. 

Thus the years of my life moved onward upon down, when the 
small-pox, that capital enemy to youth and beauty, became epi- 
demical in the city. Our children caught the contagion. All 
possible care was taken, and all possible art employed. A number 
of physicians was kept constantly about them. Fifteen days of 
their illness were already elapsed, and the doctors pronounced 
them out of danger, when the distemper took a sudden and ma- 
lignant turn, and in one and the same minute both my babes ex- 
pired in the arms of their mother. 

I was in the room at the time, and as I knew the extreme 
tenderness of my Matty's nature, all my concern as well as 
attention was turned upon her. I took her fondly by the hand, 
and, looking up to her face, I was instantly alarmed and shocked 
by that placid serenity which appeared in her countenance, and 
which I expected to be quickly changed into some frantic eruption. 
But first dropping a smiling tear on her infants, and then lifting 
her glistening eyes to heaven I thank thee I thank thee, my 
Master ! she cried ; thou hast made me of some use ; I have not 
been born in vain; thou hast ordained me the humble vehicle 
of two safe and certain angels living attendants on thy throne 
and sweet singers of thy praises in the kingdom of little children 
for ever and for ever. I have yet sufficient left more blessings re- 
maining than suit the lot of mortality take me from them, I 
beseech thee, whenever it is thy good pleasure ; for I fear there 
are some of them which I could not bear to have taken away from 
me ! So prayed the dear saint, and looking eagerly at me No, my 
Harry, she cried out, I fear, I fear I could not bear it ! So saying, 
she suddenly cast herself into my bosom, and grasping at my neck, 
and gushing into a flood of anguish, we mingled our sobs and our 
tears together till no more were left to be shed. 

You are affected, my dearest cousin: I had better stop here. 
If you are moved by small matters, how would your heart be 
wrung by some ensuing distresses ? I must not venture to proceed. 

Go on, cried the countess ; go on I insist upon it ! I love to 
weep I joy to grieve it is my happiness, my delight, to have per- 
fect sympathy in your sorrows. 

We were both of us much relieved by the vent of our mutual 
passion ; for though my wife still continued to keep to me, and 
cling about me, she yet seemed to be sweetly composed, and sunk 
within my arms as into a bed and depth of peace. 

At length I listened to a kind of murmur and bustle in the hall, 
and I heard some one distinctly cry O my master, my master ! 

We started up at the instant. Mr. Goldins: had been from home 
at the time of the deadly crisis of my two darling little ones ; and 
had quieted all his fears, and renewed all his prospects, in the view 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 199 

and full assurance of their life and quick recovery. We had been 
too much engaged and occupied in our own personal griefs, to give 
to our servants the seasonable precaution of breaking the matter to 
our father by unal arming degrees ; and a rude fellow, at his en- 
trance, bluntly told him that the children were both dead ; where- 
upon he clapped his hands together, and, casting himself into a 
chair, remained without sense or motion. 

When we ran out, we were greatly terrified by the manner of 
his aspect : though his eyes were closed, his brows were gloomy 
and contracted, while the nether part of his face looked quiet and 
composed. 

I instantly sent for a surgeon, and recalled the physicians who 
had but lately left us ; while my Matty stood motionless, with her 
hands closed together, and her eyes fixed upon her father. At 
length she cried out My papa, my papa, my dear papa ! I would, 
I would I had died before I came to this hour ! But blessed be thy 
will, since it is thy will, God ! When all other props are sapped 
and plucked from under me, I trust to fall into thee, my Father 
which art in heaven ! 

Being put to bed and bled, he recovered motion and speech,, and 
we got him to swallow a composing draught, though he did not 
yet recollect any person or thing about him. 

Notwithstanding our late fatigues, Matty and I sat up with him 
most of the night ; and then ordering a pallet to be brought 
into the room, we lay down to take a little rest toward morning. 
Alas, said I to myself, how rich was I yesterday, and how is my 
world abridged ! These narrow walls now contain all that is left 
me of all the possessions that I value upon earth. 

Poor Mr. Golding was but ill qualified to bear calamity. His 
life had been a life of sound health and successes ; and he never 
had been acquainted with sickness or with affliction, save on the 
death of his wife, whom he had married for money, and on the ill- 
ness of his daughter, as already related. 

As he had taken an opiate, he did not awaken till it was late in 
the day. Turning his head towards me Is it you, Harry? says 
he. How do you find yourself, sir? said I. Why, has anything 
been the matter with me ? Indeed, I do not feel myself right ; 
but send my children to me : send my Jacky and my little Harriet ; 
the sight of them will be a restorative beyond all the cordials in the 
world. You are silent, Harry ; what is the meaning ? Oh, now I 
begin to remember my sweet babies, my little playfellows, I shall 
never see you any more ! 

Here he burst into the most violent gust of passion. He groaned, 
he wept, he cried aloud with heart-piercing exclamations ; while I 
caught up Matty in my arms, and running with her to a distant 
apartment, catched a kiss, and locked her in. 

I returned, but found him in the same violence of agitation. I 
spoke to him, I would have comforted him; but he cried Be 
quiet, Harry, I will not be comforted. I will go to my children ; 
they shall not be torn from me ; we will die, we will be buried, we 
will lie in the same grave together ! 

As I found myself sick, and ready to faint under the oppression 



200 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

of his lamentations, I withdrew to the next chamber, and there 
plentifully vented my woe in weeping. 

After some time I listened, and perceived that all was quiet, and 
returning, I found him in a kind of troubled doze, from whence he 
fell into a deep and peaceful sleep. Thus he continued for three 
days, wailing and slumbering by fits, without tasting any matter of 
nourishment, though his daughter and I implored him on our knees, 
and with tears. No reasonings^ no entreaties, could avail for appeas- 
ing hhn ; it was from the association of our sorrows alone that he 
appeared to admit of any consolation. 

At length his passion subsided into a sullen and silent calm ; he 
would speak to nobody, he would answer none of us except by 
monosyllables. 

Within a few following weeks, news was brought me that our 
ship the Phoenix was arrived in the Downs, safe and richly laden 
from the East Indies. 

Immediately I carried the tidings to the old man, in the pleasing 
expectation that they would serve to divert, or at least to amuse, 
his melancholy. But, fixing his look upon me Wherefore, Harry, 
dost thou tell me of ships and Indies ? he cried. Both Indies are 
poor to me ; they have nothing that they can send me. I have no 
road to go upon earth; no way upon sea to navigate. I am 
already become a wild and wasted Babylon, \dierein the voice 
of music shall never more be heard. O ye old and unblessed 
knees! where are now your precious babes who were wont to 
play about ye, and to cling and climb upon ye? Gone, gone! 
gone, gone never, never to return ! 

Here, breaking into tears, I cried We are both young yet, my 
father ; we may yet have many children to be the comfort of 
your age. No, my Harry no, he replied; you may indeed have 
many children, but you will never have any children like my 
darling children. 

Mr. Golding from this time no more entered his counting-house, 
nor paid nor received visits, nor kept up any correspondence. 
Even my company, and that of his daughter, appeared to oppress 
him ; and he rarely left his apartment, where an old folio Bible 
was his only companion. 

Hereupon I began to withdraw our effects from trade, and, 
having called in the best part of them, I lodged near half a million 
in the Dutch funds. When I went to advise with my father on 
the occasion What, my child, said he what have I to say to the 
world, or to the things of the world ? Do just as you please with 
the one and with the other ; and never consult a person on any 
affair wherein the party consulted has no interest or concern. 

One morning, as I lay in bed, Matty threw her arms about me, 
and hiding her blushing face in my bosom My Harry, says she, if 
you could handsomely bring it about to my poor papa, perhaps it 
would be some matter of consolation to him to know that I am 
with child. 

When I broke the matter to him, he did not at first appear to be 
sensibly affected ; in time, however, the weight of his affliction 
seemed considerably lightened, and, as my wife advanced in her 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 201 

pregnancy, he began to look us in the face, he sat with us at one 
table, and became conversable as formerly. 

One day I went to dine with Mr. Settle, a hardware merchant, 
who had appointed to pay me a large sum of money. On my 
return in the evening through Moorfields, attended only by my 
favourite Irishman, a very faithful and active fellow, though it was 
yet fair day, I was suddenly set upon by a posse of robbers, who 
rushed on me from behind a cover. The first of them, running up, 
fired directly in my face, but did me no further damage than by 
carrying away a small piece of the upper part of my left ear. Had 
the fools demanded my money, I would have given it to them at a 
word; but, finding them bent on murder, I resolved that they 
should have my life at as dear a rate as possible. I instantly drew 
my sword, and run the first through the body ; and then, rushing 
on the second assailant, I laid him also on the ground before he 
had time to take his aim, so that his pistol went harmlessly off 
in his fall. 

In the mean while my brave and loving companion was not idle ; 
with two strokes of his oaken cudgel he had levelled two more of 
them with the earth. Hereupon the remainder halted, retreated 
into a group, and then stood and fired upon us altogether ; but, ob- 
serving that we did not drop, they cast their arms to the ground, 
and run ofl several ways as fast as they could. My good friend, 
Tirlah O'Donnoh, then turned affectionately to me Are you hurt, 
my dear master? says he. I believe I am, Tirlah; let us make 
home the best we can. O, cried the noble creature, if nobody was 
hurt but Tirlah, Tirlah wouldn't be hurt at all ! 

Here, taking me under the arm, we walked slowly to the city, 
till, coming to a hackney-coach, he put me tenderly into it ; and, 
sitting beside me, supported me, as I began to grow weak through 
much effusion of blood. 

As soon as we got home, the coachman, as is their practice, 
thundered at the door ; and my Matty, according to custom 
whenever I was abroad, was the readiest of all our domestics to 
open. 

By this time I had fainted, and was quite insensible ; but when 
my tender and true mate saw me borne by two men into her pre- 
sence, all pale and bloody, she, who thought she had fortitude to 
support the wreck of the world, gave a shriek that w r as enough to 
alarm the neighbourhood, and, instantly falling backward, got a 
violent contusion in the hinder part of her head. 

Immediately we were conveyed to separate beds, and all requisite 
help was provided. It was found that I had received six or seven 
flesh wounds, but none of them proved dangerous, as they were 
given at a distance, and by pistol shot. But, alas ! my Matty's case 
was very different; she fell into sudden and premature labour, 
and having suffered extreme anguish all the night, during which 
she ceased not to inquire after me, she was with difficulty delivered 
of a male infant, who was suffocated in the birth. 

In the mean while, the good and tender-hearted old gentleman 
hurried about incessantly from one of us to the other, wringing his 
hands, and scarcely retaining his senses. 



202 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

As soon as my wounds were dressed, and I had recovered my 
memory, I looked about and hastily inquired for my wife ; but they 
cautiously answered me that she was something indisposed with the 
fright which she got at seeing me bloody, and that her father had 
insisted on her going to bed. 

On the second dressing of my wounds I was pronounced out of 
danger, and then they ventured to tell me of my Matty's miscar- 
riage, and of the bruise which she had got in her fall when she 
fainted. On hearing this my heart was cleft, as it were, in twain. 
I accused myself of the murder of my wife and infant; and I 
accused all, without exception, of their indiscretion in not con- 
cealing my disaster from her. 

At times I began to fear that my wife was either dead, or much 
worse than they represented. On my third dressing, therefore, I 
peremptorily insisted on my being carried into her chamber. I 
sent her notice of my visit, and on entering the room He lives, 
then, she cried ; my husband, my Harry lives ! It is enough ; I 
shall die happy, I shall now depart in peace. 

Here I ordered myself to be laid by her side, when taking a 
hand which she had feebly reached out, and pressing it to my lips 
You would forsake me then, my Matty ? You die, you say ; and 
you die happy, in leaving me the most wretched, the most desolate 
of men. You die, my love you die ; and I, who would have 
fostered you and your babe with my vitals, it is I who has dug 
a grave for the one and for the other. But you must not forsake 
me, my Matty. I will not be forsaken by you ; since we cannot 
live asunder, let us die let us die together ! 

Here a passionate silence ensued on either part ; but my wounds 
growing painful, and beginning to bleed afresh, I was obliged to be 
carried back to my own apartment. 

Within a few days more I was so well recovered as to be able to 
walk about ; from which time I was a constant attendant on my 
beloved, and became her most tender and assiduous nursekeeper. 

You must have heard, my cousin, that the customs and manners 
of those times were altogether the reverse of what they are at 
present. Hypocrisy is no longer a fault among men; all now is 
avowed libertinism and open profaneness; and children scoff at 
the name and profession of that religion which their fathers 
revered. On the contrary, in those days all men were either real 
or pretended zealots ; every mechanic professed, like Aaron, to 
carry a Urim and Thummim about him ; and no man would 
engage in any business or bargain, though with an intent to over- 
reach his neighbour, without going apart, as he said, to consult the 
Lord. 

My Matty, at the same time, was the humblest of all saints, with- 
out any parade of sanctification. Hers was a religion, of whose 
value she had the daily and hourly experience ; it was indeed a 
religion of power. It held her, as on a rock, in the midst of a 
turbulent and fluctuating world : it gave her a peace of spirit that 
smiled at provocation ; it gave her comfort in affliction, patience in 
anguish, exaltation in humiliation, and triumph in death. 

In about five weeks after her unhappy miscarriage, she appeared 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 203 

on the recovery, though by very slow degrees, and, with assist- 
ance, at times sat up in her bed ; when her oldest physician one 
morning called me apart I am loth, sir, said he, very loth to 
acquaint you with my apprehensions. I wish I may be mistaken ; 
but I fear greatly for you I fear that your dear lady cannot re- 
cover. By the symptoms, I conjecture that an abscess, or im- 
posthume, is forming within her ; but a few days will ascertain 
matters either for us or against us. 

Had all sorts of evil tidings come crowding one upon another, I 
should not have been affected as I then was affected. I could not 
rise from my seat to bid the doctor adieu. My knees trembled 
under me ; a swimming came before my eyes ; and a sudden sick- 
ness relaxed and reversed my whole frame. Alas ! I had not at 
that time the resource of my Matty ; I had not on the armour with 
which she was armed to all issues and events. I however raised 
my thoughts to heaven, in a kind of helpless acquiescence rather 
than confident resignation. I struggled not to appear weaker than 
became my manhood ; and I said to myself, doctors have often 
been mistaken. 

Having recollected my strength and spirits the best I could, I 
adventured to enter my wife's apartment. She was just raised in 
her bed, from whence her pale and emaciated countenance looked 
forth, as the sun, toward his setting, looks through a sickly atmo- 
sphere, in confidence of his arising in the fulness of morning glory. 

Having cautiously and dejectedly seated myself beside her, she 
reached out both her hands, and, pressing one of mine between 
them I love you no longer, my Harry, she cried ; I love you no 
longer. Your rival at length has conquered ; I am the bride of 
another. And yet I love you in a measure, since in you I love 
all that is him, or that is his : and that I think is much, a great 
deal, indeed, of all that is lovely. O, my dear, my sweet, mine 
only enemy, as I may say ! riches were nothing unto me, pleasures 
were nothing unto me, the world was nothing unto me ! You, and 
you only, Harry stood between me and my heaven, between me 
and my God. Long, and often, and vainly, have I strove and 
struggled against you; but my bridegroom at length is become 
jealous of you ; my true owner calls me from you, and takes me 
all to himself ! Be not alarmed then, my Harry, when I tell you that 
I must leave you. You will grieve for me you will grieve greatly 
for me, my beloved ; but give way to the kindly shower that your 
Lord shed for his Lazarus, and let the tears of humanity alleviate 
and lighten the weight of your affliction. Ah, my Harry ! I tremble 
for you ; what a course you have to run ! what perils ! what 
temptations! Deliver him from them, my Master, deliver him 
from them all! Again, what blissful prospects they are gone, 
they are vanished ! I sink, I die under the weight and length of 
succeeding misery ! Again it opens ; all is cleared ; and his end, 
like that of Job, is more blessed than his beginning. Ah, my 
Harry, my Harry ! your heart must be wrung by many engines ; 
it shall be tried in many fires ; but I trust it is a golden heart, and 
will come forth with all its weight. 
You have been dreaming, my love, I said you have been 



204 TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

dreaming; and the impression still lies heavy and melancholy on 
your memory. 

Yes, she replied, I have been dreaming, indeed ; but then my 
dreams are much more real than my waking visions. When all 
things sensible are shut out, it is then that the spirit enlarges, 
grows conscious of its own activity, its own power and prescience, 
and sees by a light whose evidence is beyond that of the sun. 

O, my angel! I cried, should anything happen to you But, I 
dare not look that way ; for I know, I find, I feel that I could not 
survive you! 

You must survive me, my Harry ! nay, you will once more be 
married. I beheld your bride last night. Even now she stands 
before me, the sister of my spirit, and one of the loveliest composi- 
tions of sin and death that ever was framed for dissolution. Her 
also you will lose ; and you will think, nay, you will assure your- 
self, that no powers in heaven or earth can avail for a ray of 
comfort. In this life, however, you will finally, unexpectedly, and 
most wonderfully be blessed ; and soon after we shall all meet, and 
be more intimately and more endearingly wedded than ever, where 
yet there is neither marrying nor giving in marriage. 

"While yet she spoke, her pains, as the pains of labour, again came 
upon her, and went off, and again returned, after intermitting 
swoonings. 

0, my cousin ! what a solemn, what a fearful thing is death ! All 
our inlets of knowledge and sensation closed at once ! the sound of 
cheer, and the voice of friendship, and the comfort of light, shut 
out from us for ever ! Nothing before us but a blackness and depth 
of oblivion ; or, beyond it, a doubtful and alarming sensibility ! 
strange scenes and strange worlds, strange associates and strange 
perceptions, perhaps of horrid realities, infinitely worse than non- 
entity ! Such are the brightest prospects of infidelity in death ! 

Where, at that time, are your scoffers, your defiers of futurity? 
where your merry companions, who turn their own eternity into 
matter of laugh and ridicule ? Dejected and aghast, their counten- 
ance wholly fallen, and their heart sunk within them, they all 
tremble and wish to believe, in this the hour of dissolution. They 
feel their existence sapped and sinking from under them; and 
nature compels them, in the drowning of their souls, to cry out to 
some thing, to any thing, Save, save, or I perish ! 

Far different was the state of my little and lowly Matty, my saint 
of saints, at that tremendous period ! Where all others would have 
sunk, there she soared aloft ; and she dropped the world and its 
wealth, with her body and all the sensible affections thereof, with 
the same satisfaction that a poor man, just come to a great estate, 
would drop his tattered garb to put on gorgeous apparel. 

O, my beloved ! she would cry in the midst of her pains, I have 
been weakly through life, I have been weakness itself, and therefore 
not able to take up thy cross ; but be thou strong in my weakness, 
shew thy mightiness in me, and then lay it upon me with all its 
weight. 

Again, after a swoon, and when her pangs became excessive I 
refuse not thy process, my Master ! she cried. Thy cross and thorny 



TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 205 

crown, they are all my ambition! Point thy thorns, twist them 
harder, let them pierce into my soul ; so thou suffer me not to fail or 
fall from thee, I care not ! 

Think, my cousin, what I endured upon that occasion; my 
rending heart shared her sufferings, and felt pang for pang. Nay, 
I was not far from murmuring and questioning with my God, on 
his putting to such tortures the most guiltless of his creatures. If 
the lambs of thy flock, I secretly said if thy lambs are appointed 
to such excruciating sensations, what must be the portion of such 
sinners as I am ! 

When she drew near the goal of her blessed course upon earth 
O my almighty Samson ! she faintly cried, thou shakest the two 
pillars of my frail and sinful fabric ; finish then thy conquest in me ; 
down, down with the whole building appointed to ruin ! Let no 
one, O Lord ! of mine enemies or of thine enemies, escape thy 
victorious arm ; but slay all those by my death with whom I have 
been vainly combating during my lifetime. So saying, her pains in 
an instant forsook her. The form of her countenance was suddenly 
changed from the expression of agony into that of ecstasy. She 
raised her hands on high, and exerting herself to follow them, she 
cried I come, I come ! then sighed and dropped over. The 
muscles of her face still retained the stamp of the last sentiment of 
her soul ; and, while the body hastened to be mingled with earth, 
it seemed to partake of that heaven to which its spirit had been 
exalted. 

You may think it odd, dearest madam, that for some time past I 
have taken no note of the man to whom I was tied by every 
possible band of duty, gratitude, and affection. The fact is, that, 
during the latter part of my wife's illness, and for some weeks after 
her death, Mr. Golding was confined to his chamber by a severe 
fit of the gout; and the acuteness of his pains scarce permitted 
him to attend to any other concern. While my Matty lived, there- 
fore, I divided my time and assiduities as equally as I could between 
the daughter and father ; and at any intervals of ease I used to 
read to him favourite passages in the Bible. 

As soon as my saint had expired, I charged the servants not to 
give any intimation of her death to their master. But, alas ! our 
silence and our looks were too sure indicators of the fatal tidings ; 
for, from the highest to the least, my Matty had been the idol of 
the whole house, and her death appeared to them as the loss of 
every earthly possession. 

Having looked several times intently and inquisitively in my face 
Well, Harry, says Mr. Golding, all is over then, I see ; we must 
go to her, but my child shall no more return to us. You are silent, 
my Harry. O thou fell glutton, Death ! I had but one morsel left 
for the whole of my sustenance, and that, too, thou hast devoured. 
Here he gave a deep groan, and sunk into a state of insensibility, 
from which, however, he was soon recovered by the return of an 
anguishing fit of the gout. 

When I look back, my fair cousin, on the passages of my life, it 
is a matter of amazement to me, that a creature so frail, so feebly 
and so delicately constituted as man, with nerves so apt to be racked, 



206 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

and a heart to be wrung with anguish, can possibly endure under 
the weights of calamity that at times are laid upon him. 

I had not yet dropped a tear. I was in a state of half stupid and 
half flighty insensibility ; as one who, having lost every thing, had 
nothing further to look for, and therefore nothing to regard. 
But when I saw my dear old man, my best friend, my father, 
whelmed under such a depth of affliction, all the sluices of my soul 
and inmost affections were laid open, and I broke into an avowed 
passion of tears and exclamations, till, like David in his strife of 
love with Jonathan, I exceeded. I accused myself of all the evils 
that had happened to his house ; and I devoted the day to dark- 
ness, and the night to desolation, wherein, by my presence and 
connections, I had brought those mischiefs upon him. The good 
man was greatly struck, and I think partly consoled, by the excess 
of my sorrows ; and, all desolate as he was, he attempted to ad- 
minister that comfort to me, which he himself wanted more than 
any who had life. 

Break not your heart, my Harry break not your heart, my child! 
he cried. Deprive me not of the only consolation that is left me ; 
you are now my only trust, my only stay upon earth. A wretched 
merchant I am, whose whole wealth is cast away, save thee, thou 
precious casket, thou only remnant of all my possessions ! My girl, 
indeed, was thy true lover, the tenderest of all mates ; her love to 
thee, my son, was passing the love of woman ; but we have lost her, 
we have lost her, and wailing is all the portion that is left us below. 

As soon as the family heard the voice of our mourning, they too 
gave a loose to the impatience of their griefs, and all the house was 
filled with the sound of lamentation. 

On the following day I summoned the chief medical artists, and 
got the precious remains of my angel embalmed. She was laid 
under a sumptuous canopy with a silver coffin at her bed's foot, and 
every night when the house was at rest I stole secretly from my bed 
and stretched myself beside her. I pressed her cold lips to mine ; 
I clasped her corpse to my warm bosom, as though I expected to 
restore it to life by transfusing my soul into it. I spoke to her as 
when living : I reminded her of the several tender and endearing 
passages of our loves ; and I reminded her also of the loss of our 
little ones, by whom we became essentially one, inseparably united 
in soul and body for ever. 

There is surely, my cousin, a species of pleasure in grief, a kind of 
soothing and deep delight, that arises with the tears which are 
pushed from the fountain of God in the soul, from the charities and 
sensibilities of the human heart divine. 

True, true, my precious cousin, replied the countess, giving a 
fresh loose to her tears. O Matilda ! I would I were with thee ! 
True, my cousin, I say ; even now I sink under the weight of the 
sentiment of your story. 

Upon the ninth night, continued Mr. Clinton, as I lay by the side 
of all that remained of my Matty, overtoiled and overwatched, I 
fell into a deep sleep. My mind notwithstanding, at the time, 
seemed more awake and more alive to objects than ever. In an 
instant she stood visible and confessed before me. I saw her 






THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 207 

clearer than at noonday, by the light which she cast with profusion 
abroad. Every feature and former trace seemed heightened into a 
lustre, without a loss of the least similitude. She smiled ineffable 
sweetness and blessedness upon me ; and, stooping down, I felt her 
embrace about my heart and about my spirit ; while, at the same 
time, I saw her bent in complacence before me. After a length of 
ecstatic pleasure, which I felt from her communion and infusion into 
my soul My Harry, says she, grieve not for me ! All the delights 
that your world could sum up in an age, would not amount to my 
bliss, no, not for an hour : it is a weight of enjoyment that, in an 
instant, would crush to nothing the whole frame of your mortality. 
Grieve not then for me, my Harry, but resign my beggarly spoils to 
their beggarly parent ; ashes to ashes, and dust to dust ! In my 
inordinate fondness for you, I have at length obtained a promise 
that my master and your master, my beloved and your lover, shall 
finally bear you triumphant through all the enemies that are set in 
fearful array against you. Having so said, I felt myself, as it were, 
compressed within an engine of love ; and again losing the remem- 
brance of all that had passed, I sunk as into a state of oblivion. 
Toward the dawning, I was awakened by the clapping of hands and 
cries of lamentation. Starting up, I perceived Mr. Golding at the 
bedside, suspended over his Matty and me, and pouring forth his 
complaints. 

There was a favoured domestic of his, a little old man, who had 
always kept a careful and inquisitive eye over every thing that was 
in or concerned our household. This Argus, it seems, at length 
suspected my nightly visits to the dead, and, lurking in a corner, 
saw me open and enter the chamber where the corpse was de- 
posited. As he lay in his master's apartment, he took the first 
opportunity of his being awake to impart what he thought a matter 
of extraordinary intelligence to him. Sir, says he, if I am not 
greatly deceived, my young master is this moment in bed with his 
dead lady. What is this you tell me? cried Mr. Golding. No, 
John, no! what you say is impossible. All who live, love that 
which is living alone ; whatever savours of death is detestable to 
all men. As I am here, replied John, I am almost assured that 
what I tell you is fact. Peace, peace, you old fool! said Mr. 
Golding; think you that our Harry is more loving than father 
Abraham, and yet Abraham desired to bury his dead out of his 
sight. I know not how that may be, said trusty John ; but, if you 
are able to stir, I will help you to go and see. I am sure the 
thought of it melts the very heart within me. 

Accordingly Mr. Golding, like old Jacob, strengthened himself, 
and arose, and, pained as he was, he came with the help of his John 
to the place where I lay. 

Having for some time looked upon me, as I slept with his Matty 
fast folded in my arms, he could no longer contain his emotions, 
but he and John broke forth into tears and exclamations. O my 
children, my children, my dearest children ! he cried ; why did ye 
exalt me to such a pitch of blessedness ? Was it only to cast me 
down into the deeper gulf of misery a gulf that has neither bank 
nor bottom? 



208 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

As I arose, all ashamed to be detected in that manner, the good 
man caught me in his arms. My Harry, my Harry, says he, what 
shall I pay you, my son, for your superabundant love to me and 
to mine ? Could my wretchedness give you bliss, I should almost 
think myself blessed in being wretched, my Harry. 

I now prepared to execute the late comman<l of my angel, and 
to consign to earth the little that was earthly in her. But when 
our domestics understood that all that was left of their loved mis- 
tress was now going to be taken away from them for ever, they 
broke into tears anew, and set no bounds to their lamentations. 

Her desolate father was desirous of attending the funeral, but on 
my knees I dissuaded him from it, as I was assured it would burst 
in twain the already overstretched thread of his age and infirmities. 
He then insisted on having the lid of the coffin removed, and, 
bending over, he cast his old body on the corpse ; again he rose and 
gazed upon it, and clapping his hands, with a shout Is this my 
world? he cried; the whole of my possessions? Are you the one 
that was once my little prattling Matty the playfellow of my 
knees the laugher away of care who brought cheer to my heart 
and warmth to my bosom? Are you the one for whom alone I 
spent my nights in thought and my days in application ? Is this 
all that is left, then, of my length of labours ? O, my spark of life 
is quenched in thee, my Matty, my Matty ! the flowing fountain 
of my existence is dried up for ever ! 

There is something exceedingly solemn and affecting, my cousin, 
in the circumstances and apparatus of our funerals; they are op- 
pressive even to minds that are no way concerned or interested in 
the death of the party lamented. Though I grieved no more for 
my Matty though I was as assured of her bliss as I was of my own 
being ; yet, when the gloom of the procession was gathered around 
me when I heard the wailing of the many families whom her 
charity had sustained when I heard the bitter sobbings of the 
servants, whom her sweetness had so endearingly attached to her 
person when all joined to bewail themselves as lost in her loss, 
my heart died, as it were, within me, and I should have been 
suffocated on the spot had I not given -instant way to the swell of 
my sorrows. 

The tempest of the soul, madam, like that of the elements, can 
endure but for a season. The passion of Mr. Golding, on the in- 
terment of every joy and of every hope that he could look for upon 
earth, within a few weeks subsided, or rather sunk into a solid but 
sullen peace ; a kind of peace that seemed to say There is nothing 
in this universe that can disturb me. 

Harry, said he one evening, I have been thinking of the vision 
that I have had. Vision, sir, said I ; has my Matty then appeared 
to you ? Yes, he answered, she was the principal part of my vision 
for these twenty years past. The vision that I mean, my Harry, is 
the dream of a very long and laborious life. Here have I, by the 
toil of fifty years' application, scraped together and accumulated as 
much as in these times would set kings at contention, and be 
accounted a worthy cause for spilling the blood of thousands ; and 
yet what are these things to me, or of what value in themselves, 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 209 

more than the stones and rubbish that make our pavement before 
the door ? I have been hungering and thirsting after the goods of 
this world ; I have acquired all that it could give me ; and now my 
soul, like a sick stomach, disgorges the whole. I then took one of 
his hands, and pressing it tenderly between mine O my father ! 
I cried ; my dear, dear father ! O that 1 might be made sons and 
daughters, and every sort of kindred to you ! All that I am and 
have should gladly be spent in bringing any kind of comfort to you, 
my father. 

In about a fortnight after, as I entered his apartment to bid him 
good-morrow, I observed that his countenance had much altered 
from what it was the evening before that he looked deeply de- 
jected and seemed to breathe with difficulty. 

Are not you well, sir? No, says he, my spirits are greatly 
oppressed. I find that I must leave you shortly ; I believe that I 
must go suddenly ; but where to ? That is the question the very 
terrible question the only question of any importance in heaven 
or on earth. Sure, sir, said I, that can be no question to you, whose 
whole life has been a continual course of righteousness, of daily 
worship to God, and good-will to all men. If you have any sins to 
account for, they must be covered tenfold by the multitude of your 
charities. 

Talk not, Harry, said he, of the filthy rags of my own righteous- 
ness. I am far from the confidence of the boastful Pharisee ; alas ! 
I have not even that of the poor and humble publican, for I dare 
not look up to say, " Lord, be merciful to me, a sinner ! " wherefore, 
then, do you speak of having finished my course toward God and 
toward man ? It is but lately, very lately, that I set out upon it, 
and I am cut short before I have got within sight of the goal. 
Yes, Harry, I fear, I know, I feel, that there is no salvation for me. 

You amaze me, sir, said I : you terrify me to death ! If there is 
not salvation for such as you, what a depth of perdition opens for 
the rest of mankind ! 

I would you could convince me, he cried. I want to be com- 
forted ; I desire comfort, any kind of consolation : but I feel my 
condemnation within myself. Moreover, I see every text of the 
gospel of the words of life terribly marshalled and set in broad 
array against me. What text, sir ? said I ; I am sure I know of no 
texts that bring terror or condemnation to the just. Ah, Harry ! 
he replied, justice is of the law and the circumcision, and has 
nothing to do with the new covenant or the new man. For what 
says the great apostle? "Circumcision availeth nothing, neither 
uncircumcision, but a new creature." And Christ himself hath 
said, " Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of 
God." Again the same apostle saith, "I delight in the law of God 
after the inward man ;" and again, " My little children, of whom I 
travail in birth again until Christ be formed in you." Now if all 
these corresponding expressions of being " born again, a new 
creature, a new man, an inward man, Christ formed in us," &c., 
are to be glossed and explained away, as meaning little more than 
a state of moral sentiments and moral behaviour, there can be 
nothing of real import in the gospel of Christ. 

p 



210 TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

Again, hear what the Kedeemer gaith, " Except ye be converted 
and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom 
of heaven." Again, " If any man will come after me, let him deny 
himself and take up his cross and follow me." Again, " Whosoever 
he be of you that forsaketh not all that he hath, he cannot be my 
disciple." 

If these things, I cried, are to be taken according to the apparent 
sense and import of the letter, neither the teachers of the gospel, 
nor those who are taught, can be saved. 

Therefore, replied he, it is said, that " Many be called, but few 
chosen." And again, " Enter ye in at the strait gate ; for wide is 
the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and 
many there be which go in thereat ; because strait is the gate, and 
narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that 
find it." O my Harry, my Harry ! our lives have been employed 
in seeking and "loving the world, and the things of the world," 
therefore " the love of the Father could not be in us." that I 
had never been born ! O thou God ! whose tribunal at this hour is 
set up so tremendously against me, at length I feel the propriety 
of thy precepts, in rejecting the world and all that is therein ; for 
what can they yield save a little food and raiment to bodily cor- 
ruption, or incitements to that pride which cast Lucifer into a gulf, 
that now opens before me without a bottom ? 

As I trembled and had nothing to answer, I proposed to bring 
some of our clergy to him. No, Harry ! no, says he, I will have 
none of their worldly comforts; I will not cast my soul upon 
bladdered expectations. Can they persuade me that I am one of 
the few that are chosen? can they tell me wherein I have striven 
to enter at the strait gate, wherein many shall seek to enter, but 
shall not be able ? 

Here he sunk into a fit of agonizing desperation, so that a cold 
dew broke forth from all parts of his body, and fell, drop after drop, 
down his ghastly and fearful countenance. Never, madam, never did 
I feel such a kind of anguishing horror as I then felt ; I was af- 
frighted and all frozen to my inmost soul. Haste, my dear sir, ex- 
claimed Lady Maitland; make haste through this part of your 
narration, I beseech you ! I also feel for myself; I am terrified to 
the last degree. 

At length, continued Mr. Clinton, I recollected myself a little. 
My master, I cried ; my father, my dearest father, since you will 
not take comfort in your own righteousness, take comfort in that of 
Him who was made righteousness for you. Do you not now reject 
the world ? do you not now deny yourself ? I do, I do, he said ; 
I detest the one and the other. And do you not feel that you are 
wholly a compound of sin and death ? Ay, he cried ; there is the 
weight, there is the mountain under which I sink for ever. Come 
then to Christ, my father, heavy laden as you are, and he will 
questionless embrace you, and be rest to you, my father ! I would 
come, Harry, he cried ; but I dare not, I am not able. Strive, my 
father; do but turn to Him, and he will more than meet you. 
Cry out with sinking Peter, " Save, Lord, or I perish ! " and he 
will catch you with the hand of his ever ready salvation. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 211 

Here his countenance began to settle into an earnest composure, 
and his eyes Avere turned and fixed upward ; while his old and en- 
feebled body continued to labour under the symptoms of near disso- 
lution. At length he started, and seized my hand with a dying 
pressure There is comfort, Harry ; there is comfort ! he cried, and 
expired. 

I was now cast once more upon a strange and friendless world. 
All the interests of my heart were buried with this family ; and I 
seemed to myself as without kindred or connections in the midst of 
mankind. Your dear mamma, indeed, sometimes called to condole 
with me, and water my losses with her tears ; and in her, and you 
my cousin, young as you then were, was locked up and centred the 
whole stock that I had left of endearing sensations. 

As the scenes of my former happiness served daily and nightly to 
render me more wretched by a sad recollection, I determined to quit 
my house, and to take private lodgings. For this purpose, I sum- 
moned Mr. Golding's domestics ; and, as he had made no will, I first 
paid them their wages, and then gave them such pretended legacies 
as brought their tears and their blessings in a shower upon me. 

As soon as I had discharged all except the two favourite servants 
of my master and my Matty, I desired that John, our little old man, 
should be sent to me. 

John, said I, as he entered, here is a bill for five hundred pounds 
which our good old master has left you, in token of his acknowledg- 
ment of your true and loving services, and to help, with what you 
have saved, to soften and make easy the bed of death in your old 
age. Do you mean to part with me, sir? said John, seemingly 
thankless and unconcerned about the gift which I had offered him. 
Indeed, John, said I, in my present state of dejection, attendance of 
any kind would but be an encumbrance to me. Then, sir, you may 
keep your bounty to yourself; for I shall break my heart before 
five-and-twenty hours are over. Nay, John, said I, I am far from 
turning you from me ; stay with me as my friend and welcome, but 
not as my servant; and I shall see the comfort of old times in always 
seeing you about me. Thank you, thank you, sir, he cried. I will 
not disturb you with my tears ; but I should die unblessed if I died 
out of your presence ! So saying, he rushed from me in a fit of 
restrained passion. 

I then sent for my wife's maid, whom I formerly mentioned. She 
had just heard of my discharging the other servants, and entered 
with a sad and alarmed countenance. Come near, Susan, I am going 
to part with you, said I ; come to me, and give me a farewell kiss. 
She approached with downcast looks, when, taking her in my arms, I 
pressed and kissed her repeatedly, and scarce withheld my tears. 
Oh, my girl, my Matty's precious girl ! I cried, I am not forgetful 
of your love, your honour, and your disinterestedness toward us. 
Here, my Susy, your darling mistress presents you with this bill of 
a thousand pounds, and, if you choose, I will give you cash for it 
within a quarter of an hour. This, however, does not discharge me 
from my regard and attention to you. You are of a helpless sex, my 
Susy, that is subject to many impositions and calamities ; wherefore, 
when this sum shall fail you, come to me again come to me as to your 

P2 



212 TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

friend, as to your debtor, Susy, and I will repeat my remembrance, 
and repeat again, as you may happen to have occasion ; for while I 
have sixpence left the favourite friend of my Matty shall not want 
her proportion. 

Here the grateful and amazed creature threw herself on the 
floor. She cried aloud, while the family hearol and echoed to her 
lamentations. She clasped my knees, she kissed my feet again and 
again. I could not disengage myself, I could not force her from 
me. Oh, my master ! she cried, my all that is left to me of my 
adored, my angel mistress ! must I then be torn from you ? must 
you live without the service of the hands and heart of your Susy ? 
But I understand your regard and care for me, my master. It is 
a cruel and naughty world, and must be complied with. 

Here I compelled her to rise, and kissing her again, I turned 
hastily to the chamber where my Matty's corpse had been laid ; 
and bolting the door, and casting myself on the bed, I broke into 
tears, and at length wept myself to sleep. 

While I was preparing to leave the once-loved mansion, I found 
in Mr. Gplding's cabinet a parchment that much surprised me. On 
my marriage, he had proposed to make a settlement of his fortune 
upon me, which, however, I obstinately refused to accept ; where- 
upon, without my privity, he got this deed perfected, which con- 
tained an absolute conveyance to me of all his worldly effects and 
possessions ; and this again renewed in me the tender and en- 
dearing remembrance of each of those kindnesses and benefits 
which he had formerly conferred upon me. 

I now found myself in possession of near a million of money, 
which, however, in my disposition of mind at the time, appeared no 
worthier than so much lumber in a waste room. And I know not 
how it was, that, through the subsequent course of my life, although 
I was by no means of an economical turn, though I never sued for 
a debt, nor gave a denial to the wants of those who asked, nor 
turned away from him that desired to borrow of me, yet uncoveted 
wealth came pouring in upon me. 

It was not without some sighs and a plentiful shower that I 
departed from the seat of all my past enjoyments. I took lodgings 
within a few doors of your father ; and my little household con- 
sisted of my favourite Irishman, my little old man, two footmen, 
and an elderly woman who used daily to dress a plain dish of meat 
for us. 

It was then, my fairest cousin, that your opening graces and 
early attractions drew me daily to your house; my heart was 
soothed and my griefs cheered by the sweetness of your prattle ; 
and I was melted down and minted anew, as it were, by the 
unaffected warmth and innocence of your caresses. 

As I had no faith in dreams, not even in that of my Matty, I 
thought it impossible that I should ever marry again. I therefore 
resolved, in my own mind, to make you my heir, and to endow you 
in marriage with the best part of my fortune. But you are a little 
pale, madam ; you look dejected and fatigued. If you please, I will 
suspend my narration for the present, and in the morning, if you 
choose it, as early as you will, I shall renew and proceed in my 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 213 

insignificant history. Here he pressed her hand to his lips. She 
withdrew with a tearful eye and a heaving heart; and the next 
day he resumed his narration, as followeth. 



CHAPTER XV. 

THOUGH you, my cousin, at that time were a great consolation 
to me, and a sweet lightener of my afflictions, yet the griefs of heart 
which I had suffered were not without their effect. At length 
they fell on my constitution, and affected my nerves or spirits ; I 
think our doctors pretty much confound the one with the other. 
Accordingly, I was advised to travel for change of air and exercise, 
and I was preparing for my journey, when there happened in my 
family the most extraordinary instance of an ever-watchful pro- 
vidence that occurs to my memory. 

My little old man John began to decline apace, and at length 
took to his bed, and, having a tender friendship for him, I went to 
sit beside him, and to comfort him the best I could. John, said T, 
are you afraid to die ? No, sir, not at all, not in the least ; I long 
to be dissolved, and to be with our loving Lord. Indeed, John, said 
I ; I am inclined to think you have been a very good liver. A dog, 
sir a mere dog, desperately wicked, the vilest of sinners ! I am 
a murderer too, my master ; there's blood upon my head. Blood ! 
said I, and started. Yes, sir, replied John; but then the blood 
that was shed for me is stronger and more precious than the blood 
that was shed by me. Blood, however, John, is a very terrible 
thing; are you not afraid to appear before the judgment-seat of 
Christ? By no means, my dear master; I have long since laid the 
burden of my sins before him, for I had nothing else to bring to 
him, nothing else to offer him ; and he has accepted them and me, 
and my conscience is at rest in him. Then, John, there may yet 
be room for hope. There is assurance, my master, for I have laid 
hold upon the rock, and cannot be shaken. 

But how do you intend to dispose of your worldly substance ? 
All that I have, sir, I got with you and my old master ; and where I 
found it, even there I resolve to leave it. Indeed, John, I will not 
finger a penny of your money. How much may it amount to ? 
Eight hundred and thirty-seven pounds, sir, or thereabout. And 
have you no relations of your own ? Not one living that I know 
of. Then think of some one else, for no part of it shall lie on my 
conscience, I assure you. 

I have read, somewhere or other, sir, of a great king who was 
advised of God, in a dream, to take the very first man whom he 
should meet the next morning, to be his partner in the government. 
Now, if it pleases you, my master, I will follow the like counsel ; 
and, whosoever shall be the first found before our door, let that 
person be the owner and inheritor of my substance. It shall be 
even as you say ; I will go and see whom God shall be pleased to 
send to us. 

Accordingly I went and opened our door, when a woman, who 



214 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

had nearly passed, turned about at the noise, and perceiving me 
came up and said A little charity, sir, for the sake of him who 
had not where to lay his head. 

I was strongly affected by the manner in which she addressed me, 
and, eyeing her attentively, I observed that she was clean though 
meanly apparelled ; wherefore, to make a further trial whether our 
adventure was likely to prove prosperous or not, I slipped a guinea 
into her hand, and desired her to go about her business. Accord- 
ingly, she curtsied and went from me a few steps, when, looking 
into her hand, she turned suddenly back Sir, sir, said she ; here 
had like to have been a sad mistake ; you meant to give me a 
shilling, and you have given me a whole guinea. It was, says I, 
a very great mistake, indeed ; but be pleased to come in, and we 
will try to rectify our errors. 

Here I took her into the chamber where John lay, and, having 
constrained her to sit down, I put my hand in my pocket. Here, 
good woman, said I ; here are ten guineas for you, to make you 
some amends for the mistake I was guilty of in giving you but one. 
The poor creature could scarcely credit her senses, but raising her 
eyes in ecstasy, and dropping from the chair upon her knees, she 
was proceeding to bless me ; but I peremptorily insisted on her 
re-taking her seat. Mistress, said I, be pleased to stay your 
prayers for the present ; what I want from you is the story of 
your life : tell me who and what you are, without suppressing any 
circumstance, or concealing the faults of which you have been 
guilty, and I will make you the mistress of twenty guineas, that 
shall be added to what you have already received. 

Sir, said she, you frighten me ; my story is a very unhappy and 
a very foolish story, and cannot be of the smallest consequence to 
you. Sure, you are too much of the gentleman to desire to ensnare 
me ; and, indeed, I know not of any thing whereby I may be 
ensnared. Wherefore, bountiful sir, unto you as unto heaven I will 
open my whole soul, without seeking to know why you look into 
the concerns of such a worm as I am. 

I am the daughter of a farmer in Essex, my maiden name was 
Eleanor Darner. I was married, early in life, to a man who kept a 
chandler's shop, in a little lane that led to Tower Hill ; his name was 
Barnaby Tirrel. Barnaby Tirrel ! exclaimed John; are you very sure 
that his name was Barnaby Tirrel ? Peace, John, I cried ; what- 
ever you may know of this man, or of any other matter, I com- 
mand you not to interrupt the woman till she has finished her 
story. She then continued. 

I had neither brother nor sister, sir, except one brother a twin- 
brother, and we loved one another as though there was nobody else 
in the world to be loved. 

About three years before my marriage, my brother Tommy, then 
a sweet pretty lad, took to a seafaring life, and went from me, I 
know not where, upon a voyage that I was told was a very great 
way off; and so I cried, day and night, as many tears after him as 
would have served me to swim in. 

My husband was very fond of me, and when he used to see me 
cry while he spoke of my Tommy, he would kiss me and try to 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 215 

comfort me, and say, that he wished for nothing more than his 
return to old England, that he might welcome him and love him as 
much as I did. 

One night, on the ninth month of my marriage, as I sat moping 
and alone, my husband being abroad upon some business, I heard a 
knocking at the door, which was opened by our little servant-girl. 
And then, before you could say this, in leaped my brother, and 
catched me fast in his dear arms. 

I gave a great shout for joy, you may be sure ; and pushing my 
Tommy from roe, and pulling him to me again and again, we 
embraced, and cried, and kissed, and embraced and kissed again, as 
though we never could be tired. 

In the mean while, the door being open, my cruel Barnaby en- 
tered, unperceived by either of us ; and seeing a strange man so 
fond and familiar with me, he opened a long clasped knife which 
he had in his pocket, and rushing up, he gave my darling brother 
three stabs in the body before he could speak a word or turn about 
to defend himself. Then, casting down the knife, in a minute he 
was out of the house, and I never saw him more. 

For a time I stood like a stone, and then, giving a great shriek, 
I fainted and fell on my brother as he lay weltering in his blood. 

Our little Mary, in the while, being frighted almost to death, 
ran about like a wild thing, and alarmed the street. Our neigh- 
bours crowded in, and sent for the next surgeon. My brother's 
wounds were probed and dressed, and he was laid in our spare 
bed. 

Meantime, being forward with child, I fell into strong and un- 
timely labour, and after very grievous travail was delivered of a 
boy, who was christened and called James, after my dear and lately 
deceased father. 

No pains of my own, however, kept me from inquiring after that 
dear and lamented brother who had been killed, as I supposed, for 
his love to me. But his youth and natural strength carried him 
through all dangers. In three months he was up and about, as 
well as ever ; and in less than three more he set out on another 
voyage, from whence he never, never, O never returned ! 

Before he went abroad, my dear and sweet fellow had left me a 
note of hand for the receipt of his wages. But in five years after I 
heard that he was cast away, or killed by the Barbary people : and 
though I went and went again in the middle of my wants, and in 
the middle of my sorrows, to ask and to petition for his pay from 
the Admiralty, I never could get an answer of any profit or any 
comfort. 

My little Jemmy, however, grew, and throve, and prated apace, 
and was my only prop under all my afflictions. My husband, in- 
deed, had left me in pretty circumstances ; and, had he but stayed 
with me, we should have prospered above our fellows. But what 
can a woman do, single, weak, and unprotected? I was imposed 
upon by some ; by others I was refused payment for the goods that 
I had given ; and at length I was reduced to poverty, and obliged 
to shut up shop. 

Meantime I had spared no cost on the bringing up of my Jemmy. 



216 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

I had given him school learning:, cond he now was grown a very 
towardly and clever boy ; and having taken to messages, my sweet 
fellow every night used to bring to me whatever he had earned in 
the daytime. 

In the loss of my husband and brother, in the loss of my Barnaby, 
and in the loss of my Tommy, to be sure I had grief upon grief ; 
so that my health went from me, and next my strength went from 
me, and I was not able to work at the washing business as before. 
But this didn't signify much while my child had his health ; for he 
had now got a porter's place in the custom-house, and, young as he 
was, he willingly carried heavy burdens to have the pleasure of 
bringing home his hard earnings to his mammy. But about six 
weeks ago, may it please your honour, my dear boy fell ill of a 
quartan ague, as they call it, under which he and his mother's 
heart still continue to labour. 

As soon as she had ended her short narrative Well, John, said 
I, methinks this business will do ; in my opinion you have got a 
very worthy inheritor of your fortune ; what say you to it, John ? 
First, sir, let me ask her a question or two, if you please. 
Honest woman, draw your chair a little nearer to me, I pray you. 
And now, tell me the truth. Did you ever love your husband ? 
Yes, dearly, indeed very dearly did I love him ; for he had loved 
me very dearly till that miserable night, But when, as I thought, 
he had killed my brother, I hated him as much as I had ever loved 
him before. But then again, when my Tommy had recovered of 
his wounds, I sent far and near to inquire after him and find him 
out ; and when I could learn no tidings of him, I put it into all the 
printed papers that Thomas Darner was well recovered, and that 
Barnabas Tirrel, who had wounded him, might return without 
danger to his wife and infant. 

And he is returned ! shouted John he is returned, my Nelly ! 
Your barbarous and bloody husband, who stabbed your brother, 
and left you and your infant to famish, he is returned to you, my 
Nelly ; and, in his death, he shall make you amends for all the 
sufferings which he brought upon you during his lifetime ! But, 
my master, my dearest master, send immediately for my child, my 
Jemmy, I beseech you, that, bad as I am myself, I may give him 
a father's blessing before I die. 

I was surprised and affected, madam, beyond expression, by inci- 
dents that were at once so wonderful and so tender ; and I directly 
sent servants and a sedan chair for James, with orders to have him 
carefully and warmly wrapped up ; for what his mother told me 
of him had already given me a very strong prejudice in his favour. 
Meanwhile, Mrs. Tirrel had sunk on her knees by her husband's 
bedside, and was plentifully pouring forth her tears upon him ; 
partly for joy of having found him, and partly for grief of having 
found him in that condition. 

O, my Nelly, my Nelly ! cried Barnabas ; had I known who the 
person was whose blood I drew that terrible night,! would sooner have 
thrust my knife into my own heart, than into any part of the body 
of that dear brother of yours. But I was old and ugly, you know ; 
and you were young and handsome ; and jealousy is a mad devil 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 217 

that rages in the breast like hell-fire ; it never knew how to spare, 
but tears and consumes every thing that comes within its reach. 

At length James was brought to us ; and as we were in his father's 
apartments, a chamber in no way adorned, James entered without 
any respect to persons. lie was a tall and comely youth, but very 
pale and lean ; and as it was one of his well days, he walked in 
without help. He had barely been told that his mother sent for 
him in a hurry; so that he entered with a visible alarm in his 
countenance. 

What is the matter, my dear mother ? says he. Alas ! I am little 
able to help you at present. I hope nothing has happened that is 
suddenly distressful. Nothing amiss, my child, more than that your 
dear father, for whom I have sought and been sighing this many a 
year your father lies dangerously ill in this very bed, my Jemmy. 
Am I then so blessed, cried the boy, as to see and embrace a 
father ? O my child ! exclaimed the old man, and eagerly stretched 
his arms towards him, come to my bosom, thou only offspring of my 
bowels ! I may now say, with blessed Jacob, Let me die, let me 
die, since I have seen thy face, and thou art alive, my son ! 

I would at any time give a thousand pounds, my cousin, for a 
tenth of the enjoyment that I then had, in the feelings which God 
poured into the hearts of this little family, on their so very un- 
expected and marvellous a meeting. It appeared to me, however, 
that young James even exceeded his parents in love; and this 
gave me such a cordial attachment to him, that from that hour 
to this we have never been sundered. He never failed nor for- 
sook me; and at this very day he is my respected friend, and 
the superintendent of my family. 

John, otherwise Barnabas, continued to linger for about a fort- 
night longer, and then departed quite happy, and without a groan. 
During the same space, also, James W 7 as daily attended by my 
own physician, and was nearly re-established in his health. 

Being then intent on my departure, I sent for Mrs. Tirrell. 
Mrs. Tirrell, says I, I should be much inclined to take your James 
along with me, if I did not think you would grieve overmuch in 
his absence. No, no, sir! said she; I would to heaven I were 
myself a young man for your sake. I desire no better either of 
him or for him, than that he should live and die faithfully and 
lovingly in your service. 

When Mr. Clinton came to this part of his story, a messenger 
entered in fearful haste, and delivered a letter to Lady Maitland. 
As soon as she had run it over My dearest sir, she cried, I must 
leave you this instant. I lately made you an offer of a hundred 
thousand pounds ; and now I know not that I have so many 
shillings upon earth. I am here informed that the trustee of all 
my affairs has absconded, and made his escape to France ; but I 
must hurry to town, and inquire after this business. So saying, 
she curtsied and suddenly withdrew, without giving her cousin 
time to make a tender of his services. 

The next morning Mr. Ch'nton ordered his chariot to the door, 
and hastened to attend her ladyship at her house in London, but 
there he was told that she had set out for Dover about an hour 



218 TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

before ; and he returned much dejected and grieved on her 
account. 

In about three weeks after, Mr. Clement with his young pupil 
came home, quite lightened of the money they had ^ken abroad. 
Mr. Fenton, for so we shall call him again, gave Clement a friendly 
embrace, and took Harry to his caresses, as though he had re- 
turned from a long and dangerous voyage. 

Well, Clement, said Mr. Fenton, what account have you to give 
us of your expedition? An account, sir, that would be extremely 
displeasing to any man living except yourself: in short, our young 
gentleman here, has plunged you above a thousand pounds in debt, 
over the large sums that we carried with us. I hope the objects 
were worthy, said Mr. Fenton. Wonderfully worthy, indeed, sir ; 
I never saw such tender and affecting scenes. Then I shall be 
overpaid and enriched by the narration. 

Here, Harry inquired impatiently for Mrs. Clement and his friend 
Ned ; and being told that they were on a visit to the Widow 
Neighbourly, he took a hasty leave for the present, and away 
he flew to embrace them. 

As soon as he was gone Sir, said Mr. Clement, I cannot think 
that there is in the world such another boy as yours. I will leave 
to himself the detail of our adventures hi the several prisons ; they 
had such an effect on his heart, that they cannot but have made a 
deep impression on his memory ; so I shall only tell you of what 
happened in our way to London. 

As we were chatting and walking leisurely along the road, a poor 
man before us happened to drop in a fit of the falling-sickness. 
When Harry saw the writhings and convulsions in which he lay, he 
turned pale, and looked vastly frightened, and seizing me under the 
arm, he cried Come come away ! and hurried me off as fast as he 
could. But we had not gone far till his pace began to abate, and 
stopping, and hesitating Let us turn, let us turn, Mr. Clement, he 
cried ; let us go back again and help the poor man ! We then 
returned hastily, and, raising his head, we kept him from bruising 
it against the ground. I then forced open his clenched hands, and 
having chafed the palms awhile, he began to recover, and soon came 
to himself. Mean while Harry's fright was not yet quite over. He 
seemed willing to get away from the object of his terror, and 
putting his hand in his pocket, and giving him all the silver he had, 
he wished him better health, and away he went. 

We had not gone above half a mile further when I saw a little 
girl, in a field on the right hand, endeavouring to drive a cow 
through a small gate into the road, in order to be milked, as I 
suppose, by her mother ; but the cow kicked up her heels, and 
proved wanton and refractory, and ran hither and thither, and 
would not be guided. The poor child then set up a cry of as bitter 
distress as if all that was valuable in the world was going to ruin. 
Harry gave a ready ear to the sound of lamentation, and, seeing the 
plight that the poor thing was in, he suddenly crossed the road, 
above ankle deep in dirt, and leaping the ditch, he proved nimbler 
than the cow, and driving her through the pass, he turned her into 
the way that the child would have her go. 



TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 219 

That morning, indeed, was to Harry a morning of petty adven- 
tures. By the time that we approached the suburbs, we had nearly 
overtaken a grown girl who carried a basket of eggs on her head. 
A great lubberly boy just then passed us by at a smart pace, and 
tripping up to the girl, gave the basket a tip with his hand, and 
dashed all the eggs into mash against a stony part of the road, 
and, again taking to his heels, rim on as before. Immediately 
Harry's indignation was kindled, and setting out at top speed, 
he soon overtook him, and gave him several smart strokes with 
his little cane across the shoulders. The fellow then turned upon 
Harry, and gave him a furious blow with his fist over the head, 
while I hastened to his relief, as I perceived that the other was 
quite an overmatch for him. But before I arrived our hero had 
put a quick end to the combat ; for, springing from the ground, he 
darted his head full into the nose and moutli of his adversary, who 
instantly roared out, and, seeing his own blood come pouring down, 
he once more took to flight, while Harry continued to press upon 
him, and belaboured him at pleasure, till he judged that he had 
beaten him to the full value of the eggs. 

Meanwhile the poor girl, wholly unmindful of what passed, 
remained wailing and wringing her hands over the wreck of her 
merchandise. The voice of a siren could not so powerfuly have 
attracted and recalled Harry from the length he had gone ; he 
returned with speed to her, and I followed. My poor girl, says he, 
where were you going with those eggs ? To market, master, says 
she. And what did you expect to get for them? About five 
shillings, sir ; and I had promised my daddy and mammy to lay it 
out in shoes and stockings for my little brothers and sisters ; and so 
I must now bear all the blame of the poor things going barefoot. 
Here she again set up her wailings, and her tears poured down 
afresh. 

Harry then desired me to lend him ten shillings, and turning to 
the mourner Hold out your two hands, my poor girl, he cried ; then 
putting five shillings into each hand, Here is the payment for your 
eggs, said he ; and here are five shillings more, though I fear it is 
too little to pay you for all the tears they cost you. 

Never did I see so sudden, so great a change in any countenance. 
Surprise, gratitude, ecstasy flashed from her eyes, and gave a joyous 
flush to the muscling of her aspect. She hurried her money into 
her bosom, and dropping on her knees in the dirt, and seizing hold 
of Harry's hand, she squeezed and kissed it repeatedly, without 
being able to utter a word ; while Harry's eyes began to fill, and, 
endeavouring to disengage himself, he made oif as fast as he could 
from such thanks as he thought he had no way deserved. 

This, sir, was the last of our adventures going to London. But 
had you seen us, on our return, about two hours ago, you would 
have wondered at the miry plight into which we were put, by 
helping passengers up with their bundles that had tumbled into the 
dirt, or by assisting to raise cattle that had fallen under their 
carriages ; for Master Harry would compel me to be as busy and 
active in matters of charity as himself. 

However, sir, I am to tell you that Harry, with all his excellences 



220 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

of person, heart, and understanding, will be accounted a mere idiot 
among people of distinction, if he is not permitted to enter into some 
of the fashionable foibles and fashionable vices of the age. 

We were taking a walk in the Mall, when we were met by the 
Earl of Mansfield, who expressed great joy at seeing his old 
acquaintance, as he called him : and he pressed us so earnestly to 
dinner, that we could not, in manners, refuse him. 

There was a vast concourse of company, especially of the little 
quality of both sexes, who came to pay their respects to young 
Lord Bottom and his sister the Lady Louisa. 

Harry was received and saluted by Lady Mansfield and the 
young lord, without any appearance of the old animosity. Some 
time after dinner a large packet of letters was brought in to the 
earl, and, making his excuse to Harry alone, he rose from the 
table and retired to his closet. 

Lord Bottom and his sister then led the young males and females 
to an adjoining apartment, where several card-tables were laid ; and 
I began to tremble for the credit of my pupil on the occasion, as I 
knew him to be a novice in such matters. 

In the mean time, the remaining ladies and gentlemen divided 
into two or three parties at ombre ; and I sauntered about the room, 
admiring the prints of the Ariadne and the Aurora, that were 
taken from Guido, as also some capital paintings that the earl had 
brought from Italy. 

I had spent above an hour in this pleasing amusement, and had 
nearly made the tour of the whole dining-room, when, as I stood at 
a little distance behind my lady's chair, seeming inattentive to any 
thing that passed, Lord Bottom entered on tiptoe, and tripping up 
to his mother, and tittering and whispering in her ear What do 
you think, mamma? said he ; sure Master Fenton is a fool, a down- 
right fool, upon my honour ! He does not know a single card in 
the whole pack : he does not know the difference between the ace 
of hearts and the nine of clubs. I do not think either that he 
knows any thing of the difference or value of coin ; for, as we passed 
through the hall to-day, a beggar asked for a halfpenny, and I saw 
him slip a shilling into his hand. Indeed, mamma, he is the 
greatest fool that ever I knew ; and yet, poor fellow, he does not 
seem to know any thing of the matter himself. 

During this oration of Lord Bottom on the virtues of his new 
friend, I felt my whole body glow and tingle with concern ; and 
soon after Harry entered with the rest of the small quality. 
Master Fenton, cries my lady, I beg to speak with you. Don't you 
know the cards, my dear ? No, indeed, madam. Can't you play at 
dice? No, madam. Can you play at draughts, polish, or chess? 
Not at all, madam. Why then, my dear, I must tell you that all 
your father's fortune will never introduce you among people of any 
breeding or of any fashion. Can you play at no kind of game, 
Master Harry ? A little at fox and geese, madam. And pray, my 
dear, said my lady smiling, which of the parties do you espouse ? 
The part of the geese, madam. I thought as much, pertly cried 
out my Lord Bottom ; whereupon a loud laugh was echoed through 
the room. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 221 

Here my lady chid the company, and calling Harry to her again, 
for he had gone something aloof Tell me, I pray you, said she, why 
you espouse the part of the geese. Because, madam, I always wish 
that simplicity should get the better of fraud and cunning. 

The countess here looked astonished ; and having gazed a while 
at him, and caught and kissed him eagerly You are a noble fellow, 
she cried, and all must be fools or mad that ever shall take you for 
the one or the other. 

The elder gentry here laid their cards aside, and desired the 
young ones to set about some play. Lady Louisa proposed draw- 
gloves, or questions and commands, and to it they went. 

Among the females was one Miss Uppish, sole heiress to a vast 
fortune. Though her person was deformed, her face was the picture 
of confident disdain ; and scarce any one could speak to her, or 
look at her, without being told of the contempt she had for them, 
by the side glance of her eye, the writhing of her neck, and tossing 
up of her head. 

In the course of the play, our Harry was commanded to put the 
candle into the hand of Miss Uppish, and then to kiss the candle- 
stick ; which command he obeyed literally, by giving her the 
candle, and kissing the candlestick which he held in his own hand. 

Hereupon, a great shout was set up in the young assembly, and 
the fool, the senseless creature ; the fool, the fool, the fool ! was 
repeated throughout ; while Lord Bottom laughed, and danced about 
in the impatience of his joy. 

I was amazed that Harry's countenance seemed no way discon- 
certed by all this ridicule. At length Lady Mansfield called him to 
her. How, my dear, could you be guilty of such an error ? she said ; 
did not you know that, when you gave the candle into the hand of 
the young lady, she became the candlestick, and it was her you 
should have kissed ? Harry then approached to her ladyship's ear, 
and in a pretty loud whisper said I did not like the metal, madam, 
that the candlestick was made of. Again Lady Mansfield looked 
surprised, and said You are a sly rogue, a very sly rogue, upon 
my honour ; and have sense enough to dupe the wisest of us all. 

Jemmy Bottom, cried my lady aloud, come here ! I can't but 
tell you, Jemmy, that you have behaved yourself extremely ill to 
your young friend here, who might have improved you by his 
example, as much as he has honoured you by his visit. I must 
further tell you, Jemmy Bottom, that whenever you pique yourself 
on degrading Mr. Fenton, you only pride in your own abasement, 
and glory in your shame. Hereupon I got up, and, leaving our 
compliments for the earl, I carried off my young charge, for fear 
of our falling into any further disgrace. 

While Harry is abroad, said Mr. Fenton, be pleased to give me a 
general sketch of the manner in which you disposed of your money. 
In the first place, sir, answered Clement, you will find by this 
list, that, for little more than the five hundred pounds allotted, 
we released ninety five prisoners, whose debts amounted from forty 
shillings to about twelve pounds per man. These, in the general, 
had been journeymen tailors or weavers, or professors of other 
inferior crafts ; and, as they wanted means or encouragement for 



222 TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

exercising their respective occupations in jail, they subsisted on 
the pence which they got by begging at the grates, or on their 
dividends of occasional sums which were sent for their relief by 
charitable individuals. Nearly all of them were thin in flesh, and 
extremely shabby in clothing ; and yet they could hardly be said 
to excite compassion, as they appeared so cheerful and unfeeling 
of their own wretchedness. Neither was there one of them, that 
I could learn a single circumstance of, whose story was worth 
reciting. 

Some, however, were of a quality much superior to this class. 
Among others, there was a French marquis and a German prince ; 
the prince had been put under arrest by his caterer, and the mar- 
quis by his tailor ; so that something less than fifty pounds set 
them both at liberty. 

While the keeper of the Fleet Prison was making out a list 
for us of the principal debtors, Harry and I took a turn about the 
court, and observed two fellows in liveries bearing several smoking 
covers up the stone stairs to a front dining-room. This surprised 
me, and gave me the curiosity to inquire what prisoners it could 
be who lived in so expensive and superb a manner. Sir, said the 
under-keeper, there are few men now at liberty near so wealthy as 
this gentleman, who has done us the honour to set up his staff of 
rest in our house. His name is Sink. He is an attorney and an old 
bachelor, turned of sixty years of age. He is in for several sums, 
amounting to upwards of nine thousand pounds, and he is reputed 
to be worth above double that money. 

During the last twenty years, he behaved himself with the 
strictest probity toward all men, and with the strictest appearance 
of piety toward God. In the dark, in frost and snow, and all in- 
clemencies of weather he never missed attending morning service 
at church. He was equally solicitous to be at evening prayer ; 
and, whatever company he chanced to have with him, or how im- 
portant soever the business in which he was engaged, the moment 
he heard the bell ring he would huddle up his papers and break 
away without ceremony. He was eager in his inquiries to know 
where the sacrament was soonest to be administered, and he never 
missed receiving it at least once in the week. Whenever he heard 
any profaneness or obscenity in the streets, he would stop to re- 
prove and expostulate with the offender. In short, he so perfectly 
counterfeited or took off, as they call it, the real Christian, that 
many looked to see him, like Enoch or Elijah, taken alive into 
heaven. 

This perpetual parade of sanctity gave him such an eclat and 
immeasurable credit, that he was left trustee and executor in a 
multitude of wills ; and numbers also deposited their substance in 
his hands, in order to be laid out at interest on securities, and 
so forth. 

Three months since, about the dawning, as his butcher happened 
to pass by his door, he heard it open, and turning saw a number 
of porters come out heavy laden. This gave him a kind of sus- 
picion. He let them all pass, and, walking softly after, he stepped 
up to the hindmost, and offered him half-a-crown on condition of his 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 223 

telling him where they were carrying those parcels. That I will, 
said the porter ; for the secret, if such it is, is nothing to me, 
you know. In short, we are carrying them to the wharf, to be put 
on board a boat that waits to take them in. 

The butcher said no more, but hurried away to the baker, and, 
as they both run to the office, they met the brewer by the way. 
They took out their respective actions, and, taking a constable with 
them, they seized on good Mr. Sink, as he was stepping into a 
coach and six to make the best of his way to Dover. He would 
have paid them their money and discharged their actions on the 
spot ; but here the master, in whom he trusted, happened to leave 
him in the lurch. As he had turned all his effects into money, and 
his money into paper, he had not at hand wherewith to pay his 
instant creditors. So they hurried him to jail, and before the 
banks were open the matter was blown, and action after action 
came pouring fast upon him. 

When he found himself thus at bay, he cast aside his disguise, 
and set them all at defiance. His creditors have since offered to 
accept ten shillings, and some of them to accept five shillings, in 
the pound ; but he swears that he will never pay them a groat ; for 
he is now as liberal of his oaths and impious execrations, as he was 
lately of his more impious profanation of gospel phrases. And 
thus he daily revels in the sensual consumption of those wretches 
whom he hath so inhumanly defrauded; while hundreds of 
orphans and widows, and other miserables, perish for want of the 
sustenance which one infernal appetite devours without remorse. 
Nay, several of his creditors are, at this very time, famishing in this 
prison, while they see him feasting so lavishly upon their spoils. 

The gorge of my soul, cried Mr. Fentpn, the very gorge of my 
soul rises against this demon ! Can nothing be done to bring him 
to punishment? Our parliament will surely interfere in such a 
calling exigence ; they will send to the several banks and take up 
all the deposits that have been made in his name. Alas, sir ! said 
Clement, he was already aware of such possibilities, and has entered 
all his lodgments in feigned names, and to bearer upon demand. 

Indeed, continued Clement, I heartily wished at the time that 
the laws of the Grecians and Komans had been in force among us, 
by which the debtor was given up to be set to labour, whipped, or 
tortured, at the pleasure of the creditor. 

God forbid ! God forbid ! exclaimed Mr. Fenton. 

When we see mankind divided into the rich and the poor, the 
strong and the weak, the sound and the sickly, we are apt to 
imagine that health, strength, or opulence was given to those, and 
infirmity, want, and weakness appointed to these, as marks of the 
peculiar favour or disfavour of Providence. 

God, however, knows that there is nothing permanently good or 
evil in any of these things. He sees that nothing is a good but 
virtue, and that nothing is a virtue save some quality of bene- 
volence. On benevolence, therefore, he builds the happiness of 
all his intelligent creatures ; and in this our mortal state (our 
short apparatus for a long futurity), he has ordained the relative 
differences of rich and poor, strong and weak, sound and sickly, &c , 



224 TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

to exercise us in the offices of that charity and those affections, 
which, reflecting and reflected, like mutual light and warmth, can 
alone make our good to all eternity. 

Benevolence produces and constitutes the heaven or beatitude 
of God himself. He is no other than an infinite and eternal Good 
Will. Benevolence must, therefore, constitute the beatitude or 
heaven of all dependent beings, however infinitely diversified 
through several departments and subordinations, agreeable to the 
several natures and capacities of creatures. 

God has appointed human power and human wealth, as a ready 
and sufficient fund for human want and weakness ; to which fund, 
therefore, they have as good a right to resort as any other cre- 
ditors have to respective trusts or deposits ; for though poverty and 
weakness are not creditors by the laws of man, they are creditors 
by the eternal laws of nature and equity, and must here, or here- 
after, bring their debtors to account. 

Every man, when he becomes a member of this or that society, 
makes a deposit of three several sorts of trusts, that of his LIFE, 
that of his LIBERTY, and that of his PROPERTY. 

Now as every man, in his separate or independent state, has by 
nature the absolute disposal of his property, he can convey the dis- 
posal thereof to society, as amply and absolutely as he was, in his 
separate right, entitled thereto. 

This, however, cannot be said of his life, or of his liberty. He 
has no manner of right to take away his own life, neither to depart 
from his own liberty : he cannot therefore convey to others a right 
and authority which he hath not in himself. 

The question then occurs, by what right it is that the legislative 
and executive powers of community appoint some persons to death, 
and others to imprisonment ? My answer is short, and follows : 

It is the right, perhaps the duty, of every man, to defend his life, 
liberty, and property, and to kill or bind the attempters. This 
right he can, therefore, convey ; and on such conveyance it becomes 
the right and duty of the trustees of society to put to death or im- 
prison all who take away, or attempt the life, liberty, or property of 
any of its members. 

This right, however, extends to criminal matters only; and it 
does not yet appear to me upon what reason, or right rule, founded 
in nature or policy, the several societies of mankind have agreed to 
deliver up their members to slavery, to stripes, tortures, or im- 
prisonment, for matters merely civil, such as debts. 

Several of the states of Greece, though accounting the rest of the 
world as barbarians, and even the Koman republic, during the times 
of its most boasted policy and freedom, gave up insolvent debtors 
(without inquiring into the causes or occasions of such insolvency) 
as slaves, or absolute property, into the hands of their creditors, to 
be sold at will, or put to labour, or starved, macerated, or tortured, 
in order to qive value in vengeance, which they could not give in 
coin or other equivalent commodities. 

The Jewi-h or Mosaic law, though allowing sufficiently, as Christ 
says, for " the hardness of that people's hearts," yet gave perfect 
enlargement to all Jews who were bondmen, and perfect remission 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 225 

to all Jews who were personal debtors, on every seventh or sab- 
batical year, and on every seventh or sabbatical year, or jubilee, all 
prisons were thrown open ; all slaves, though foreigners or aliens, 
set at liberty, and even the lands were enfranchised, however 
mortgaged, or labouring under debt and execution ; that all things, 
animate or inanimate, might have an earnest of that immunity and 
perfect freedom which God originally intended, and keeps in store 
for all his creatures. 

The laws of Egypt permitted no member to deprive the public 
of the life, liberty, or labour of any other member, except he were 
a criminal not fitting to live, or to be suffered to walk at large. In 
all cases of debtor and creditor, they equitably appointed value 
for value, as far as the substance of the debtor could reach ; and, 
in case of insufficiency, the insolvent party was obliged to leave 
in pledge the mummies, or preserved bodies, of his deceased an- 
cestors, till, by industry or good fortune, either he or his posterity 
should be enabled to redeem them a matter of refined as well as 
charitable policy ; as nothing was held more infamous among the 
Egyptians than their inability to produce the mummies of their 
forefathers. 

The laws of Holland, by their late qualifications, seem to ac- 
knowledge the iniquity, or inadequateness, of depriving a man of 
the possibility of earning, merely because he has not an immediate 
ability to pay. Sensible, therefore, that all men are debtors to God, 
and reciprocally debtors and creditors to each other, they have 
ordained that he who imprisons an insolvent debtor shall pay the 
proper penalty of his malevolence or indiscretion, by maintaining 
the party from whom he takes the ability of maintaining himself. 

It must be admitted that, were our laws less severe with respect 
to debtors, were people less afraid of the jail on failure of payment, 
there would be less credit, and consequently less dealing in this so 
wondrously wealthy and trading a nation. But if our credit were 
less, would not our extravagance lessen also ? Should we see such 
princely tables among people of the lower class ? would so much 
claret, spirits, and ale intoxicate a kingdom? should we see the 
value of a German prince's ransom gorgeously attiring each of our 
belle-dames, if neither merchant, butcher, brewer, laceman, mercer, 
milliner, nor tailor would trust ? 

Many of our poor city dealers are yearly undone, with their 
families, by crediting persons who are privileged not to pay, or 
whose remoteness or power places them beyond the reach of the 
law. For by the return of non-invent. generally made upon writs, 
one would be apt to imagine that no single sub-sheriff knew of any 
such thing as a man of fortune, within his respective county, 
throughout the kingdom of Great Britain. 

Before money became the medium of commerce, the simple 
business of the world was carried on by truck, or the commutation 
of one commodity for another. But when men consented to fix 
certain rateable values upon money, as a ready and portable equiva- 
lent for all sorts of effects, credit was consequently introduced, by 
the engagements of some to pay so much money in lieu of such 
commodities, or to deliver such or such commodities on the 

Q 



226 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

advance of so much money; and states found it their interest to 
support such public credit by enforcing the performance of such 
engagements. 

By the common law of England, no person except the king could 
take the body of another in execution for debt ; neither was this 
prerogative of the crown extended to the subject till the statute of 
Marlbridge, chap. 23, in the reign of Henry III. 

Many contract debts through vanity or intemperance ; or borrow 
money, or take up goods, with the intention of thieves and robbers, 
never to make return. When such suffer, they suffer deservedly 
in expiation of their guilt. But there are unavoidable damages 
by water, by tire, the crush of power, oppressive landlords, and 
more oppressive lawsuits, death of cattle, failure of crop, failure of 
payment in others ; with thousands of such-like casualties, whereby 
men may become bankrupt, and yet continue blameless. And in all 
such cases one would think that the present ruin was sufficient 
calamity, without the exertion of law to make that ruin irreparable. 

As all the members of a community are interested in the life, 
liberty, and labours of each other, he who puts the rigour of pur 
laws in execution, by detaining an insolvent brother in jail, is guilty 
of a fourfold injury : first, he robs the community of the labours of 
their brother; secondly, he robs his brother of all means of 
retrieving his shattered fortune ; thirdly, he deprives himself of the 
possibility of payment ; and lastly, he lays an unnecessary burden 
on the public, who, in charity, must maintain the member whom he 
in his cruelty confines. 

However, since the severity of law is such, that he whose mis- 
fortunes have rendered him insolvent must "make satisfaction," 
(for so the savages esteem it,) by surrendering his body to durance 
tor life, it is surely incumbent on our legislators and governors to 
make the condition of the unhappy sufferers as little grievous as 
may be. 

But this most Christian duty, this most humane of all cares, is yet 
to come. "When a debtor is delivered up into the fangs of his jailer, 
he is consigned to absolute and arbitrary slavery ; and woe be to the 
wretch whose poverty may not have left him a sop for Cerberus. 
How more than miserable must be the state of those unhappy men, 
who are shut in from all possible redress or appeal against the 
despotic treatment of their savage keepers, whose hearts are 
habitually hardened to all sense of remorse, and whose ears are 
rendered callous by incessant groans ! 

We are credibly informed that it is usual with such keepers to 
amass considerable fortunes from the wrecks of the wretched : to 
squeeze them by exorbitant charges and illicit demands, as grapes 
are squeezed in a vine-press while one drop remains; and then 
to huddle them together into naked walls and windowless rooms ; 
having got all they can, and nothing further to regard, save the 
return of their lifeless bodies to their creditors. 

How many of these keepers exact from their distressed prisoners 
seven and eight shillings per week, for rooms that would not rent 
at a third of that sum in any other part of this city ! At times, 
nine of those wretched prisoners are driven to kennel together in a 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 227 

hovel, fit only to stable a pair of horses, while many unoccupied 
apartments are locked up from use. Even a sufficiency of the 
common element of water is refused to their necessities, an advan- 
tage which the felons in Newgate enjoy. Public or private bene- 
factions are dissipated or disposed of at the pleasure of the keepers, 
regardless of the intention or order of the donors. And the apart- 
ments appointed to these miserable men are generally damp or 
shattered in the flooring, and exposed, by breach or want of 
windows, to the inclemency of night-air, and all the rigour of the 
season. 

But what avail their complaints if the legislature have not 
authorized, or made it the duty, of some especial magistrates to 
examine into and redress these crying abuses? 

But tell me, continued Mr. Fenton, were there any prisoners of 
consideration among the confined debtors ? A few, sir, of note, and 
many who had been well to pass in the world. Among these, 
indeed, it was that every scene and species of misery was displayed. 
There you might see, as you have said, numerous families of 
wretches, whose thin and tattered garments but ill defended their 
shivering bodies from the inclemency of the elements, that blew 
through shattered windows or came pouring from unstanched roofs. 

These people fared incomparably worse than those of the vulgar 
herd ; for, being ashamed to beg at the grates, they had nothing to 
subsist on save their scanty portions of such charities as happened 
to be sent in from time to time, and this scarcely supplied them with 
a sufiiciency of water, black bread, and offal ; while the recollection 
of their former affluence added sharp and bitter poignancy to the 
sense of their present wants. But here comes my pupil ; he will be 
more particular on scenes with which his heart was so meltingly 
affected. 

Harry then entered, with Mrs. Clement caressing him on the 
one side, and his old dependant Ned hanging about him on the 
other. 

As soon as Clement and his Arabella had embraced, and all were 
settled and seated Well, Harry, said Mr. Fenton, will you favour 
us with some account of your expedition? Have you ever a pretty 
story for me, my Harry ? Several stories, sir, said Harry, that were 
sweet pretty stories when I heard them; but Mr. Clement had 
better tell them, they would be sadly bungled if they came through 
my hands, sir. The company will make allowances, replied Mr. 
Fenton ; let us have these stories in your own way, Harry, just as 
your memory may happen to serve you. 

On the second day, sir, as my tutor and I were walking in the 
court-yard of the Fleet Prison, whom should I spy but my old 
master, Mr. Vindex, walking very sad to and again by the wall. 
He was so pale and shabby, and so fallen away, that I did not 
rightly know him till I looked at him very earnestly. My heart 
then began to soften and warm toward the poor man ; for it told 
me that something very sorrowful must have happened before he 
could have been brought to that condition. So I went up to him 
with a face, I believe, as melancholy as his own. 

How do you do, good Mr. Vindex? said I. I should be glad to 



228 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

see you, if I did not see you look so sad. He then stared at me 
for some time, and at length remembering me, he looked concerned, 
and turned away to shun me ; but I took him lovingly by the hand, 
and said You must not leave me, Mr. Vindex ; won't you know 
your old scholar, Harry Fenton? Yes, said he, casting down his 
mournful eyes, I know you now, master ; I know I used you basely, 
and I know why you are come ; but reproach me and insult me as 
much as you please, all is welcome now since I cannot lie lower 
till I am laid in the earth. 

I do not mean to insult you ; this tear will witness for me that I 
do not mean to insult you, my clear Mr. Vindex ; and so I wiped my 
eye. Here are twenty guineas, to put warm clothes upon you in 
this cold weather. Little and low as I am myself, I will try to 
do something better for you ; and so give me one Mss in token that 
we are friends. 

The poor dear man then opened his broad eyes in a wild stare 
upon me, with a look that was made up half of joy and half of shame. 
He then kneeled down, as I supposed, that I might reach to kiss 
him, and taking me into his arms You are not born of woman ; you 
are an angel, an angel ! he cried; and so he fell a-crying, and cried 
so sadly, that I could not for my heart but keep him company. 

I did all I could to pacify and make him cheerful, and getting 
him up at last You must not part with me, Mr. Vindex, said I ; 
we must dine and spend the day together. Here is Mr. Clement, 
my tutor ; you and he too must be friends. 

I then led him by the hand into a large ground room that Mr. 
Close, the chief keeper, had appointed for us ; and I ordered dinner 
to be hastened and brought up. As soon as we were all seated, I 
began to laugh and joke, after my foolish way, in order to make 
poor Mr. Vindex merry. When I found that it would not do Mr. 
Vindex, said I, be so kind as to let me know what the money may 
come to for which you are confined? A terrible sum, indeed, my 
darling, said he ; no less than a hundred and fifty-two pounds. I 
then put my hand in my pocket, and taking out two bills and a 
little matter of money that made up the sum, I put it into his 
hand, saying, My friend shall never lie in jail for such a trifle 
as this. 

Having looked for some time at the bills with amazement, he turned 
to my tutor with a doubtful and shamed face Is this young gentle- 
man, sir, said he, duly authorized to dispose of such vast matters as 
these ? He is, says Mr. Clement ; he is the carver and disposer of 
his father's fortune at pleasure ; and I am confident that his father 
will think himself doubly paid, in the use that his noble son has 
made of his privilege this day. 

A gleam then, like that of sunshine, broke through his sad 
countenance, as through the clouds of a dark day. And are you 
the one, he cried are you the one, Master Harry, whom I treated 
so barbarously ? You may forgive me, my little cherubim ; you 
indeed may forgive me ; but I never I never shall forgive myself! 
O Mr. Vindex ! said I, I would very nearly undergo the same 
whipping again to do you twice the kindness, and make you love 
me twice as much as you now love me. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 229 

Dinner was now served, and, calling for wine, I filled him a 
bumper in a large glass, which he drank to the health of my 
glorious dada, as he called you, sir. Upon this we grew very 
merry and friendly among one another; and, when dinner was 
over, I begged him to tell me how he came to be put into con- 
finement. 

O, Master Harry! he cried, I have suffered all that I have 
suffered very justly very justly, for my harsh and cruel usage of 
you, Master Harry. 

After the affair of the hobgoblins, as you know, the shame to 
which I was put by my fright and by my scourging began to be whis- 
pered, and then to be noised about the town. The boys at length 
catched the rumour, and began to hoot at me ; and the more I 
chastised them the more they gathered about me, and shouted 
after me A rod for the fiogger ; a rod for the flogger ! 

No disease is so deadly, no blasting so baneful, as contemprt to a 
man in the way of his profession. My boys grew disorderly, and 
behaved themselves in school without respect to my person, or 
regard to my government. Even my intimates shunned me, and 
would cast at me a side glance of smiling scorn as they passed. 
My school then melted from me like snow in a fog. Even my 
boarders forsook me. I stood at a high rent; my effects were 
seized by the landlord. It was in vain that I solicited payment 
from the parents of my scholars. No one who was indebted to 
me would give me a penny ; while all that I owed came like a 
tumbling house upon me, and so I was cast into this prison, from 
whence your bounty has set me free. 

My poor broken-hearted wife would have accompanied me to 
jail ; but, as I had not wherewithal to give her a morsel of 
bread, I sent her to an old aunt, who had the humanity to take 
her in. 

Alas, alas! poor Mr. Vinclex, said I; had I guessed any part 
of the mischiefs that our unlucky pranks have brought upon 
you, I would have put both my hands into the furnace of Nebu- 
chadnezzar rather than have had art or part in such a wickedness ; 
for herein we acted the fable of the frogs and the boys that 
wliich was play to us was death to you, Mr. Vindex. 

In conscience, now we are indebted to you for every misfortune 
we caused you ; and, as you are not yet paid for the half of your 
sufferings, I here give you my hand and word to make up a 
hundred and fifty pounds more for you ; and for this I will not 
accept the smallest thanks, as I think it is no more than an act of 
common honesty. And I, cried Mr. Fenton, I hold myself indebted 
to you a thousand pounds, my noble Harry, for that single senti- 
ment. That's well that's well, sir ! cried Harry, leaping up and 
clapping his hands ; I shall now be clear in the world with all my 
poor creditors ! 

Thus, sir, continued he, it rejoiced my heart greatly to send poor 
Mr. Vindex away in such triumph ; while my tutor and I went 
two or three doors off to see a mighty pretty young creature, who 
was said to be confined with her ancient father. And I will tell 
you their story, with two or three other stories more, on account 



230 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

of the incidents that happened while we were there, than of any 
thing else that was wonderful or uncommon in them. 

On tapping at the door, we were desired to walk in, and saw 
a female with her back to us, weaving bone lace on a cushion, 
while an elderly man, with spectacles on, read to her in Thomas a 
Kempis. They both rose to salute us. Mr. Clement then stepped 
up, and seeing what they were about, cried God cannot but 
prosper your work, good people, since you employ your time to 
his purposes, both on earth and in heaven. As an earnest of his 
kindness to you, he sends you by us a considerable charity, which 
you shall receive as soon as you inform us who and what you are, 
and how you came here. Blessed be the messengers of my God ! 
cried out the father, whether they come with happy or with heavy 
tidings! I say, with old Eli "It is the Lord, let him do what 
seemeth him good." 

father! I was quite charmed when the daughter turned to 
me ; there was such a sweetness, such a heavenly harmlessness, 
in her face, that I could have kissed her, and kissed her, again and 
again. 

As I had brought a glass and the remainder of our bottle with 
me, we all got about a board that was half stool and half table, 
and, after a round or two, the good man began his story. 

My father's name was Samuel Stern. He had a clear estate of 
nine hundred and fifty pounds a-year in Sussex ; and had by my 
mother three daughters and four sons, of whom I was the second. 

My father, unhappily, was a loyalist ; and when the troubles 
broke out between King Charles and the parliament, he took up 
all the money he could at any interest, and raised a company at his 
own cost, which he headed on the part of his royal master. 

After some successful skirmishes, his head was split in two by 
the broadsword of a trooper at the battle of Naseby. Immediately 
all our servants forsook us, each carrying away with him whatever 
came to hand ; and quickly after the soldiers of the Commonwealth 
came, carried off all the cattle, and left nothing of our house except 
the bare walls. 

In the mean time, we poor children huddled together into the 
garden, and there separating, ran and crept under bushes and 
hedges, as so many chickens endeavouring to gain shelter from 
the kite. 

As soon as the noise of the tumult was over, we rose and looked 
about fearfully ; and, getting together again, we helped one another 
through the garden hedge, and made as fast as we could to the 
cottage of a neighbouring farmer, who had been our father's tenant. 
Here we were received coldly, and fared but very hardly for that 
night. On the next day, however, in order to get quit of us, as I 
suppose, the man went among our relations, and prevailed on one 
to take a son, and on another to take a daughter, till we were all 
divided among them; and so we entered on a kind of service to our 
kindred a service, as I believe, that is found on experience to be 
much harder and more insulting than any service to a stranger. 

1 forgot to tell you, gentlemen, that our mother deceased before 
our father engaged in arms, insomuch that we became orphans in 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 231 

all respects. I fell to the share of an uncle by my mother's side. 
He had a small estate of about a hundred and twenty pounds 
yearly income, with one son, and a daughter whom I thought very 
lovely. 

My uncle appointed me overseer of his labourers, as also his 
occasional clerk, for casting accounts and inditing his letters, &c. ; 
but when it was intimated to him that there was a secret liking 
between his daughter and me, he called me aside, and, taking up a 
book of profane poems, he kissed it, and swore by the contents 
thereof, that if ever I married his daughter he would not give us a 
groat. 

If you ever knew what love was, said he to Mr. Clement, you 
must know that it breaks over stronger fences than these. In 
short, we were wedded, and turned out of the house without any 
thing to live upon except about the value of twenty pounds in 
small matters, which had been given to my wife from time to time, 
by Lady Goodly, her godmother. 

We made the best of our way to London. My wife understood 
needlework, and as I knew that my father-in-law was quite irre- 
concilable, I joined myself to a house-painter, to whom I gave my 
time for nothing, on condition of his giving me a sight into his 
business. 

In the third year my dear wife brought this poor creature into 
the world ; but happily, she did not encumber mankind with any 
more of our wretched and depending progeny. 

All our care and delight was fixed on this our little daughter, 
and we thought nothing of any pains or labour that might serve 
to introduce her, like herself, into the world. 

As soon as Charles II. had ascended the throne, our relations 
were fully assured that we should be restored to our ancient rights 
and possessions ; and they contributed, as it were for their own 
credit, to set us forth in a suitable manner for appearing at court. 
There, accordingly, we attended, from time to time, for the space of 
twelve months, and got a number of woful memorials presented to 
his majesty ; but his majesty was so deeply engaged in his pleasures, 
or so fearful of offending the enemies of his house, that he gave no 
attention to our wrongs. There may be also something in the 
breasts of the great that excites them to acts of bounty rather 
than acts of justice ; for these, as they apprehend, might be ac- 
cepted as matter of debt and not as matter of favour. 

Being tired of a fruitless suit, I returned to my former employ- 
ment, and, by industry and frugality, I lived with my little family 
quite happy and contented. 

About ten months ago, two men came to our lodgings. The one 
was in a rich livery, and, having inquired for my daughter, pre- 
sented her with a note to this effect: "Lady Diana Templar 
sends Diana Stern, the enclosed bill of twenty-five pounds, in order 
to put her into some little way of livelihood." As my poor dear 
child had no cause to suspect any fraud or evil intention in the case, 
she desired the men to return her most humble thanks and duty to 
her ladyship, and away they went. 

As this lady was a distant relation of my wife's father, my 



232 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

daughter in a few days dressed herself in her best, and went to 
return thanks to her ladyship in person, but was told that she was 
gone to her seat in the country. 

In the mean time she laid out her supposed bounty in furnishing 
a little front shop with some millinery wares, and was already 
beginning to get some custom, when one evening two bailiffs en- 
tered, laid an action upon her, and, taking her up in their arms, 
hurried her into a coach that drove up to the door. 

My wife and I had rushed out on hearing our child shriek ; and, 
seeing a coach set off with her at a great rate, we ran after as 
fast as we could, shouting, and screaming, and crying Stop the 
coach stop the coach ! At length a bold fellow who was passing 
caught one of the horses by the bridle, and, while the coachman 
lashed at him, he took out his knife and cut the reins in two. A 
mob then began to gather ; whereupon a well-dressed man, who 
was in the coach, leaped out and made his escape, but the coach- 
man was not so lucky ; the people pulled him from the box, and 
having beaten and kicked him, they dragged him through the 
kennel. 

Mean while we got our child out, and then the mob overturned 
the coach, and, jumping upon it, broke and dashed it all to pieces. 
We then thought that we had nothing further to apprehend, and, 
taking our child between us, we turned back and walked homeward ; 
but, alas ! we were not permitted to enter. The two bailiffs met 
us, and, producing their writ, again arrested our daughter at the 
suit, as they said, of Jonathan Delvil, Esq., for the sum of twenty- 
five pounds, which he had lent her on such a day. So they con- 
ducted her here, while my wife and I accompanied her, weeping 
and sobbing all the way. 

I then took these poor apartments to cover us from the weather, 
and, as my wife grew suddenly sick and faint, I hastened back to 
our lodgings and had our bedding brought hither. 

It was now evident that the pretended gift of Lady Templar 
was no other than a diabolical scheme of the villain Delvil to get 
my darling within his fangs ; and I cursed my own stupidity for 
not perceiving it at first ; but blessed be God, however, in all 
events, that my lamb was still innocent was still unsullied. 

What with grief and with fright together, my dear wife took to 
her bed, from whence she never rose, but expired on the fifth day, 
blessing and pressing her daughter to her bosom. My poor infant 
then fell as dead beside her mother, and could not be recovered 
from her fit in many hours ; and indeed it was then the wish and 
the prayer of my soul, that we might all be laid and forgotten in 
one grave together. 

As soon as my darling was recovered, however, I again wished 
to live for her sake, that I might not leave her without a com- 
forter or protector in the midst of a merciless and wicked world. 

In order to pay the nurse-keeper, the doctor, and apothecary, as 
also to defray the funeral expenses, I left my child with the nurse- 
keeper, and, going to our former lodgings, I sold all her millinery 
matters at something under a third of prime cost ; and having dis- 
charged the lodgings, and paid my jail debts, I prepared to lay my 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 233 

precious deposit in the womb of that earth which is one day to 
render her back incorruptible to eternity. 

When the corpse was carrying out at the door my child fell 
once more into fits, and I was divided and quite distracted about 
what I should do, whether to stay with the living, or pay my duty 
to the dead. But I will no longer detain you with melancholy 
matters, since all worldly griefs, with all worldly joys also, must 
shortly be done away. 

As soon as I understood that Lady Templar was returned to 
town, I waited upon her, and giving her an abridgment of our 
manifold misfortunes, I produced the note that had been written 
in her name; but she coldly replied that it was not her hand, 
and that she was not answerable for the frauds or villanies of 
others. 

Mean while, my dear girl accused herself as the cause of all our 
calamities, and pined away on that account as pale as the sheet she 
lay in. She was also so enfeebled by her faintish and sick fits, that 
she was not able to make a third of her usual earnings ; and as I, 
on my part, was also disqualified from labouring in my profession, 
since I did not dare to leave my child alone and unsheltered, we 
were reduced to a state of the greatest extremity. 

One day word was brought me that a gentleman, a few doors 
off, desired to speak with me ; and as they who are sinking catch 
at any thing for their support, my heart fluttered in the hope 
of some happy reverse. Accordingly I followed the messenger. 
His appearance in dress and person was altogether that of the 
gentleman. 

He ordered all others out of the room, and requesting me to sit 
beside him, in a half whispering voice he began : I am come, Mr. 
Stern, from one whom you have great reason to account your 
greatest enemy: I come from Mr. Delvil, at whose suit your 
daughter now lies in prison. I started. Be patient, sir, he said. 
He knows your distresses he knows all your wants he knows 
also that he is the author of them ; yet I tell you that he feels 
them as if they were his own, and that it was not his enmity, but 
his love, that occasioned them. 

He depends on his old uncle Dimmock for a vast fortune in ex- 
pectation. He saw your daughter, and loved her; he saw her 
again, and loved her to madness. He inquired her family, her 
character, and found that he had nothing to expect from any 
licentious proposal. He feared, however, that all must love her as 
he did, and, to prevent other pirates, he made use of the stratagem 
which, contrary to his intentions, has brought you here. He never 
meant any thing dishonourable by your daughter. Had he carried 
her clear off, you might all have been happy together at this day ; 
and, if you consent, he will marry her here in the presence of a few 
witnesses, who shall be sworn to secresy till his uncle's death; 
and he will instantly pay you down three hundred pounds in re- 
compense for your sufferings, and will settle one hundred pounds 
annuity on your child for life. 

I must own that, to one in my circumstances, this proposal had 
something very tempting in it. But who is this Mr. Delvil ? said I. 



234 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

I know him not ; I never saw him. I am the man, sir, said he. 
I would have discharged my action as I came to this place ; but 
I dare not permit your daughter to get out of my custody ; for, 
at the loss of my fortune at the loss of my life I am deter- 
mined that no other man living shall possess her. I then promised 
him that I would make a faithful narration to my child of all that 
had passed, but told him, at the same time, that I would wholly 
subscribe to her pleasure ; and so we parted. 

As soon as I represented this matter to my Diana no ! my 
papa, she cried; it is impossible it never can be; I would do 
any thing suffer any thing but this, for your relief. Would you 
act the marriage of the lamb and the wolf in the fable ? If such 
have been the consequences of this gentleman's affection for us, 
what have we not to expect from the effects of his aversion? I 
would prefer any kind of death to a life with such a man. And 
then, my mother, she cried, and burst into tears my dear mother 
whom he has murdered! Though he were worth half the world, 
and would marry me publicly in the face of the other half; it 
will not be it cannot be, indeed, my papa! 

Hereupon I writ Mr. Delvil almost a literal account of my daugh- 
ter's answer. It is nearly five weeks since this happened, and 
we have not heard any thing further of him. In this time, how- 
ever, we got acquainted with a family at the next door, whose con- 
verse has been a great consolation to us. There is a father and 
mother, and seven small children boys and girls ; they are very 
worthy people, and of noble descent ; but how they contrive to 
live at all I cannot conceive, for they have no visible means of 
making a penny. Had we not known them, we should have 
thought ourselves the poorest of all creatures. "We must own 
them more deserving of your charity than we are. 

Here poor Mr. Stern ended ; and you cannot think, dada, how 
my heart leapt with love toward him, on his recommending others 
as more deserving than himself. So I resolved at once what to do, 
and taking two fifty pound notes from my pocket-book You shall 
not be under the necessity, Mr. Stern, says I, of marrying your 
pretty lamb here to the ugly wolf ; so here is fifty pounds to pay 
your action and fees, and other small debts. 

On taking the note he looked at it very earnestly ; and when he 
saw it was a true note, he opened his eyes and his mouth so wide, 
and stood so stiff, without stirring hand or foot, that he put me in 
mind of Lot's wife who was turned into a pillar of salt. How- 
ever, I did not seem to mind him, but turning to his daughter, and 
showing her the other note, Miss Diana, says I, here is fifty pounds 
for you also, in order to set you up in your little shop again ; but 
you shall not have it without a certain condition. What condition, 
master ? said she, smiling. The condition, says I, of putting your 
arms about my neck, and giving me one or two sweet kisses. 
She then looked earnestly at me with eyes swimming with plea- 
sure ; and starting suddenly to me, and catching me to her bosom, 
she kissed my lips and my forehead, and my head, again and again ; 
and then set up as lamentable and loud a cry as if her father had 
lain a corpse before her. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 235 

Mr. Stern then lifted up his eyes, and dropping on his knees 

my God ! he cried, how bountiful art thou to a wretch who is 
not worthy the least of all thy mercies ! Hereupon the daughter 
turned, and seeing the posture of her father, she fell on her knees 
before him, and throwing her arms about him, he folded her in 
his also, and they wept plentifully upon each other. 

How comes it that crying should be so catching? However it 
be, Mr. Clement and I could not contain ; and I shall love him the 
better during life for the tears that he shed on that occasion. 

On hearing a smart rapping, Mr. Stern rose and opened the door, 
where a footman, almost breathless, delivered him a letter. The 
letter was to the purpose that Mr. Delvil was ill of a quinsey, that 
he had but a few hours to live, and requested Mr. Stern to bring 
his daughter to him, that, by marriage, he might give her a law- 
ful title to his fortune. No, papa ! cried Diana ; living or dead, 
nothing shall ever bribe me to give my hand to a man who has 
had a hand in the death of my dearest mother. 

Mr. Clement, however, thought it advisable that Mr. Stern 
should attend the messenger, to see if Mr. Delvil was really ill, or 
whether this might not be some new-contrived treachery. 

This was a day of successes to poor Mr. Stern. We had pro- 
mised to stay with his Diana until his return; and he had not 
been long gone till some one tapped at the door. I opened it, 
and saw an exceeding old and reverend man ; he was dressed all 
in black, and his white head looked like snow on the feathers of 
the raven. Is Tom Stern here? said he. No, sir, said I, he is 
gone into town. I thought he was a prisoner. No, sir, it is not 
he, but his daughter who is under confinement. Will you give a 
feeble old man leave to sit with you, gentlemen? and so down he 
sat. Come here to me, child, says he to Diana, are you a daugh- 
ter of Tom Stern ? I am, sir, so please you. And what was your 
mother's name ? Ann Koche, sir ; but, alas ! she is not living. I 
was the cause of her death ; she broke her heart, good sir, on my 
being put to jail. I hope, child, said the old gentleman, that you 
were not imprisoned for any thing that was naughty. No, sir, no ! 
cried Mr. Clement, it was her honesty alone that brought and kept 
her here; had she been less virtuous she might have been at 
liberty, and flaunting about in her coach. 

The old man then put on his spectacles, and ordering her to 
draw nearer, he took a hand in each of his, and, looking intently 
in her face What is your name, my dear? said he. Diana, 
honoured sir. That is a pretty and chaste name, for an unchris- 
tian name. Indeed, Diana, you are a sweet babe, and the prettiest 
little prisoner that ever I saw. I will pay all your debts, and give 
you a thousand pounds, over, if you will come along with me, 
and be my prisoner, Diana. Ah, sir ! cried the girl, it is too much 
to have broken the heart of one parent already ; I would not leave 
my dear father for any man with all the money in all the world. 
You do not leave your father, he cried, by going with me, Diana. 

1 am your true father, the father of Nanny Koche, the father of 
her who bore you your own grandfather, my Diana. 

Here she sunk on her knees, between his knees, begging anJ 



236 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

beseeching his blessing ; while his hands and eyes were lifted in 
prayer over her. He then raised her, and placing her gently on 
his knee, clasped her in his aged arms ; while she threw hers 
about his neck, and joining her cheek to his, sobbed aloud, and 
poured her tears into his bosom. The old gentleman, however, did 
not express his concern by word, or sob, or even any change of his 
countenance ; and yet his tears fell fast down his reverend and de- 
lightful features, upon his grandchild. 

This was a very pleasing, though a very affecting sight. As soon 
as the height of their passion was something abated, Miss Diana 
turned her eye toward me, and said You were pleased, my 
grandpapa, to promise that you would pay my debts, but that is 
done already. This angel here was sent to prevent all others ; 
and he further presented me with this bill of 50, to set me up in 
a better shop than I kept before. 

I rejoice, cried the old man, I rejoice to find that so much of 
heaven is still left upon earth. But you, my Diana, are now in 
a condition rather to give charity than receive it from any. 
Your dear uncle Jeremy, who traded to the West Indies, lately 
died of the smallpox on his passage homeward. You are the 
heir of his fortunes, and the heir of my fortune ; you are the 
whole and sole lady of all our possessions. But, tell me, how much 
did this young gentleman advance in your favour? A hundred 
pounds, sir. 

He then took out a banker's note of a hundred pounds, and, 
having offered it to me, I did not dare to refuse it, for fear of 
offending the honour of the respectable old gentleman ; so I held it 
in my hand after a doubting manner. My dear Miss Diana, says 
I, I will not be put to the pain of taking this back again, but on 
the condition of your telling me to whom I shall give it ? O, she 
cried out instantly, to the babies, to the sweet babies at the 
next door! I wish to heaven I had as much more to add to it 
for their sakes. 

I then inquired the name of her favourite family at the next 
door, and being told that it was Ruth, I looked over my list, and 
found that Mr. Ruth was in for above seven hundred pounds. This 
grieved me very much, as such a sum nearly amounted to the half 
of our whole stock. However, I comforted myself with the hope 
that God would send some one else to make up to this poor family 
what should be wanting on my part. 

Mr. Stern just then returned. I beg pardon, said he, gentlemen, 
for detaining you so long, but I could not avoid it. The unhappy 
man is actually dying a very terrible death, indeed, in his full 
strength, and almost in his full health, stifling and gasping for air, 
which the swelling of the glands will not suffer to pass. 

As soon as I entered, he beckoned to me, and put this paper 
sealed into my hand. And again, observing that I was agitated 
and deeply concerned for the state in which he laboured, he reached 
out his hand to me, and grasping my right hand, put this ring 
upon my finger. This paper contains, under his hand and seal, a 
discharge of the action which he laid upon my daughter, as also 
a conveyance to us of the cash notes enclosed, amounting to three 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 237 

hundred pounds, in consideration, as he recites, of our losses and 
unjust sufferings. And so, my dear Mr. Fenton, I here return you 
your 100 with all possible acknowledgments, and a sense of the 
obligation that will never leave me during life. 

Sir, said I, you must excuse me ; I am already paid. That gen- 
tleman yonder compelled me to accept of the very sum you offer. 

Mr. Stern then started, and turning, he saw his uncle ; and, 
eyeing him inquisitively, at length recollected who he was. He 
then stepped up, and falling on his knees before him O, sir ! he 
cried, your pardon, your pardon! Tis all I presume to ask; I 
dare not hope for your blessing. 

Tom, said the old gentleman, I wanted to be even with you ; 
I wanted to seduce your daughter, as you seduced mine. But 
your daughter, Tom, though come of very rebellious parents, would 
not be seduced. However, as I have taken a liking to her, she 
must come along with me, whether she will or no. And as Jacob 
said to Joseph concerning Ephraim and Manasseh, she shall be mine 
and not thine, Tom ; and my name, and the name of my fathers 
shall be named upon her, according to her inheritance. But if you 
have any affection for this my child, Tom, and are unwilling to 
part with her, you may follow her, and welcome. 

Soon after we got up, and, having congratulated this happy 
family on the blessing of their meeting and reconciliation, I stepped 
to the old gentleman, and catching him about the neck, tenderly 
took my leave of him, as I did also of Mr. Stern. But when I 
went to take leave of the fair Diana, she drew some steps backward, 
and her eyes and sweet features beginning to swell, she again run 
forward, and catching me in her dear arms 0, my darling, my 
darling, my darling ! she cried ; am I then going to lose you, it may 
be never to see you more ! were it but once in a week, in a month, 
in a year, to behold you, even that would keep me alive for all the 
remainder. O my best, my most generous, my first preserver ! it 
is you who might be the seducer who might make me and others 
run after you barefoot. But if we must part, my little angel, do 
but promise to know me in heaven, and there your poor Diana 
will meet you, never to part any more. 

What could I say or do, sir, in answer to the dear girl ? My 
heart swelled almost to bursting while she caressed and wept over 
me. At length, with words as well as my tears would give me 
leave to pronounce them, I demanded the name of the place to 
which she was going, and promised to pay her a visit as soon as 
possibly I could. "We then parted very melancholy, notwithstand- 
ing all our success ; and, going out, I wiped my eyes, and begged 
Mr. Clement to order tea and coffee, with a comfortable entertain- 
ment, for the family at the next door, while I should go in and 
introduce myself as well as I could. 

Having tapped gently at the door, it was opened by a little 
ragged boy of about five years old. Mrs. Kuth sat full in my view, 
and her three little daughters stood before her, while she examined 
them in the Old Testament questions of who was the first man, 
and the wisest man, and the strongest man, and the oldest man, 
and, above all, the man after God's own heart? 



238 THE FOOL OF QVALITY. 

Mrs. Kuth was a fine woman, and had a great deal of humble 
dignity about her. I bowed to her as I entered, and, going fami- 
liarly up, I took her by the hand and kissed it. Allow me, madam, 
said I, to introduce a little neighbour to you. I lodge within a 
few doors, and shall think myself happy in being acquainted in 
your family. Alas! my dear, says she, there are very few who 
seek acquaintance with calamity. They who wish to relieve it 
seek acquaintance with it, madam. 

Having eyed me all over with an earnest kind of surprise You 
look, my love, said she, to be very good-natured, and, I dare say, 
will be very charitable when you come to have the ability. The 
little ability I have, madam, shall be strained for your service. In 
the mean time, pray pardon the freedom I have taken in ordering 
tea and coffee into your room, with some cakes and sweetmeats 
for these pretty misses. I will only trouble you, madam, with one 
guest more ; it is Mr. Clement, my tutor, who, good man, has been 
no stranger to poverty or distress. 

Here she called Mr. Kuth from an inner room. Give me leave, 
my dear, says she, to introduce a young stranger to you ; from 
what world he comes I know not, but I am sure that he is not 
wholly of the world that we have lived in. 

Mr. Ruth's countenance spoke at once the meekness of Moses 
and the patience of Job. Having saluted, we both sat down. 
Mr. Kuth, said I, I have a message to you and your lady from 
your sweet, pretty neighbour, Miss Diana Stern. In token of her 
respect and affection for you, she presents you with this cash-note 
of a hundred pounds. Diana Stern! cried out Mr. Kuth, why, 
master, she is nearly as poor as ourselves. By no means, sir, I 
assure you ; her grandfather has come to town ; she is worth several 
thousands, besides a considerable estate to which she is heiress. 
O the dear creature ! the dear angel ! cried Mrs. Ruth, I will 
instantly go and pay her my acknowledgments. So up she got, 
and out she run, before I could prevent her. 

As soon as she was gone Mr. Ruth, says I, my father is much 
fonder of me than I deserve. He has given me a little money to 
dispose of at pleasure among the confined debtors ; and though I 
may not have enough to answer your occasions, yet my father is 
so very good and so very generous, that if you give me the sum of 
your debts, with the story of your distresses, his heart, I am sure, 
will melt, and he will set you clear in the world. 

He made no answer, however, to this my offer, but, lifting up 
his eyes, he cried Well mightest thou say, great Saviour of 
the simple, " Suffer little children to come unto me, for of such 
is the kingdom of heaven." thou babe of the manger ! " thou 
first-born of many brethren;" here, indeed, is a dear and true 
little brother of thine ; but he speaks in his simplicity, and 
not according to knowledge ! Then, turning toward me Can 
you guess, my darling, said he, what you undertake to do for 
me? I question if the charities of all this nation would be 
sufficient, when united, to effect my deliverance. Nothing 
nothing, but the arm of the Almighty can do it. He will do 
it, indeed, in death ; but what then shall become of my wife 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 239 

and seven infants? that truly is terrible is worse than death 
to think of ! 

While we were speaking two sweet little fellows came in, the 
eldest very nearly of my size, but both clad in very thin and poor- 
looking apparel. Having kneeled for their father's blessing, they 
slipped behind us ; and, turning my head to observe them, I was 
quite ashamed, and drew it back again, on perceiving that the poor 
things were unlading their pockets of old crusts and broken meats, 
which I supposed they had begged for the family. 

Mrs. Ruth just then returned, and her countenance looked 
something dejected. She took her seat by her husband, and, 
continuing a while silent, she put her handkerchief before her 
eyes, and began in broken words Can you guess, my dear, said 
she, what sort of a creature this is whom we have got among us ? 
This little heavenly impostor, to lighten our obligation, would have 
persuaded us that the hundred pounds was the gift of another ; 
but it is all his own bounty it is all his own graciousness. 
Come, my daughters come, my children, kneel down and return 
your thanks to this your patron, your benefactor, your little 
father here ! 

0, sir, you would have pitied me sadly had you seen me at 
this time ! The poor dear things came, all in a cluster, pressing, 
and catching, and clasping, and clinging about me, while my love 
and my very heart was torn, as it were, to fritters among them. 
So I took them one by one in my arms, and kissed and embraced 
them very cordially, calling them my brothers and sisters. I then 
took out another hundred-pound note, and giving it to the eldest 
of the daughters Here, my dear, said I, I always loved the 
little misses better than the little masters; here is for yourself 
and your sisters, to clothe you in a way more becoming your 
family. And then taking a note, of equal value, I gave it to 
the eldest son, for himself and his brothers, as I said, to help to 
educate them in a manner more agreeable to the house from 
whence they came. 

Mr. and Mrs. Kuth looked so astonished at me, and at each 
other, that for a while they were not able to utter a syllable ; 
and, just as they began to make their acknowledgments, I cried 
Hush, hush ! here comes my tutor. 

Mr. Clement just then entered, followed by several servants, 
who carried a tea equipage, cold fowl, baked meats, with pastries, 
and some wine. 

Having introduced Mr. Clement, we all got round the table, and 
after a tea and a further regale, I besought Mr. Kuth to give us 
the story of his misfortunes. 

My father, said he, was baron of Frankford. He left my brother, 
with the title, four thousand five hundred pounds a-year, entailed, 
however, upon me in case of his dying without male issue ; and he 
left me a small inheritance of four hundred pounds yearly, to 
support in some measure the appearance of a gentleman. 

As my concern bordered on my brother's estate, we saw one 
another every day, and continued for several years ie straight and 
tender amity. 



240 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

Being both invited one day to dine with other company, at the 
house of a neighbour called Mr. Heartless, a question happened to 
be started over the bottle, whether the method of setting an egg 
on end was originally the invention of Columbus, or whether it was 
communicated to him by some other, and I unhappily espoused 
the opinion that was opposite to that of my brother. 

Now, though the question was not worth the very shell of the 
egg about which we debated, yet we entered as warmly into it as 
though a province had lain at stake ; for it is not truth or in- 
struction that disputants seek after it is victory alone that is the 
object of their contention. 

After some warm words and personal retorts had passed between 
my brother and me, he started into sudden passion, and gave me 
the lie ; whereupon, reaching across the table, I gave him a tap 
on the cheek with the flat of my fingers, then rising furiously from 
his seat, he swore a fearful oath, and cried I will ruin you, Harry, 
though it cost me my estate ; I will rum you, Harry Kuth, with all 
who are yours. 

The very next day he mustered his tenants and labourers, and, 
coming upon me with a little army, he laid most of my fences level 
with the earth. 

When I complained of this violence to my next neighbours, Mr. 
Heartless and Mr. Hollow, they protested they would stand by me 
against such outrageous proceedings to the last of their fortunes. 
They then advanced me, between them, five hundred pounds for the 
purpose. I immediately commenced suit against my lord's tenants. 
But, though I cast them all with costs, I unhappily found that 
nearly all my money was sunk in the contest. 

Meantime, scarce a day passed wherein I was not served with a 
subpoena from chancery, to answer such or such a bill, to which my 
brother had procured me to be made a party. And he also entered 
a suit against me himself, in order to invalidate my father's will, 
whereby I claimed my little patrimony. 

When I told this to my friend Mr. Hollow, he broke into a loud 
laugh. Your title! cried he; the world cannot invalidate your 
title, Mr. Kuth ; I will let you have a thousand pounds upon it to- 
morrow ; and this I was under the necessity of accepting soon after. 

Contention serves, with mutual hands, to shut every door against 
reconcilation. The more I had loved my brother, the more I now 
detested him. Instead of any submission or overture to appease 
him, my lips uttered, in daily invectives, the overflowings ot my 
heart ; as I also was assured that, on his part, he wished me nothing 
less than eternal perdition. Thus we burned, on both sides, with 
unquenchable fire, and the kingdom of Satan was fully opened 
within us. 

At length my body was imprisoned, at the suit of my neighbour 
Heartless, for 750, and my lands were taken under execution, at 
the suit of my neighbour Hollow, for the sum of 2000. But I 
soon was informed that all this money was my brother's, who had 
advanced it from time to time, to those his clandestine correspond- 
ents, in order to hasten and deepen my destruction. When I 
understood this I raged I was all on fire; and I took a horrid 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 241 

pleasure in the notion of having the fangs of a tiger, that I might 
tear my brother piecemeal, and my false friends limb from limb, 
and feast my spirit on their pangs, and mine eyes on their carnage. 

But when I turned a look on my wife and seven infants, grief 
joined with rage to rend me by a double distraction. I cursed the 
lot to which I was appointed upon earth, and I should have sought 
some desperate means of putting an end to my torments and ex- 
istence together, but that I dreaded, by my death, to give pleasure 
to my brother, ten times more than I dreaded the pain of death 
itself. 

O my friends ! had all that ever were sainted come and preached 
to me the peace of our Lord Christ at that season, it would have 
been no more than beating the air, or striving with so many 
sponges to make an impression on a block of marble. It is distress 
alone that, by oppression, makes impression that preaches the 
internal doctrine of sensible mortification, and humbles a proud 
spirit by plucking away all its props. 

At first, I was a worm under the foot of my God. I turned and 
struggled, and writhed, and fought with all my force against the 
crusher. But, alas ! all was in vain ; he was too mighty for me, 
and opposition served only to add to my anguish. 

At length I was compelled to acquiesce, rather through the 
want of power than the want of will to resist. And 1 lay, as it 
were, without motion under his dispensations; at the same time 
that my heart reproached him in secret. 

Having sold all our moveables, and even our wearing apparel 
for sustenance, we were reduced to the necessity of sending our 
eldest boys to beg fragments of victuals at kitchen-windows, to 
keep us from utterly famishing. This I held to be such a further 
shame and disgrace as stung my soul to the quick; I therefore 
began to kick against these pricks also ; but finding that the more 
I spurned, the stronger I was held and pressed into the dust, I 
gave up all resistance, and contented myself with grieving and 
weeping under the hand of the Almighty. 

From hence I gradually sunk into a state of resigned serenity, 
which, although without sunshine, was yet without disturbance. 
My fury smoothed its crest, my passions subsided, and I felt 
nothing more of rancour against my brother, or resistance against 
my God. 

The activity of the soul will find itself employment. As I had 
now no further prospect or concern upon earth, I began to turn 
my thoughts and attention toward heaven. I locked myself into 
yonder closet. I threw myself into the dust. I have sinned, I 
cried I have greatly sinned, O God ! I am nothing I am crushed 
even lower than the nothing that I am ; spare, spare me from a 
deeper perdition, I beseech thee ! 

I felt that my prayer was heard : peace descended upon me like 
dew upon the night ; the day-star began gradually to dawn to my 
soul ; the dark kingdom of Satan gave way before the kingdom 
of the Son of light and love ; and I would no more have entertained 
any one of my former passions than I would have taken burning 
coals and have buttoned them up in my bosom. 

B 



242 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

I was greatly delighted, father, with this part, and some more of 
Mr. Ruth's story ; and I got him to repeat it over and over, that 
I might remember it the better. 

I now, continued he I now pitied my brother as much as ever 
I had hated him. I grieved for having caused the loss of his peace. 
I wished to restore it to him. I wrote a penitential acknowledg- 
ment of my faults. I besought his pardon, in the humblest manner, 
for the unfortunate blow. I subscribed to the justice of my con- 
sequent sufferings ; and I sent my son here, to attend his lordship 
with my lowly address. 

The triumph which this humiliation gave to my brother, supplied 
him with patience to go through my memorial. But then con- 
ceiving, as I suppose, that it was dictated by mercenary meanness 
and hypocrisy, he tore it to pieces and dashed it into the fire. 
Then returning to my child the box which had so inflamed the soul 
of his lordship, he kicked my poor little fellow out of his house. 

My child came home to me weeping sadly ; but I consoled him 
the best I could, and mingled my tears with his ; not in any re- 
sentment for the treatment received, but through grief for the 
inveteracy of my unhappy brother. O my God! I cried, I no 
longer repine at my abasement, at the weight of my sufferings and 
mortifications ! I bless thee for them, God ! they have proved my 
best friends, my most salutary physicians. Cruel and stern, indeed, 
is the porter who stands at the iron gate of pain ; but O, it opens 
upon regions of inward delight ; for He who clothed Himself with 
the cross is all glorious within. 

My happy experience of this truth opened for me a new prospect 
into the mystery of God's dispensation to mortals, and threw a 
number of shining lights on those very articles of gospel-redemption 
which had formerly appeared to me so exceptionable and gloomy. 
If God, said I to myself, hath suffered man to fall, he hath also 
provided for him every possible means of recovery and restoration. 

Wherefore, when sin came into the world, God also sent suffering, 
its inseparable attendant, to be a cure and an antidote to the poison 
thereof. If sin, therefore, hath thrust the kingdom of heaven from 
within us, suffering comes, as God's forerunner; it relaxes and 
unfolds the brazen gates of our polluted temple, that Christ, our 
righteousness, may enter, the very hem of whose garment is salva- 
tion to every soul that lays hold upon it. 

Here I took Mr. Ruth about the neck, and kissing him, said, that 
I was sure my father would be willing to pay his whole debt, in 
return for the sweet instructions which he had given to his Harry. 
You speak of your father, my dear, said he, as though he were 
the representative of God in the gospel, who forgave to his servant 
ten thousand talents. What you have given me already, master, 
is beyond any human bounty that ever I heard of. I shall, there- 
fore, lay by two of these notes, till I am better informed how far 
your good father may be satisfied with the donation. 

Soon after we took leave, for the present, of this honourable 
family. We then went among the other principal debtors, whose 
distresses indeed were great, though their stories, except one, had 
little singular in them. In order to make our money go as far as 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 243 

we could, we hurried here and there through the town, com- 
pounding with the several creditors, from eight to ten and twelve 
and fifteen shillings in the pound ; so that, for about six hundred 
pounds, we discharged a number who were indebted to the amount 
of a thousand. 

On Tuesday about noon, in the last week, I stepped to Mr. 
Kuth's, to see if the family had been decently clad, agreeable to 
my request. There I found him and his four sons clothed in warm 
and clean, though very coarse, apparel ; and he told me that his 
wife had gone abroad with her three daughters, in order to put 
them also into a suitable condition. 

While I sat with him, a young woman came in, of a very genteel 
appearance, though in a plain dress. Don't you remember the girl, 
sir, said she, to Mr. Kuth, who used to come to you over night, in 
a green kerchief and a little red mantle? I should be very un- 
grateful, indeed, said he, if any change of dress could conceal from 
my remembrance that sweet and charitable countenance. sir ! 
she cried, the few shillings that I have brought you, from time to 
time, came from a very affectionate hand, though from a hand you 
would little suspect of any affection toward you ; they came from 
your loving niece, Belinda Euth, who has shed many a shower of 
tears on your misfortunes. May heaven be her portion, cried out 
the good man, since earth has nothing equal to so much goodness ! 
Indeed, sir, continued the girl, the little that your niece sent 
you was procured with much difficulty and danger to herself; for 
from the time that, on her knees and with a deluge of tears, she 
petitioned her father in your behalf, he kept a watchful eye over 
her, and took from her all family trusts, so that she had nothing 
wherewith to supply you except the price of some cast gowns, and 
of other little matters that she feigned to have lost. Moreover, 
my lord swore vehemently, that if ever she furnished you with the 
value of a farthing, or kept any kind of correspondence with you 
or with yours, he would disown and turn her into the public 
streets. 

You alarm me greatly, cried out Mr. Euth. Is any thing amiss 
has any thing happened to my dear child? She was a lovely 
little lamb a little angel from her cradle, though I should not 
know her now if she stood erect before me. I hope, I say tell 
me proceed, I beseech you ! 

There was a servant, sir, a man whom your niece thought veiy 
faithful, and therefore intrusted with the secret of my coming to 
you, that he might attend and see me safe back again. This fellow, 
presuming on the confidence that was placed in him, would this 
morning have taken liberties with his young mistress. This she 
resented in a becoming manner, and threatened to complain of his 
insolence to her father. The revengeful villain instantly ran and 
told the affair to his lord, with many aggravations, as though his 
daughter was robbing him of all his substance. Thereupon she 
was hastily called, and having in part confessed the charge, my 
lord drew his sword in his fury, whereupon, giving a shriek and a 
sudden spring, she got out of his presence, and has sent me to 
know, sir, if you will be pleased to receive her? 

B2 



244 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

Yes, cried Mr. Ruth, to my bosom, to my heart ! with the same 
pleasure and welcome that a convict receives pardon on the hour 
of execution. 

Just then Mrs. Ruth entered, with her three daughters, who, 
running up to their father, dropped together on their knees before 
him for a blessing. 

While his hands and eyes were raised in prayer over them, the 
young stranger stepped earnestly up, and falling on her knees 
beside the daughters, she broke into tears, and cried aloud Bless 
me, bless me also, O my father! I am your niece, your Belinda. 
My father is no more ! Yours, my lord, is the title, yours all the 
possession ! I now, in my turn, depend on your bounty for a morsel 
of bread. My brother, my brother dead ! exclaimed Mr. Ruth. 
He is, my lord, she replied ; he was suffocated by his rising choler, 
arid expired on the spot. 

While the young lady spoke, Mrs. Ruth looked as quite terrified 
by the tidings of such a sudden elevation ; and clapping her hands 
together, and lifting her eyes, she cried It cannot be, it is im- 
possible ! Ours the title, ours the fortune ! O my God ! my 
husband ! my children ! and down she dropped. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

WHILE Harry was speaking, Ned saw a woman standing before 
one of the windows ; and, looking earnestly at her, he gave a sudden 
jump, and dancing about, cried sir, sir! my mammy, my 
mammy ! there's my mammy, as sure as day ! 

Run, Ned, instantly, cried Mr. Fenton, and call James to me. 
James, yonder's the woman who stole Ned from his parents ; have 
an eye to her, do not let her escape ! Order Frank to take a horse 
and go with all speed to Mr. and Mrs. Fielding, that they may 
come and know, of a surety, whether Ned is their child or not 
Stay a moment ; as soon as you have given Frank his orders, take 
the rest of the servants and lay hold on this bad woman ; bring 
her into the house by force, and confine her in one of the back 
rooms till Mr. Fielding arrives. By all Ned's account, she must be 
a very sad creature, and deserves no favour. 

James went out with alacrity upon his commission ; and, having 
executed matters with his accustomed punctuality, he returned to 
the company. 

O, sir ! cried James, it is impossible that this woman should be 
Ned's mammy, as he called her. This is some unhappy decayed 
gentlewoman, as innocent of the fact, I dare answer, as the child 
unborn. I am sorry, with all my heart, that I had her used so 
roughly. Beside, sir, she is so deaf that she can't answer to any 
thing of which she may be accused. 

When we took her in hand she was terribly frighted. Come, 
says I, mistress, you must now give an account of all your wicked- 
ness. Ennis, says she, Ennis ? No, but Enfield ; five miles beyond 
Enfield, with the Rev. Mr. Catharines. I know nothing, said I 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 245 

aloud, of your Enfields or your Catharines ; but I tell you that you 
must now answer for the life that you have led. Dead, dead ! says 
she, God forbid ! A dear and good master he was to me, I am sure. 
I have lived with him these five years, and he gave me money 
enough to bear my charges ; but I fell sick at St. Alban's and 
spent all, and I have been these three days creeping along, and 
begging wherewithal to keep life in me on the way. 

As you say, James, cried Mr. Fenton, this account seems pretty 
feasible ; a deaf servant, however, is something uncommon. Go to 
her yourself, Ned, and observe her more exactly ; for if what she 
says has any truth in it, it is impossible she should be your 
mammy. 

Ned accordingly went, but returned under evident confusion and 
difficulty. I don't know what to think, sir, of this matter, cries 
Ned. When I look at the gentlewoman's face, I could swear, 
twenty times over, to every feature ; but, when I look at her dress 
and manners, I could again almost swear against her face. 

Ned's perplexity added greatly to Mr. Fenton's curiosity. He got 
up in haste and went in person to inspect the party. When he 
entered, he saw a young woman who looked very pale and sickly, 
but of a genteel appearance, and neatly though plainly dressed. 
She cast upon him a sensible and penetrating look, and curtsying to 
him, with downcast eyes Sir, said she, your presence tells me that 
you are master here. I know not for what offence your people have 
confined me ; but if it is on any suspicion of misbehaviour, I have 
here the certificate of a worthy man and a great saint, who vouches 
at least for the innocence of my conduct. Here she presented 
him with a paper that contained the following words : 

" I certify that the bearer hath served me upwards of five years, 
in quality of housekeeper and intendant of my family ; and that she 
is a young woman of distinguished piety and merit, and departs, at 
her own desire, on some business to London. Given under my 
hand, &c. 

"MAEMADUKE CATHAEINES, 01." 

On reading this Mr. Fenton bowed, and made a motion with his 
hand for her to sit down. He then took a pen and paper that lay 
beside him, and wrote to the purpose, that he requested her to 
allow him to detain her certificate for about an hour ; after which 
he would return it, and endeavour to make her amends for the 
unbecoming treatment which his people had given her. 

On casting her eye over the paper, she made a low curtsy, and 
said I shall willingly attend, sir, during your pleasure ; but hope, 
in the mean time, that your charity will afford me a morsel or two 
of the fragments of your last meal. 

Mr. Fenton then pulled a bell, and having ordered some cold 
meats and wine to be served, he bowed, and withdrew to his 
company. 

Ned, said he, as he entered, this woman is just as much the 
empress of Russia as she is your mammy. Here, Mr. Clement, 
look at this certificate ; I have no reason to doubt the truth of the 



246 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

character given in it, for her person and manners are every way 
conformable. I am sorry at heart that I sent in such a hurry for 
Mr. and Mrs. Fielding ; I have thereby raised a sort of expectation 
in them, and it may be very mortifying to have that expectation so 
suddenly and so wholly defeated. 

Some time after a coach and six frothing horses drove up to the 
door, and Mr. and Mrs. Fielding alighted, with a kind of impatience 
and trepidation apparent in their countenance. As soon as Mr. 
Fenton had duly received and seated them My dear madam, says 
he to Mrs. Fielding, I think myself very unhappy in having given 
you a deal of unnecessary trouble. My poor Ned here, has been 
utterly mistaken in the person of the woman whom he took to be 
his mammy. The certificate of her certain residence bears a date 
even previous to that in which we found him . and her deportment 
is more than a thousand testimonies against her being of the 
wandering or dissolute class of people. Be pleased, Mr. Fielding, 
to look over this certificate ; I think it has all the marks of its 
being genuine. 

The moment that Mr. Fielding cast his eye on the paper A well- 
known character, indeed! he exclaimed. It is the hand of Mr. 
Catharines, my tutor, my friend ; the man of the world, excepting 
yourself, Mr. Fenton, for whom I have the dearest respect and affec- 
tion. No question can be made of any thing to which he sets his 
affirmative. 

Alas ! cried Mrs. Fielding, then all the hopes we had conceived 
must again be cast aside. Here comes our nurse, too, poor woman, 
in great haste; I sent her word that we had found the person 
whom we suspected to have stolen our child, and desired that she 
would meet me here directly. 

While Mrs. Fielding spoke, nurse entered panting, and almost 
breathless ; and, without saluting or taking any notice of the 
company Where, she hastily cried, where is the boy, madam, whom 
you suppose to be your child? 

Ah, nurse ! said Mrs. Fielding, we were quite mistaken in the 
woman whom we suspected to be the kidnapper, and so that affiair 
is all over again. 

I have nothing to say, cried nurse, to this woman or t'other 
woman ; but you must riot have another body's child put upon you. 
If he is indeed your son, I shall know him in an instant ; I should 
know him from all the children that ever were born. Why, nurse, 
cried Mrs. Fielding eagerly, do you know of any natural mark, or 
mole, or spot, by which you could guess at him ? He had no such 
spot upon him, madam ; but, if he be a living boy, he has a mark 
of my own making that never will out, and that's the reason that 
I never dared to tell you of it. What mark, nurse, what mark? 
tell me instantly, I beg you. 

Why, madam, you must know as how the weather was very cold, 
it being twelfth day in Christmas holidays. So you and my master 
were from home on visiting, and I had a rousing fire down, and my 
child stood by my knee, being just then twelve months nineteen 
days old, and as sturdy a fellow of his age and inches as any could 
desire to see. So the cat, all at once, threw down some crockery 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 247 

ware behind me. Up I started, to be sure, and run to save the 
vessels ; but, hearing my child scream, I turned much nimbler back 
again, and found him fallen with his little neck against the upper 
bar of the grate. It was well that I didn't die on the spot, for 
then he must have died too. So I whipped him up in my arms, 
but he shrieked and roared terribly. So I got some softening 
cream and spread it over the burn, and I put a plaster upon that 
again ; and I covered the place from day to day so well with his 
cap, that neither you nor my master knew any thing of the matter. 
But the shape of his hurt went so deep into my heart and into my 
memory, that, as I was saying, and still say, I should know him by 
it again among all the children in all the world. 

Go then, my dear nurse, cried Mrs. Fielding ; go immediately, 
and examine if this boy has your mark upon him. Is this the 
master, madam, whom you suspect to be your son? It is, nurse, it 
is ; my heart took a liking to him the first moment I saw him ; he 
too was stolen from his parents, and may as well be my son as the 
son of another. 

Here nurse made a hasty step or two toward Ned, but suddenly 
stopping and turning pale Ah, madam! she cried, I wish you 
would go and try yourself ; the wound, if he has it, is just under his 
right ear ; for if I should find, indeed, that he is my very child, I 
shall certainly run mad on the very spot for joy. I dare not tiy, 
nurse, I dare not try for the world, said Mrs. Fielding; I am 
already all of a tremble, I know not how. 

Nurse, then plucking up a little resolution, stepped suddenly to 
Ned, and turned up his hair ; when, giving a loud scream, she had 
just the power to cry out- My child, my child, my child! and 
dropped down in an anguishing fit of hysterics. 

Mrs. Fielding, on hearing her nurse cry out, rose hastily from her 
chair, and would have gone to embrace her son, but falling instantly 
back she fainted away. The poor nurse, however, was not so 
happy. She broke forth at times into convulsive peals of laughter, 
that made the house ring ; and again she fell into fits of weeping, 
so outrageous and bitterly desolate, as no heart under the temper of 
adamant could support. 

While the family were all in bustle, applying remedies to their 
patients, Mrs. Fielding recovered, and hearing the cries of her 
nurse, she went and kneeled down by her, and wept with her 
and over her, while her tears proved a seasonable restorative to 
herself. 

As soon as Mr. Fielding found that his lady was well recovered, 
he turned to Ned, and lifting his hair, observed the remarkable 
seam that the burn had made. It is, it is my child ! he tenderly 
cried. O my God! how is this? wherein have I deserved thy 
smallest notice or regard, that thou shouldest thus visit me with 
thy wonders, and by thy mercies put me to confusion of face? 

Here Ned kneeled respectfully down for a blessing, which his 
father silently called upon him with lifted hands and eyes. He 
then raised him, and sitting down took him fondly to his bosom. 
Thou art, thou art my son, my beloved son, he cried ; my first and 
my last, the only offspring of my bowels ! thou shalt no more be a 



248 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

wanderer, no more be a beggar, my babe ! Thrice blessed be our 
meeting, and tenfold blessed thy future fortune ! O that our lives, 
my child, might be made one whole oblation to him from whom 
this amazing salvation hath come ! 

By this time the nurse's distemper was greatly abated, though 
she still continued extremely low and feeble, and did not seem to 
recollect, except by faint glimmerings, any matter that had passed. 
Mr. Fielding then proposed to take her to town to the physicians, 
observing that there was room enough for her and Ned in 
their carriage ; and as Mrs. Fielding made no exception, the coach 
was ordered to turn directly to the door. 

Poor Ned, during this time, was as a person who fluctuated 
between the dread of leaving known and certain enjoyments, and 
the hopes of possessing somewhat that he had not yet tasted. 

Mr. Fielding then stepped up, in a kind of quick rapture, to Mr. 
Fenton. He caught him in his arms My dearest sir, he cried, I 
love, I respect, I revere you, even next to my God ! What can I 
return you ? what shall I say to you ? All that I am or have sinks 
out of sight from your benefits. I am blessed, my dear sir, I am 
blessed beyond expression, replied Mr. Fenton, in being made an 
humble instrument of happiness to a worthy man. O sir ! cried 
Mr. Fielding, what events next to miraculous ! We came to your 
door, but we were not permitted to pass ; our carriage broke for 
the purpose ; you then told us of this foundling ; but what likeli- 
hood that among millions he should happen to be ours ? You then 
proposed an expedient for ascertaining the persons from whom he 
was kidnapped. This expedient failed. God, however, would 
discover him, and had foreordained the means. He set upon him 
an indubitable mark for the purpose ; none knew of this but his 
nurse, and she has revealed it. Had any one of these many circum- 
stances been wanting, our child must have continued a stranger to 
us for ever. Indeed, sir, said Mr. Fenton, they are all concurring 
proofs that you are under the especial eye of Providence. But, sir, 
I fear we shall have a heavy loss of our friend Ned ; for, though 
he does not want his small faults, he is a worthy-hearted child, and 
a very pleasant companion. O sir ! cried Mr. Fielding, you and 
Master Fenton have a right to command both him and us at all 
times. But come, Ned, take leave for the present of your best 
friends. 

Here Ned, with filling eyes, stepped respectfully to Mr. Fenton, 
and, kneeling before him, took each of his hands and kissed them, 
crying My father ! my father ! whereupon Mr. Fenton tenderly 
raised him, and, pressing him affectionately to his bosom, cried 
God be good to you, my son, and make you a blessing to your true 
parents, and to all your kin ! 

Ned then turned to Harry, and taking him by both hands, and 
looking him fondly in the face O Master Harry, Master Harry ! he 
cried ; I never shall be able to say the word farewell to you, my 
Master Harry! I was hungry and you fed me, I was naked and 
you clothed me, I was a stranger and you took me in ; the whole 
world to me was fatherless and friendless, when you were father 
and mother, and a whole world of friends to me, my true lord and 



TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 249 

master, Harry ! Are you not my owner ? am I not your property, 
your own hard bought bargain ? Did you not purchase me with 
your stripes, and with your precious blood, and will you suffer me 
to be taken away from you, my heart's master ? 

Here Harry, swallowing his passion as well as he was able, 
clasped Ned in his arms and cried My brother, my brother, my 
friend and brother for ever! Then turning to Mr. and Mrs. 
Fielding, and wiping his eyes I hope, madam, I hope, sir, says he, 
that you will excuse my young friend here, for his partiality to a 
family who have loved him long and very dearly ; in a little time, 
to be sure, he will love and respect you both, above all the world, 
though put altogether. Though I grieve to part with him, I heartily 
rejoice at his being found, and acknowledged to be the child of such 
worthy parents ; and I hope, I say, that you will not be offended at 
his concern for parting with his old friends. 

No, my noble creature, cried Mr. Fielding, we are delighted at 
the proof that he gives of his gratitude, and at the strength of his 
attachment, where he has been so highly obliged. 

Oh, sir ! Oh, madam ! says Ned (kissing the hands of his parents), 
did you but know the value of what I lose, when I leave, when 1 
leave and here he burst afresh into tears. 

Mrs. Fielding then took Ned in her arms, and tenderly embracing 
him, cried We do, my love, we do know the value of the family 
that you leave ; and it is the first and the dearest wish of my heart, 
that we should all become as one family and as one household. This 
angel here, as you say, is your rightful owner ; and we owe him 
more on that account than our whole fortune can pay, and he shall 
have you as long and as often as ever he pleases: but for this 
night, my darling, it would be very unkind not to go with your good 
nurse, your true and loving mammy, who has suffered so much for 
your sake ; and her case requires that we should take her im- 
mediately to the doctor's. 

Here Ned acquiesced ; and having taken a weeping leave of all the 
family, not forgetting the meanest servant in the house, he stepped 
slowly into the coach, sat down by his nurse, and away they drove. 

As soon as the family of the Fieldings were gone, Harry with- 
drew to his chamber and locked himself in, while Mr. Fenton went 
to enfranchise his late prisoner. 

He first returned the certificate to her, and then presenting her 
with twenty guineas, he bowed and made a motion with his hand to 
the door, intimating that she was at liberty to depart when she 
thought proper. 

Having looked several times, with silence and surprise, now at 
Mr. Fenton, and again at the money I should be very ill deserving 
of your bounty, sir, she said, should I attempt any longer to impose 
upon you. I am not deaf, as you supposed ; it was only an artifice 
which I made use of, when taken into custody, to avoid answering 
questions. But you look so altogether the gentleman and the kind- 
hearted Christian, that I think I ought to have no reserve of any 
kind toward you. 

Be pleased then, said Mr. Fenton, as far as prudence will allow, 
to let me know who and what you are. 



250 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

I hope, sir, she replied, that I am very far from being what 1 was, 
otherwise I should be the very vilest of the vile. Wherefore, if you 
will allow a weakly woman to sit, I will tell you the whole of my 
short story, with the same openness that I made confession of my 
sins to Him from whom alone I can look for remission. 

She then narrated to Mr. Fenton the substance of her history 
it was a tale of sorrow, of passion, and of sin. She had been under- 
housekeeper in the Fielding family, where she had formed an 
attachment to a worthless and profligate young man in the neigh- 
bourhood, who had asked her in marriage ; but this union Mr. 
Fielding had strenuously opposed on account of the man's character 
being so veiy bad ; and her lover soon married another. On this 
she left her service full of ire and bent on vengeance ; she had 
fallen into poverty through unhappiness and neglect of herself; 
and, hovering round the house whose master she conceived had so 
injured her, she kidnapped his child in the absence of the nurse, 
who had left him on the lawn for a moment. For two years she 
had subsisted by soliciting alms, and had taught little Ned to assist 
in her evil trade of mendicancy : till one day, the parish officers 
coming on her track, she deserted the child near Mr. Fenton's gate, 
and escaped. Shortly after, being taken ill near Enfield, she was 
carried into the workhouse, where, during a long sickness, she had 
been attended by the Kev. Mr. Catharines, an old and pious clergy- 
man, who first taught her to see the errors of her hfe, and into 
whose service she passed on the recovery of her health, an altered 
and a happier character in every respect. To his house she had 
been now returning after a visit to a friend near London, when she 
had suddenly fallen sick on the way, and spent all her money, 
and in that condition she had been seen and recognized by Ned, 
and brought into Mr. Fenton's house. 

Her story was an ample confirmation of the discovery made by 
nurse ; and Mr. Fenton having taken it all down in a certified form, 
dismissed her, in a day or two after she was rested and refreshed, 
in one of his own carriages, back to her master, Mr. Catharines, to 
whom, as well as to the Fieldings, he wrote an account of the whole 
matter. 

When he had folded and sealed his letters, he took bills from his 
pocket to the amount of thirteen hundred pounds, and on Harry's 
return from London presented them to him. Here, my dear, said he, 
here is what will enable you to be more than just to your engage- 
ments it will enable you to be generous also. And I desire, my 
Harry, in matters of charity, that you may never stint the sweet 
emotions of your heart, for we have enough, my child, and we are 
but the stewards of the bounty of our God. 

Here Harry's speech was stopped, but his silence was more 
eloquent than a thousand harangues. He suddenly threw his arms 
about his dear father, and, hiding his face in his bosom, he there 
vented the tears of that pleasure, love, and gratitude, with which 
he found himself affected. 

On the afternoon of the following day, Harry and Arabella went 
to drink tea with the Widow Neighbourly, who received them with 
a countenance that spoke an uncommon welcome. Some other 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 251 

company had arrived before them, and rose on their entrance. 
When all were again seated, Mrs. Neighbourly very affectionately 
questioned Harry concerning his father. 

On hearing the name of Master Fenton, an elderly gentlewoman 
started. Pray, madam, said she eagerly, is this Master Fenton, the 
son of that noble gentleman who lives on the hill? He is, madam, 
said Mrs. Neighbourly. My God ! exclaimed the stranger, can this 
suckling be the father of the orphan and the widow ? Is this he who 
goes about turning sorrow into joy ? who wipes the tears from the 
afflicted, and heals the broken of heart? Permit me then, thou 
beloved child of the Father which is in heaven, permit me to 
approach and throw myself at the feet of my preserver ! 

So saying, she rose with a rapturous motion, and dropping at 
Harry's knees, she clasped his legs and kissed his feet, before he 
could prevent her. 

Poor Harry, much to be pitied, sat astonished, abashed, and 
distressed to the last degree. At length, recollecting, and disen- 
gaging himself with difficulty My dear madam, he cried, you hurt 
me greatly; what have I done that you should put me to so 
much pain? 

Babe of my heart, she cried, I am the wife of your Yindex 
your own Vindex whom you redeemed from beggary and slavery 
whom you restored to his wretched partner whom you re- 
stored to his infant daughter all pining and perishing apart 
from each other, but now united by you, my angel, in joy and 
thanksgiving ! 

Here her words were suffocated, and, throwing herself back in 
the chair, she was not ashamed to give way to her tears, and, 
putting her handkerchief to her face, she vented her passion aloud. 

Harry then rising, and going tenderly to her, put his arms about 
her, and kissed her forehead, and then her lips. You owe me 
nothing, my dear Mrs. Vindex, said he, I am still greatly in your 
debt. I was the very naughty boy who brought your misfortunes 
upon you. But I am willing to make you amends, and that will do 
me a great pleasure, instead of the punishment which I deserve. 

The tea-table was now laid, and Mrs. Vindex grew more com- 
posed when her husband entered, leading his daughter by the hand, 
a very pretty little girl of about six years old. Harry instantly 
sprung up, and running, and throwing himself with a great leap 
upon him, he hung about his neck, crying How glad I am to see 
you, my dear Mr. Vindex ! Boy of boys, cried Vindex, am I so 
blessed as to have you once more in my arms ! 

The company then rose and saluted Mr. Vindex, and congra- 
tulated him on his return to his ancient habitation. But Harry 
took him aside, and having cautioned him in a whisper not to take 
any notice of what should pass, he stole a bill for one hundred and 
sixty pounds into his hand, saying softly It is good first to be 
honest, so there is what I owe you. And here also is a small 
matter for your daughter ; I did not know till now that we had 
such a sweet little charge in our family. So saying, he slipped to 
him another bill of fifty pounds, and then, turning from him, 
stepped carelessly to his seat, as though nothing had happened. 



252 TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

Meantime the astonished Vindex was greatly oppressed. He did 
not dare to offend Harry by any open intimation of his recent 
bounty, and yet he could feel no ease till the secret should be 
disclosed. He therefore stole softly to the back of our hero's chair, 
where, unperceived of Harry, he displayed the bills to the company, 
beckoning at the same time in a way that forbade them to take 
any notice ; then raising his hand over his head, and lifting his eyes 
toward heaven, he blessed his benefactor in a silent, ardent ejacula- 
tion, and, taking an empty seat, joined in with the company. 

While they were in chat, the little Susanna slipped unnoticed 
from beside her mamma, and veering over toward Harry, she went 
on one side, and then on the other, and surveyed him all about ; then, 
coming closer, she felt his clothes, and next his hands, in the way, 
as it were, of claiming acquaintance with him. At length, looking 
fondly up to his face, she lisped and said Me voud kiss oo, if oo 
voud ask me. Indeed then, said Harry, me vill kiss oo, fedder oo 
will or no. And so, catching her upon his knee, he pressed her to 
his bosom, and kissed her over and over again. 

You all see, cried Mr. Vindex, it is not one of the elders with 
whom our Susanna has fallen in love. My sweet babe ! cried Mrs. 
Vindex, her little heart instinctively led her to her best friend, to 
the one of all living who best deserved her love. Miss Susanna, 
said Mrs. Clement, puts me in mind of some very delicate lines in 
Milton, respecting our Virgin Mother ; for she also refused to 
kiss the loveliest man that ever was created, at least till she was 
asked. 

"And though divinely brought, 

Yet innocence and virgin-modesty, 

Her virtue and the conscience of her worth, 

That would be woo'd, and not unsought be won ; 

Not obvious, nor obtrusive, but retired, 

The more desirable." 

It is happy, said Mrs. Neighbourly, for our weakly and over 
affectionate sex, that God has been pleased to fix a monitor within 
us, who struggles against our inclinations, who fights against our 
affections, and is, with difficulty, won over to acquiesce in our 
desires. I know not else what might become of the most of 
womankind. 

But then, said Mrs. Vindex, are we not rather to be pitied, that, 
even when our propensities are warrantable, we are prohibited 
by custom from giving any intimation thereof to the object ; while 
the licentious reprobate, man, roves and riots at large, and unre- 
proved, beyond the pale over which it is treason for us to look? 

I do not pity you, ladies, said Mr. Vindex I do not at all pity 
you on account of any restraints that custom has laid you under, 
respecting chastity, or its environs called decorum. The chastity 
of woman is the only basis upon which the order, honour, and peace 
of the world can be built ; it twists the sacred and endearing cord 
of society; without it there could be no amity, no brotherhood 
upon earth. But then, surely, there is much respect and tender- 
ness due to those from whom such advantages are derived. Whereas 
I have observed, on the contrary, that the most amiable of your 
sex are generally mated to tyrants ; to men who, being born and 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 253 

appointed their protectors, pervert every end of nature and duty, 
and treat with injury, contempt, and insult, the gentle saints whom 
they should have cherished with their most respectful endearments. 

The question yet occurs, said Arabella, whether your devils of 
husbands find us angels, or make us such. Tyrants are like files, 
they serve to smooth and polish whatever they are applied to. I 
was once in company with a man who was called the saint-maker ; 
he had married five shrews in succession, and made grizels of every 
one of them before they died. 

But pray, ladies, said Harry, are there no tyrants among the 
wives ? I lately took a walk to Tower-hill, and growing hungry, I 
turned in to a little shop of groceries, where a slender, skinny 
woman, of about four feet high, stood behind the counter. Taking 
out a sixpence, I threw it on the board, and desired her to give me 
the value in almonds and raisins. She had scarce weighed my 
merchandize when a huge, jolly-looking Quaker came up to the 
hatch-door, but seemed fearful of opening it. The moment the 
little woman had cast her eye toward him, she exclaimed, in a 
shrill and exasperated accent Art thee there, thou rogue, thou 
hang-dog, thou gallows-faced vagabond? when, gathering up the 
whole dignity and importance of his person, and clapping a hand 
on each side, he cried with an undaunted air, " I tell thee, Mary, I 
fear thee not ! " Ah, thou villain ! she vociferated, dares thee then 
appear in my presence ? Get thee back to thy fellows and husseys 
on whom thee spendest my substance ! Still, however, he kept his 
ground, and courageously repeated, " I tell thee, Mary, I fear thee 
not!" 

Not fear me, sirrah ! sirrah, not fear me ! says she ; we shall see 
that in a twinkling. So saying, she whipped up the measuring- 
yard, and, scudding round the counter, she flew to the door. But 
he was already vanished as fast as his fat sides would let him. 
And, to tell you the truth, ladies, there was something so authori- 
tative and tremendous in the little body's voice and manner, that 
I was glad to get out and to scamper after him. 

The company laughed heartily, and Mr. Vindex added I forget 
the hero's name a great general he was, and I think a Frenchman. 
He won every battle abroad, but was sure to be beaten in his 
turn also, as often as he returned home to his wife. 

Well said Hercules and the distaff, cries Harry. But to the 
point ; the bravest man I know is one Peter Patience, a currier, 
who lives in the suburbs. My tutor and I were walking one day 
through Islington, when we perceived the likelihood of a scuffle at 
a distance. 

As we approached, we saw one man making up with great fury 
to another, who would have avoided him ; and who, retiring back- 
ward across the street, parried his blows, and kept him off as well 
as he could. His enraged adversary would then have closed in 
upon him ; but, grasping his shoulder with a long and very strong 
arm, he still held his enemy aloof, who nearly spent all his efforts 
and blows in the air. 

Never did I see so living a representation of heaven and hell, 
as was visible in the faces of those two men. The muscles of the 



254 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

one were frightfully distorted, his eyes shot fire, and his mouth 
frothed with madness ; while the countenance of the other was as a 
lake in a summer's evening, that shews heaven in its bosom, and 
reflects all the beauties of nature around it. 

Be quiet, Ben ! he said ; you know that I would not hurt you ! 
you know that I love you. What a fool the man makes of himself. 
Are you not sensible that I could demolish you with a single 
blow ? but I cannot find in my heart to do it. Be quiet, Ben ! 
I say ; I see you want to vex me ; but I won't be vexed by you, 
my dear Ben. 

While the gentle Peter was thus expostulating with his exas- 
perated friend, Mrs. Patience, as it should seem, had seen all that 
passed from an upper casement ; and flying down-stairs, and rush- 
ing out at the door, she seized her husband behind by the hair of 
his head, and tore and cuffed away at a terrible rate. 

Poor Peter, finding himself thus between two fires, gave a slight 
trip to his male assailant; who instantly fell with his shoulder 
against the pavement, and, rising with difficulty, limped homeward, 
muttering curses all the way. 

Then Peter, turning meekly to the lady mistress of his house 
Gatty, my love, says he, what have I done to provoke you ? Oh ! 
she cried, you mean-spirited, hare-hearted, milk-livered poltroon! 
I'll teach you what it is to suffer every fellow to pommel you ! 
Sirrah, sirrah (and still she cuffed), I'll have you tied down at the 
foot of the market cross, with notice on your breast, for all who pass 
to spit on you ! 

Then, quite angry to see the man so abused, to whom I had 
taken such a fancy, I rushed in between man and wife, and seized 
Mrs. Patience by both her hands; but, wrenching one of them 
from me, she gave me a round cuff on the side of my head. I 
was, however, too well used to cuffs to matter that much; and 
so, catching one of her hands on both of mine, I gave her a pluck 
to me, and a foot at the same time, and laid her on the broad of 
her back in the kennel. 

My friend Peter looked quite astonished at this, and fearing what 
might happen to me on the rising up of his wife, he tucked me like 
a gizzard under the wing of a turkey, and off he scoured with me 
down the street ; while Mr. Clement also made pretty nimbly after 
us, for fear, as I suppose, that Mrs. Patience, when on her legs, 
might take him for one of our company. 

As soon as we had turned a corner, and were out of harm's way, 
honest Peter set me down. My friend, says I, if you would be 
advised by me, you will not be in a mighty hurry to get back to 
your wife. I see a house of entertainment yonder, and I wish 
to be further acquainted with you. Adad, said he, you are the 
boldest little body that ever I knew ; you performed a feat to-day 
that made me tremble for you. Had any other man, though, used 

my wife so but I pass that matter over ; I see you are too great 

a hero to be threatened by any one, and I should consider that 
you did what you did for my sake. 

So saying, we all went into a sort of a tavern, and, being shown to 
a little parlour, I called for a pint of white wine. 



TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 255 

As soon as we were seated, I took my new acquaintance very 
lovingly by the hand. My dear friend, said I, I have conceived 
a great respect and fondness for yon, and should be glad to know 
who and what you are. I am a currier by trade, sir, and my name 
is Peter Patience. You are patience itself, indeed, said Mr. 
Clement ; but your wife, as I think, has taken the whole trade of 
the currier into her own hands. 

Peter laughed, and replied She is a dear and a sweet girl as 
ever lay by the side of a man, and she loves me as she loves her 
own soul. Her blows were sweet blows to me ; they were the 
blows of her affection. For, though I did not matter the strokes 
of my friend Benjamin a single fillip, yet every one of them went 
to her heart, and she wanted to frighten me from ever taking 
the like again. 

But pray, says I, how happened the quarrel between you and your 
friend Benjamin, as you call him? Why, there it is, too, said 
Peter; he also beat me out of his downright and true-hearted 
kindness to me. 

As this is holiday in the afternoon among us trades-folk, Ben 
Testy invited me to a share of a can of flip, at the Cat and Bagpipes 
over the way. Just as we sat down, Peter, says he, I am told that 
your Gatty is with child. I believe it may be so, says I. I am 
glad of it, Peter, with all my heart ; and so now remember that I 
bespeak myself gossip. Why, that may happen, says I, just as 
matters shall turn out. If the child is a boy, you shall be one of 
the godfathers, and welcome ; but if it is a girl this cannot be, for 
my uncle Geoffry has already engaged himself, and I have some 
expectations from him. And so, says he, you refuse to admit me 
for your gossip. If it is a girl, says I, you see that I cannot. 
Oh ! he cried, I had forgot, I was a rascal for proposing it ; you 
are of high blood, have high relations, and so scorn to have con- 
nections with a poor tradesman like me. That is not the case, 

indeed, my dear Ben, but Confound your dears ! says he, I will 

have no more of them. You are a covetous scoundrel, and value 
money more than love ! "Well, says I, but will you be patient, will 
you hear reason, my friend? Friend, friend, says he, my curse 
upon all such friendships! I see into you now. You're an un- 
grateful, unloving, cold-hearted villain, and I would sooner be god- 
father to a child of the Turk. So saying, he struck at me, and 
repeated his blows across the table. But, as I saw that his choler 
was inflaming more and more, I got up and retreated, merely 
intending to defend myself till his passion should be spent upon 
me. But you saw what happened, gentlemen, which I am heartily 
sorry for, as I fear that my poor dear fellow is much hurt. 

Well, said my tutor, I have heard many definitions and many 
disputes concerning the word courage, but I never saw the thing 
itself till this day. Pray, Mr. Peter, were you never angiy? 
Scarce ever, sir, that I remember, at least on my own account ; 
for I do not fear any man that steps upon the earth, and what is 
it then that should make me angry? A man may be angry, said 
Mr. Clement, from other motives sure besides that of fear. God 
himself can be angry, and yet he cannot possibly fear. 



256 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

I am feelingly assured, sir, replied the valiant Peter, that God 
was never angry in his whole life ; and that is a long time that 
has neither beginning nor ending. Don't you believe the gospel? 
says Mr. Clement ; the scripture assures us, in a hundred places, of 
the anger of God against impenitent sinners. I am the son of a 
clergyman, sir, said Peter, and mayhap could quote scripture as 
well as another. The scriptures were written for man ; but how 
should man understand them, if they were not written according to 
his own language and to his own passions? I will ask you a 
question, sir Can you be angry at a mite or a worm, which you 
can crush into nothing at pleasure ? I think not, said my tutor. 
No, certainly, said Peter, because you cannot fear a thing that has 
not power to oifend you. Now, aU the world is but as a worm or 
mite to God, and neither man nor angels can disturb or affect him 
with any thing, except delight, on their acceptance of that happi- 
ness which he desires to give to all his creatures. 

Ay, but, says Mr. Clement, you see that God's anger and in- 
dignation was so great against sin, that nothing could satisfy for it 
save the death of his beloved Son. Ay, but, says Peter, the scrip- 
ture which you quote tells you, that it was not his anger but his 
love that sent him to us. " For God so loved the world," a very 
sinful world indeed ! " that he gave his only begotten Son to take 
his death upon the cross." And I am as fully assured as I am of 
my own being, that the same gracious God who has already re- 
deemed poor sinners, would willingly redeem the poor devils also 
if they could but find in their hearts to desire his salvation. 

Here, catching and clasping his hand My dear Peter, said I, 
I embrace and wish from my heart that your doctrine may be 
true. I have many tutors, Mr. Peter, and my father pays them all 
with pleasure for the instructions that they give me. Tell me 
then, Mr. Peter, what must he give you for the lesson which you 
have taught me ? What lesson, my hero ? A very precious lesson, 
says I ; a lesson that will always teach me " to despise myself for 
a coward whenever I shall be angry." 

Peter then sprung up without speaking a word, and hugged, and 
clasped, and kissed me with all his affections. Then, plucking a 
button from the upper part of my coat I will accept of this token, 
my darling, says he ; and will look at it many a time in the day 
for your sake. 

But, Mr. Peter, said I, I think it would be my advantage to 
keep up an acquaintance with you, and this cannot be so well done 
while your dear Gatty is angry with me. You must therefore 
promise me to carry a token to her also, as an olive-branch of that 
peace which I want to be made between us. I will, my love, says 
he ; I never refuse to give or accept the favours of a friend. You 
must be upon honour,, then, not to reject what I ofier you. I am 
upon honour, he said. 

I then slipped something into his hand, at which he looked and 
looked again ; and then cried out from the overflowings of a good 
and grateful heart You are either of the blood-royal, or ought to 
be so ! For the man was very poor, though so very sensible and 
well descended, and so he looked upon a little as a great matter. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 257 

Here Harry closed his narration, and all the company gathered 
about him, and nearly smothered him with their caresses, in which 
little Susannah came in for her full share. 

On the following day Harry introduced his friend Vindex and 
family to his dear father, who received them with a graciousness 
that soon dispelled that awkward diffidence, and humbling sense of 
obligations, under which the late unhappy preceptor apparently 
sunk. 

As soon as it was known abroad that Mr. Vindex enjoyed the 
patronage and good countenance of Mr. Fenton and his family, his 
former friends resorted to him, his acquaintance was sought by all 
the neighbourhood, his credit was restored, his school daily in- 
creased, and, like Job, his latter end was far more blessed than 
his beginning. 

Within a few weeks Mr. and Mrs. Fielding, with their sister 
Phoebe, our friend Ned, and a splendid equipage, called and break- 
fasted at Mr. Fenton's ; and, soon after, Mr. Fenton and his Harry, 
with Mr. and Mrs. Clement, attended their visitants to St. Alban's, 
where, all together, they spent the happiest night ; only that this 
happiness was blended at times with the affecting consideration of 
parting in the morning. 

For two succeeding years and upward little interesting happened, 
save that our hero increased in stature and all personal accomplish- 
ments, and had happily got over the measles and smallpox. He 
was now nearly master of the Latin and Greek languages. He 
could outrun the reindeer, and outbound the antelope. He was 
held in veneration by all masters of the noble science of defence. 
His action was vigour, his countenance was loveliness, and his 
movement was grace. 

Harry by this time was also versed in most of the select and 
interesting portions of history. Mr. Clement had instructed him 
in the use of the globes and maps ; and, as he there led him from 
clime to clime, and country to country, he brought him acquainted 
with the different manners, customs, laws, politics, governments, 
rise, progress, and revolutions of the several nations through which 
they passed. Finally, said Clement, you see, Master Fenton, that 
the mightiest states, like men, have the principles of growth, as 
likewise of dissolution, within their own frame. Like men, they 
are born and die have their commencement and their period. 
They arise, like the sun, from the darkness of poverty to tem- 
perance, industry, liberty, valour, power, conquest, glory, OPULENCE, 
and there is their zenith. From whence they decline to ease, 
sensuality, venality, vice, corruption, cowardice, imbecility, infamy, 
SLAVEKY. And so, good-night ! 

Mr. Fenton now judged it full time to give our hero an insight 
into the nature of the constitution of his own country ; a constitu- 
tion of whose construction, poise, action, and counteraction, the 
lettered Mr. Clement had scarcely any notion, and even the learned 
in our laws and the leaders in our senate but a very confused 
idea. 

For this especial purpose he called Harry to his closet. You 
are already, my love, said he, a member of the British state, and, 

s 



258 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

on that account, have many privileges to claim, and many duties 
to perform toward your country in particular, independent of your 
general duties to mankind. 

Should it please God to bless your friends with the continuance 
of your life for eight or ten years longer, you will then be a member 
of the legislature of Great Britain, one of the highest and most 
important trusts that can be confided by mankind. 

Here, my Harry, I have penned, or rather pencilled, for your 
use, an abstract in miniature of this wonderful constitution. But, 
before I give it for your study and frequent perusal, I would give 
you some knowledge of the claims whereon it is founded ; as also 
of the nature of man in his present depraved state, and of his 
several relations as a subject and as a sovereign. 

Man comes into this world the weakest of all creatures, and 
while he continues in it is the most dependent. Nature neither 
clothes him with the warm fleece of the sheep nor the gay plumage 
of the bird ; neither does he come forth in the vigour of the foal 
or the fawn, who, on the hour of their birth, frisk about and exult 
in the blessing of new existence. 

Sacred history seems to intimate that man was originally created 
invulnerable and immortal ; that the fire could not burn him, stones 
wound, air blast, nor water drown him. That he was the angelic 
lord and controller of this earth, and these heavens that roll around 
us; with powers to see at once into the essences, natures, pro- 
perties,, and distinctions of things ; to unfold all their virtues, to 
call forth all their beauties, and to rule, subdue, and moderate 
these elements at pleasure. 

These, truly, were godlike gifts, illustrious powers and pre- 
rogatives, and well becoming an offspring produced in the express 
image of an all-potent, all- wise, and all-beneficent Creator. 

True, sir, said Harry ; but then we see nothing now of all this 
greatness and glory. Man, on the contrary, is himself subjected to 
all the elements over which, you say, he was appointed the ruler. 
He has everything to fear from every thing about him ; even the 
insects and little midges fearlessly attack and sting this boasted 
lord of the creation ; and history shows, from the beginning of the 
world, that the greatest of all enemies to man is man. 

This, replied Mr. Fenton, is continually to remind him of the 
depraved and guilty state into which he has fallen. Man, indeed, 
is now no better than the remains of man ; but then these remains 
are sufficient to prove the lustre and dignity of his original state. 
When you behold the ruins of some lofty and spacious palace, you 
immediately form an idea of the original beauty and stateliness 
of the structure. Even so, in our present feeble and fractured state, 
a discerning eye may discover many traces and fragments of man's 
magnificent ruin; thoughts that wing infinity, apprehensions that 
reach through eternity, a fancy that creates, an imagination that 
contains an universe, wishes that a world hath not wherewithal to 
gratify, and desires that know neither ending nor bound ! 

These, however, are but the faint glimmerings of his once glorious 
illumination. All his primitive faculties are now lapsed and dark- 
ened ; he is become enslaved to his natural subjects ; the world is 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 259 

wrested out of his hands ; he comes as an alien into it, and may 
literally be called " a stranger and pilgrim upon earth." 

All other animals are gifted with a clear knowledge and instant 
discernment of whatever concerns them ; man's utmost wisdom, on 
the contrary, is the bare result of comparing and inferring ; a mere 
inquirer called reason, a substitute in the want of knowledge, a 
groper in the want of light ; he must doubt before he reasons, and 
examine before he decides. 

Thus ignorant, feeble, deeply depraved, and the least sufficient of 
all creatures in a state of independence, man is impelled to derive 
succour, strength, and even wisdom, from society. When he turns 
a pitying ear and helping hand to the distressed, he is entitled, in 
his turn, to be heard and assisted. He is interested in others, others 
are interested in him. His affections grow more diffused, his powers 
more complicated; and in any society or system of such mutual 
benevolence, each would enjoy the strength, virtue, and efficacy of 
the whole. 

You have, sir, said Harry, here drawn an exceeding swet picture 
of society, and you know I am but a fool and a novice in such 
matters; but if any other man breathing had given me such a 
description, I should, from all my little reading, have withstood 
him to the face. Look through all the states and associations that 
were ever upon earth ; throughout the republics of Greece, Italy, 
Asia Minor, and others, the most renowned for urbanity and virtue ; 
and yet what do you find them, save so many bands of public 
robbers and murderers, confederated for the destruction of the rest 
of mankind ? What desolation, what bloodshed, what carnage from 
the beginning ! what a delight in horrors ! what a propensity in all 
to inflict misery upon others! The malignity of the fiends can, 
I think, pierce no deeper ! 

Neither is this, sir, as I take it, the extent of their malevolence. 
For when any of these bands, or states, as you call them, have 
conquered or slaughtered all around them, they never fail, for want 
of employment, to fall out among themselves, and cut the throats 
of their very confederates ; and this puts me in mind of what is said 
by the Prince of Peace, " The prince of this world cometh, and has 
no part in me." And again he says to the purpose, that fathers 
and sons, and mothers and daughters, shall be divided against each 
other; and that "a man's enemies shall be those of his own 
household." 

I lately met with a fragment of an epic poem that struck me 
wonderfully at the time; and I recollect some of the lines that 
contain, in my opinion, the most genuine, the truest picture that 
ever was drawn of the state of mankind. 

" Man comes into this passing world in weakness, 
And cries for help to man for feehle is he, 
And many are his foes. Thirst, hunger, nakedness ; 
Diseases infinite within his frame ; 
"Without, inclemency, the wrath of seasons, 
Famines, pests, plagues, devouring elements, 
Earthquakes heneath, tne thunders rolling o'er him ; 
Age and infirmity on either hand ; 
And death, who shakes the certain dart behind him! 
These, surely, one might deem, were ills sufficient. 

82 



260 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

Man thinks not so ; on his own race he turns 
The force of all his talents, exquisite 
To shorten the short interval, by art, 
Which nature left us -Fire and sword are in 
His hand, and in his heart are machinations, 
For speeding of perdition. Half the world, 
Down the steep crulf of dark futurity, 
Push off their fellows, pause upon the brink, 
And then drop after." 

Say then, my dearest father, tell me whence comes this \Merse 
than flinty, this cruel-heartedness in man? Why are not all like 
you? Why are they not happy in communicating happiness? If 
my eyes did not daily see it in fact, as well as in history, I should 
think it impossible that any one should derive pleasure from giving 
pain to another. Can it be more blessed to destroy than to pre- 
serve, to afflict than to gladden, to wound than to heal ? My heart 
wrings with regret for being cast into a world where nation against 
nation, family against family, and man against man, are perpetually 
embattled, grudging, coveting, grasping, tearing every enjoyment, 
every property, and life itself, from each other. 

Here Harry for a while held his handkerchief to his eyes, while 
his fond uncle dropped a silent tear of delight at beholding the 
amiable emotion of his beloved. 

Take care, my Harry, rejoined Mr. Fenton ; beware of the 
smallest tincture of uncharitableness ! You see only the worse 
part, the outward shell of this world, while the kernel, the better 
part, is concealed from your eyes. There are millions of worthy 
people and affectionate saints upon earth ; but they are as a king- 
dom within a kingdom, a grain within a husk it requires a kindred 
heart and a curious eye to discover them. Evil in man is like evil 
in the elements ; earthquakes, hurricanes, thunders, and lightnings 
are conspicuous, noisy, glaring ; while goodness, like warmth and 
moisture, is silent and unperceived, though productive of all the 
beauties and benefits in nature. 

I once told you, my darling, that all the evil which is in you 
belongs to yourself, and that all the good which is in you belongs to 
your God ; that you cannot in or of yourself so much as think a 
good thought, or form a good wish, or oppose a single temptation 
or evil motion of any kind. And what I then said of you may 
equally be said of all men, and of the highest angels now in 
bliss. 

No creature can be better than a CRAVING AND DARK DESIRE. 
No efforts of its own can possibly kindle the smallest portion of 
light or of love, till God, by giving himself, gives his light and 
love into it. 

Here lies the eternal difference between evil and good, between 
the creature and the Creator; the spirits who are now in darkness 
are there for no other reason but for their desire of a proud and 
impossible independence ; for their rejecting the light and love of 
that God, in whom, however, they live, and move, and have their 
desolate being. 

God is already the fulness of all possible things ; he has, there- 
fore, all things to give, but nothing to desire. The creature, while 
empty of God, is a wanting desire ; it has all things to crave, but 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 261 

nothing to bestow. No two things in the universe can be more 
opposite, more contrasted. 

Eemember, therefore, this distinction in yourself and all others ; 
remember that, when you feel or see any instance of selfishness, 
you feel and see the coveting, grudging, and grappling of the 
creature ; but that, when you feel or see any instance of benevo- 
lence, you feel and see the informing influence of your God. All 
possible vice and malignity subsists in the one ; all possible virtue, 
all possible beauty, all possible blessedness, subsists in the other. 

As God alone is love, and nothing but love, no arguments of our 
own can reason love into us, no efforts of our own can possibly 
attain it. It must spring up within us, from the divine bottom or 
source wherein our existence stands; and it must break through 
the dark and narrow womb of self, into sentiments and feelings 
of good-will for others, before this child of God can be born into 
the world. 

Self is wholly a miser it contracts what it possesses, and at the 
same time attracts all that it doth not possess. It at once shuts 
out others from its own proposed enjoyments, and would draw 
into its little whirlpool whatever others enjoy. 

Love, on th'j contrary, is a giving, not a craving ; an expansion, 
not a contraction ; it breaks in pieces the condensing circle of self, 
and goes forth hi the delightfulness of its desire to bless. 

Self is a poor, dark, and miserable avariciousness, incapable of 
enjoying what it hath, through its grappling and grasping at what 
it hath not. The impossibility of its holding all things, makes it 
envious of those who are in possession of any thing; and envy 
kindles the fire of hell, wrath, and wretchedness, throughout its 
existence. 

Love, on the other hand, is rich, enlightening, and full of 
delight the bounteousness of its wishes makes the infinity of its 
wealth ; and, without seeking or requiring, it cannot fail of finding 
its own enjoyment and blessedness in its desire to communicate 
and diffuse blessing and enjoyment. 

But is it not, sir, a very terrible thing, said Harry, for poor 
creatures to be evil by the necessity of their nature ? 

You mistake this matter, my Harry; you take the emptiness, 
darkness, and desire in the creature to be the evil of the creature. 
They are, indeed, the only possible cause of evil in or to any 
creature ; but they are exceedingly far from being an evil in them- 
selves; they are, on the contrary, the only, the necessary, and 
indispensable foundation whereon any creaturely benefit can be 
built. It is extremely good for the creature to be poor and weak, 
and empty, and dark, and desiring; for hereby he becomes a 
capacity for being supplied with all the riches, power, glories, and 
blessedness of his God. 

As God is every where in and of himself, the fulness of all 
possible beings and beatitudes, he cannot create any thing inde- 
pendent or out of himself; they cannot be but by being both in 
him and by him. Could it be otherwise ? Could any creature be 
wise, or powerful, or happy, in and of itself? What a poor and 
stinted happiness must that have been: its blessedness, in that 



262 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

case, must have been limited like its being ; and how infinitely, 
my child, should we then have fallen short of " that eternal weight 
of glory " intended for us. But God has been graciously pleased 
to provide better things. If we humbly and desirously depend 
upon him, we become entitled to all that he has, and that he is. 
He will enlighten our darkness with his own illumination ; he will 
inform our ignorance with his own wisdom ; his omnipotence will 
become the strength of our weakness ; he himself will be our 
rectitude and guide from all error ; he will purify our pollution ; 
put his own robe on our nakedness ; enrich our poverty with the 
heartfelt treasures of himself; and we shall be as so many mirrors 
wherein our divine Friend and Father shall delight to behold 
the express image of his own person, his own perfections and 
beatitudes, represented for ever. 

Oh, sir ! exclaimed Harry, how you gladden, how you transport 
me ! I shall now no longer repine at my own weakness, or blindness, 
or ignorance, or insufficiency of any kind; since all these are 
but as so many vessels prepared to contain pearls of infinite 
price, even the riches, the enjoyment and fulness of my God. 
Never will I seek or desire, never will I accept any thing less 
than himself. 

You must, my child, said Mr. Fenton : you are still in the flesh, 
in a carnal and propertied world ; your old man must be fed, though 
not pampered ; it must be mortified, but not slain. 

You read in the third chapter of Genesis how our first father 
lusted after the sensual fruits of this world ; how he wilfully brake 
the sole commandment of his God ; how he added to his apostasy 
the guilt of aspiring at independence ; how he trusted to the 
promise and virtue of creatures for making him equal in godhead 
to the Creator ; how in that day he died the fearfullest of all 
deaths, a death to the fountain of life, light, and love within him ; 
and how his eyes were opened to perceive the change of his body 
into grossness, corruption, diseases, and mortality, conformable to 
the world to which he had turned his faith, and into which he had 
cast himself. 

Now, had man continued in this state, his spirit, which had turned 
from God into its own creaturely emptiness, darkness, and desire, 
must have so continued for ever, in its own hell and misery, 
without the possibility of exciting or acquiring the smallest spark 
of benevolence or virtue of any kind. But God, in compassion to 
Adam, and more especially in compassion to his yet unsinning 
progeny, infused into his undying essence a small embryo or 
reconception of that lately forfeited image, which, in creation, 
had borne the perfect likeness of the Creator. 

From hence arises the only capacity of any goodness in man. 
And, according as we suppress, or quench, or encourage and foster, 
this heavenly seed, or infant offspring of God within us, in such 
proportion we become either evil, malignant, and reprobate ; or 
benevolent, and replete with divine propensities and affections. 

Now, Harry, let us turn our eyes to our gross and outward man ; 
for, as I told you, it must be cared for, and sustained agreeable to 
its nature: and it is well deserving of our attention, forasmuch 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 263 

as it is the husk, the habitation, and temple of that godlike 
conception, which, when matured, is to break forth into never- 
ending glory. 

Lastly, this same outward man is further to be regarded by us, 
forasmuch as his infirmities, frailties, distemperatures, afflictions, 
aches, and anguishes are so intimately felt by his divine inmate, 
that they occasionally excite those thousand social charities, rela- 
tions, and endearments, that with links of golden love connect the 
brotherhood of man. 

It is, therefore, worth while to inquire into the claims and rights 
of this close, though gross companion ; at least, so far as may be 
requisite for his necessary, if not comfortable, subsistence upon 
earth. 

We find that God has intrusted him with life, liberty, and 
strength to acquire property for his sustenance. It is therefore 
his duty to preserve all these trusts inviolate; for, as they are 
wedded to his nature, " what God hath so joined, let no man put 
asunder." 

If these were not, my Harry, the natural, inheritable, and in- 
defeasible rights of all men, there would be no wrong, no injustice, 
in depriving all you should meet of their liberty, their lives, and 
properties, at pleasure. For all laws that were ever framed for 
the good government of men (even with the divine decalogue), 
are no other than faint transcripts of that eternal LAW OF BE- 
NEVOLENCE which was written and again retraced in the bosom 
of the first man, and which all his posterity ought to observe 
without further obligation. 

The capital apostle, St. Paul, bears testimony also to the impres- 
sion of this law of rights on the consciences and hearts of all men, 
where he says, in the second chapter of his epistle to the Komans, 
" Not the hearers of the law are just before God, but the doers of 
the law shall be justified. For when the Gentiles, which have not 
the law, do by nature the things contained in the law, these, 
having not the law, are a law unto themselves : which shows the 
work of the law written in their hearts; their consciences also 
bearing witness, and their thoughts, the meanwhile, accusing or 
else excusing one another." 

But, sir, interrupted Harry, I am quite astonished at the 
falling off of the father of mankind. So infinitely benefited and 
obliged as he was, so necessarily dependent also on his omnipotent 
benefactor ; how foolish, how base, how ungrateful, how unpardon- 
able, as I think, was his wonderful apostasy ! Wretched creatures 
that we are! no sound branch, to be sure, could ever spring 
from so debased, so cankered a stock. 

Let us not be prone to judge of others, my Harry. I am con- 
fident, as I am of my being, that had you or I been in the case 
and place of Adam, we should have fallen in like manner. He 
had an old and a very subtile adversary to deal with. He felt 
himself powerful, glorious, and happy. He had no notion that 
his present state could change for the worse. He was yet a 
novice in existence. He could form no conception of the depravity, 
pains, and mortality that afterward ensued. And he was strongly 



264 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

tempted by sensual objects from without, and by the emotions of 
his creaturely nature within him. But of this I am assured, Harry, 
that, if he was the greatest sinner, he was also the greatest and 
most contrite penitent that ever existed; as the comparison of 
his first with his latter state must have given him the most 
poignant and bitter compunctions, and must have caused him, with 
tenfold energy, to cling to that Kock from which he was hewn, but 
from whence he had fallen. 

I have already shown you, Harry, that every man has a right in 
his person and property ; and that his right is natural, inheritable, 
and indefeasible. No consent of parties, no institution, can make 
any change in this great and fundamental law of right ; it is uni- 
versal, invariable, and inalienable, to any men or system of men. 
It is only defeasible in particular cases ; as where one man, by 
assailing the safety of another, justly forfeits the title which he had 
to his own safety. 

If human nature had never fallen into a state of inordinate appe- 
tence, all laws and legal restraints would have been as needless and 
impertinent, as the study and practice of physic in a country 
exempted from mortality and disease. But, forasmuch as all 
men are tyrants by nature, all prone to covet and grasp at the 
rights of others, the great LAW OP SAFETY TO ALL can no other- 
wise be assured, than by THE RESTRAINT OP EACH PROM DOING 

INJURY TO ANY. 

On this lamentable occasion, on this sad necessity of man's calling 
for help against man, is founded every intention and end of civil 
government. All laws that do not branch from this stem are 
cankered or rotten. All political edifices that are not built and 
sustained upon this foundation, "of defending the weak against 
the oppressor," must tumble into a tyranny even worse than 
that anarchy which is called the state of nature, where individuals 
are unconnected by any social band. But if such a system could 
be framed, whereby wrong should not be permitted or dispensed 
within any man, right would consequently ensue, and be enjoyed 
by all men, and this would be the perfection of CIVIL LIBERTY. 

Sir, says Harry, I have heard some very learned men affirm that 
God, in whom is the disposal of all lives and all properties, has given 
to some a right of ruling over others; that governors are his 
vicegerents and representatives upon earth ; and that he hath 
appointed the descendible and hereditary rights of fathers over 
families, of patriarchs over tribes, and of kings over nations. 

In a qualified sense, my Harry, their affirmation may be just ; 
all the agents and instruments and dispensers of beneficence, 
whether their sphere be small or great, are God's true representa- 
tives and vicegerents upon earth ; he hath given authority to the 
tenderness of parents over their progeny ; and he hath invested 
patriarchs and kings with the rights of protection. But God never 
gave the vulture a right to rule over the dovecot never gave up 
the innocent many for a prey to the tyrannous few. God never 
can take pleasure in the breaches of the law of his own righteous- 
ness and benignity. Arbitrary regents are no further of his ap- 
pointment than the evils of earthquakes and hurricanes as, where 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 265 

he is said " to give the wicked a king in his anger, and to set over 
the nations the basest of men." 

The God of all right cannot will wrong to any : " His service 
is perfect freedom." It is his pleasure to deliver from "the land 
of slavery and the house of bondage ; " he is the God of equity 
and good-will to all his creatures ; he founds his own authority, 
not in power but beneficence. The law, therefore, of safety and 
well-being to all, is founded in the nature of God himself eternal, 
immutable, and indispensable. 

One man may abound in strength, authority, possessions ; but no 
man may have greater right than another. The beggar has as 
much right to his cloak and his scrip, as the king to his ermines 
and crown lands. 

To fence and establish this divinely inherent right, of security 
to the person and property of man, has been the study and attempt 
of Hermes, Confucius, Minos, Lycurgus, Solon, Numa, and of all 
the legislators and systems of civil polity that ever warmed the 
world with a single ray of freedom. 

But so strong is the propensity to usurpation in man ; so dan- 
gerous is it to tempt trustees with the investiture of power ; so 
difficult to watch the watchers to restrain the restrainers from 
injustice that, whether the government were committed to the 
One, the Few, or the Many, the parties intrusted have generally 
proved traitors; and deputed power has almost perpetually been 
seized upon as property. 

Monarchy has ever been found to rush headlong into tyranny 
aristocracy into faction and multiplied usurpation and democracy 
into tumult, confusion, and violence. And all these, whether 
distinct or compounded with each other, have ended in the supre- 
macy of some arbitrary tyrant, enabled by a body of military 
mercenaries to rule, oppress, and spoil the people at pleasure. 

How England hath come, after the many wrecks and ruins which 
you have read of in history, to survive, to recover, to grow sounder 
from her wounds, and mightier from her discomfitures, and to rise 
superior, as we trust, to all future external and internal attempts 
hath been owing to the peculiarity of her constitution. 

Her constitution, it is true, is not yet quit, perhaps never ought 
to be quit, of some intestine commotions. For, though liberty has 
no relation to party dissension or cabal against government, there 
is yet a kind of yeast observable in its nature, which may be 
necessary to the fermentation and working up of virtue to the 
degree that is requisite for the production of patriotism and public 
spirit. But when this yeast of liberty happens to light upon weak 
or vapid tempers, they are immediately affected like small beer 
casks, and rave and boil over in abundance of factious sputter and 
turbulence. Party and faction therefore, being the scum and 
ebullition of this animating yeast, are sure signs and proofs of the 
life of liberty, though they neither partake nor communicate any 
portion of its beneficence ; as rank weeds are the proof of a hot snn 
and luxuriant soil, though they are the detestable consequence of 
the one and the other. 

"Salus Populi Public Safety Security to the Persons and 



266 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

Properties of the People "constitutes the whole of England's 
polity. Here empire is " Imperium lef/um, the sway of law ; " it 
is the dispensation of beneficence, of equal right to all : and this 
empire rises supreme over king, lords, and commons, and is 
appointed to rule the rulers to the end of time. 

Other states before now have been compounded, like ours, of 
prince, peers, and people, the one, few, and many united. But the 
error and failure of their constitution was this : The People, who 
are the Fountain of all Power, either retained in their own hands 
an authority which they never were qualified to wield ; or deputed 
it to trustees without account, without a provident resource, or 
due reserve of potency, when "those instructed with government 
should be found to betray their trust." 

The people of England, on the contrary, claim no authority in 
government ; neither in the framing, administration, or execution 
of the laws by which they consent to be governed. They are 
themselves imaged, and as it were epitomized, in their three 
several estates. The king represents their majesty ; the lords their 
nobility; and the commons, more immediately, their legislative 
power. The constitution is the inheritance of them and their 
posterity ; and theirs is the right and duty, at all times, to watch 
over, assert, and reclaim it. Wherefore, as you find in history, 
when any of the three estates have usurped upon the others 
even when all of them together have dared to violate the frame 
of this salutary constitution ; the people, to whom it belongs, have 
never failed, as on the other day's revolution, to restore and re- 
instate it. 

England's three estates, of king, lords, and commons, are parts of 
the people, under covenant with the people, and accountable to 
the people ; but the people, as a people, make not any of the said 
estates. They are as a perpetual fountain, from whence the three 
estates arise ; or rather as a sea of waters, in which three exalted 
waves should claim pre-eminence, which yet shall not be able to 
depart from their fund, but in rotation are dissoluble and resolvable 
therein. 

Thus, however complicated the system of England's polity may 
be, it is all rooted in, and branches from the trust of the people, the 
trust of powers which they have granted to be returned in pro- 
tection. And, in truth, it makes little difference whether the 
powers in such cases be granted or assumed ; whoever either re- 
ceives or assumes such powers, save to the ends of beneficence, 
is equally guilty of usurpation and tyranny. 

Government can have no powers save the powers of the people ; 
to wit, the power of their numbers, strength, and courage, in time 
of war ; and in peace, of their art and industry, and the wealth 
arising therefrom. Whoever assumes to himself these powers, or 
any part thereof, without the consent of the proprietors, is a robber, 
and should at least be divested of the spoil. 

On the other hand, if such powers are granted by the people, the 
people cannot grant them for purposes to which they themselves 
cannot lawfully apply them. No man, for instance, can arbitrarily 
dispose of his own life or liberty, neither of the whole product of his 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 267 

own labours ; forasmuch as the lives of himself and his family should 
be first sustained thereby, and his obligations to others fairly and 
fully discharged. He cannot, therefore, grant an arbitrary disposal 
of what he hath not an arbitrary disposal in himself. Much less 
can any man grant a power over the lives, liberties, or properties 
of other people, as it would be criminal and highly punishable in 
himself to assail them. 

Hence it follows, as evident as any object at noon, that " no man, 
or body of men, can rightfully assume, or even accept, what no man 
or body of men can rightfully grant," to wit, a power that is 
arbitrary or injurious to others. And hence it necessarily follows, 
that all usurpations of such powers throughout the earth, with all 
actual or pretended covenants, trusts, or grants, for the investiture 
or conveyance of such illicit powers, are null and void on the exe- 
cution ; and that no man, or nations of men, can possibly be bound 
by any consents or contracts, eversive of the laws of God and their 
own nature, of common sense and general equity, of eternal reason 
and truth. 

I beg pardon, sir, says Harry, for interrupting you once more ; 
but you desire that I should always speak my mind with freedom. 
You have delighted me greatly with the account which you gave of 
the benefits and sweets of Liberty, and of its being equally the 
claim and birthright of all men ; and I wish to heaven that they had 
an equal enjoyment thereof. But this you know, sir, is very far from 
being the case ; and that this animating fire, which ought to comfort 
all who come into the world, is now nearly extinguished throughout 
the earth. 

sir ! if this divine, golden law of liberty were observed, if all 
were restrained from doing injury to any, what a heaven we should 
speedily have upon earth ! The habit of such a restraint would in 
time suppress every motion to evil. The weak would have the 
mightiness of this law for their support ; the poor would have the 
benevolence thereof for their riches. Under the light and delight- 
some yoke of such a restraint, how would industry be encouraged 
to plant and to multiply the vine and the fig-tree! how would 
benignity rejoice to call neighbours and strangers to come and 
fearlessly partake of the fruits thereof ! 

How has the sacred name of all-benefiting Liberty been perverted 
and profaned by the mouths of madding demagogues, at the head of 
their shouting rabble, who mean no other than a licentious un- 
muzzling from all restraint, that they may ravage and lay desolate 
the works and fruits of peace ! 

But liberty, in your system, is a real and essential good ; the 
only source, indeed, whence any good can arise. I see it, I revere 
it ; it shines by its own light in the evidence of your description ! 

How is it, then, sir, that there are persons so blind or so bigoted 
against their own interests and those of their fellows, as to declaim 
with much energy and studied argumentation against this divine, 
inheritable, and indefeasible right (not of kings, as it should seem), 
but of human kind? 

1 lately happened in company with a number of discontentedly- 
looking gentlemen, whom I supposed to have been abettors of the 



268 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

late King James, and friends to the arrogating family of the 
Stewarts. Among them was one of some learning and great clever- 
ness, and he paraded and showed away at a vast rate concerning 
the divinely inherent right of monarchs, implicit submission, passive 
obedience, non-resistance, and what not. 

Our God, said he, is one God, and the substitutes of his mightiness 
should resemble himself ; their power ought to be absolute, un- 
questioned, and undivided. The sun is his glorious representative 
in the heavens ; and monarchs are his representatives and mirrors 
upon earth, in whom he is pleased to behold the reflection of his 
own majesty. 

Accordingly we find, that the monarchs over his chosen people 
were of his special appointment; and that 'their persons were 
rendered sacred and awfully inviolable, by unction or the shedding 
of hallowed oil upon them. Many miscarriages and woful defaults 
are recorded of Saul as a man ; yet, as a king, he was held perfect 
in the eyes of his people. What an unhesitating obedience, what a 
speechless submission, do they pay to all his behests I Though he 
massacred their whole priesthood, to a man, in one day, yet no 
murmur was heard no one dared to wag a tongue, and much less 
to lift a finger, against the Lord's anointed. 

I own to you, sir, that this last argument staggered me ; such an 
express authority of the sacred writings put me wholly to silence. 
Say then, my dearest father, give me the benefit of your en- 
lightening sentiments on this head, that I may know, on all 
occasions, to give to all men an account of the political faith that 
is in me. 

It is extremely surprising, rejoined Mr. Fenton, that all our lay 
and ecclesiastical champions for arbitrary power who have raised 
such a dust, and kept such a coil about the divine, hereditary, and 
indefeasible right of kings, and the unconditional duty of passive 
obedience in the subject, have founded their whole pile of argument 
and oratory on the divine appointment of the regal government of 
the Jews, as the perfect model and ensample whereby all other 
states are, in like manner, required to form their respective 
governments. 

Now, if these champions had engaged on the opposite side of the 
question, and had undertaken the argument against arbitrary power, 
they could not have done it more effectually, more conclusively, 
more unanswerably, than by showing that arbitrary power was the 
very evil so displeasing to the nature of God, that he exhibited his 
omnipotence in a series of public and astonishing wonders, in order 
to deliver this very people from the grievance thereof; and more 
especially to proclaim to all nations and ages the detestation in 
which his eternal justice holds all lawless dispensations all acts of 
sovereign power that are not acts of protection. 

Could these champions, again, have better enforced the argument 
against arbitrary power, than by showing that this people so 
miraculously enfranchised, but now fat, and wantonly kicking under 
the indulgence of their God, had taken a loathing to the righteous- 
ness of the dispensations of their deliverer " had rejected him," as 
he affirms, " from reigning over them ; " and had required a King, 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 269 

like to the kings of the neighbouring nations ? the very evil from 
which God had redeemed their forefathers ! 

Could these champions, further, have better demonstrated the 
miseries, the iniquities, the abominations of such a government, 
than by reciting the expostulations, the tender and earnest re- 
monstrances, of God himself, on the sufferings that these rebels 
were about to bring upon themselves from the enormities of an 
arbitrary and unlimited sovereignty? And lastly, could they have 
better recommended, to the free and the virtuous, to stand out to 
the death against arbitrary oppression, than by showing the obstinacy 
of these apostate Jews, when they answered to the compassionating 
expostulations of their God" Nay, but we will have a king like all 
the nations, to rule over us " ? 

Nothing, my Harry, can be more unaccountable, more astonishing, 
than the perverseness of that stiff-necked nation. 

They daily drank the bitterest dregs of slavery ; they had been 
galled by double chains, and had groaned under an unprecedented 
tyranny and oppression. They cried out to their God, and he 
miraculously delivered them from the land of their misery, and from 
the house of their bondage. Yet, on the first cravings of appetite, 
these soul-sensualized wretches desired to be returned to their 
chains and their flesh-pots, and longed to groan and gormandize in 
their old sty. 

Hereupon God gave them flesh and bread to the full ; and he 
brought them into a land " flowing with milk and honey," and 
abounding with all the good things of this life. He made them a 
free and sovereign people ; discomfited their enemies before them ; 
and informed their judges with his own spirit for the dispensation 
of righteousness ; insomuch that " every man sat under his own 
vine, and did what was right in his own eyes." And yet they 
lasciviously petitioned to be subjected to a state of absolute des- 
potism ; and this for no assigned reason, save because it was the 
fashion: "Make us a king to judge us, like to all the nations 
around us." 

Here God, in the same act, approves his attributes of mercy 
and reluctant justice to his erring creatures. He punishes their 
rebellion by no greater a severity than the grant of their request. 

" And the Lord said unto Samuel, Hearken unto the voice of the 
people in all that they say unto thee : for they have not rejected 
thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them. 
Howbeit, protest solemnly unto them, and show them the manner 
of the king that shall reign over them. 

" And Samuel told all the words of the Lord unto the people that 
asked of him a king. And he said, This will be the manner of the 
king that shall reign over you : 

" He will take your sons and appoint them for himself, for his 
chariots, and to be his horsemen. And some shall run before his 
chariots. And he will appoint him captains over thousands, and 
captains over fifties, and will set them to ear his ground and to reap 
his harvest. And he will take your daughters to be confectioners, 
and cooks, and bakers. And he will take your fields, and your 
vineyards, and your oliveyards, even the best of them. And he 



270 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

will take your men-servants, and your maid-servants, and your 
goodliest young men, and your asses, and put them to his work, 
and ye shall be his servants. And ye shall cry out in that day, 
because of your king which ye shall have chosen you ; and the Lord 
will not hear you in that day. 

" Nevertheless, the people refused to obey the voice of the Lord 
and of Samuel; and they said, Nay, but we will have a king 
over us." 

And now, Harry, what do you gather from all these sacred 
authorities? I gather, sir, answered Harry, from the express and 
repeated declarations of holy writ, that whoever he be, whether 
sovereign or subject, who doth not wish that all men should be 
limited or restrained from doing injury to any, is a rebel to the will 
of the God of Beneficence, and an enemy to the well-being of 
human kind. 

You have, exclaimed Mr. Fenton you have, in a few words, 
spoke the whole of the matter. On what you have said hang all 
the law and the prophets. 

Again, my dear, continued Mr. Fenton, it is evident from the 
history, that the Jews themselves did not pay the smallest regard 
to the divine hereditary right of kingship. Both David and 
Solomon, the second and third in succession, were established on the 
throne in direct contradiction to such pretended right. And on 
the succession of Kehoboam, the fourth king, ten of the twelve 
tribes repented of their submission to an arbitrary monarchy, and 
required the king to consent to a limitation of his authority, and to 
enter into a contract with the people. 

" And they spake unto Kehoboam, saying Thy father made our 
yoke grievous : now, therefore, make thou the grievous service of 
thy father, and his heavy yoke which he put upon us, lighter, and 
we will serve thee." 

But when Kehoboam, by the advice of his sleek-headed ministry, 
refused to covenant with the people, the ten tribes cried out 
" What portion have we in David ? Neither have we inheritance in 
the son of Jesse : to your tents, O Israel ! " And thus the ten 
tribes revolted from the arbitrary domination of the houses of Saul 
and David. For as the sacred text says " The cause was from the 
Lord. 11 

Now when these ten tribes sent and called Jeroboam, the son of 
Nebat, and made him king over Israel, it is most evident that they 
obliged him to limit the regal authority, and to covenant with them 
for the restoration and re-establishment of their popular rights. 
For in the sixth succession, when Ahab sat upon the throne, the 
regal prerogative had not yet so far usurped on the constitutional 
rights of the people, as to entitle Ahab to deprive his subjects even 
of a garden for herbs. 

" And Ahab said unto Naboth, Give me thy vineyard, that I may 
have it for a garden of herbs, because it is near unto my house, and 
I will give thee for it a better vineyard ; or, if it seems good to 
thee, I will give thee the worth of it in money. But Naboth said 
to Ahab, The Lord forbid that I should give the inheritance of my 
fathers unto thee. So Ahab came to his house heavy displeased, 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 271 

because Naboth had said, I will not give to thee the inheritance of 
my fathers ; and he laid him down upon his bed, and turned away 
his face, and would eat no bread." 

Here we see that the people of Israel had so far recovered their 
originally inherent and hereditary rights, that the regal estate had 
not the privilege of wresting from any subject so much as an herb 
garden. 

This was a mortifying circumstance to royal elevation, but power 
is seldom unfruitful of expedients. A method was found of rending 
away Naboth's property (without his consent) under colour of the 
law to which he had consented. He was falsely impeached, and 
forfeited his life and inheritance together. But God, by the signal 
punishment which he inflicted for this breach on the natural rights 
of his people, evinced to the world how dear they are in the eye of 
eternal justice. 

How deplorable, then, my Harry, is the suppression of these 
rights, now nearly universal throughout the earth ! But when 
people, from their infancy, and from generation to generation, have 
been habituated to bondage, oppression, and submission, without 
any tradition or memorial delivered down to them of a happier or 
more equitable manner of life ; they are accustomed to look on 
themselves, their possessions, and their progeny, as the rightful 
property of their rulers, to be disposed of at pleasure ; and they no 
more regret the want of Liberty that they never knew, than the 
blind-born regret the want of the light of the sun. 

Before I give you this paper that I have in my hand, this epitome 
or picture, in miniature, of the incomparable beauties of the Bri- 
tannic constitution, it may be requisite to premise a few matters. 

Travellers, when they survey a grand Egyptian pyramid, are apt 
to inquire by whom the stupendous pile was erected, and how long 
it hath stood the assaults of time. But when nothing of this can 
be developed, imagination runs back through antiquity without 
bounds; and thence contemplates an object with peculiar venera- 
tion, that appears as it were to have had no beginning. 

Such a structure is the constitution of Great Britain ! No records 
discover when it had a commencement; neither can any annals 
specify the time at which it was not. 

William the Norman, above seven hundred years ago, on his 
entering into the original contract with the people, engaged to 
govern them according to the bonze et approbate antiquss regni leges, 
the good, well-approved, and ancient laws of the kingdom; this 
constitution was therefore ancient, even in ancient times. 

More than eighteen hundred years are now elapsed since Julius 
Csesar, in the sixth book of his Commentaries, bore testimony as 
well to the antiquity as excellency of the system of the laws of 
Britain. He tells us that the venerable order of the Druids, who 
then administered justice throughout Gaul, derived their system of 
government from Britain ; and that it was customary for those 
who were desirous of being versed in the said ancient institutions 
to go over to Britain for that purpose. 

Caesar seems to recommend, while he specifies, one of the laws 
that was then peculiar to the constitution of Britain. He tells you 



272 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

that, if a woman was suspected of the death of her husband, she 
was questioned thereupon with severity " by her neighbours ;" and 
that, if she was found guilty, she was tied alive to a stake, and 
burned to death. The very trial used in Britain, " by a jury of 
neighbours," to this day. 

It is hence very obvious that our Gothic ancestors either adopted 
what they judged excellent in the British constitution, or rather 
superadded what was deemed to be excellent in their own. 

The people who went under the general name of Goths were of 
many different nations, who, from the northern, poured down on the 
more southern parts of Europe. 

Their kings were originally chiefs or generals, appointed to lead 
voluntary armies, or colonies, for the forming of new settlements in 
foreign lands ; and they were followed by a free and independent 
multitude, who had previonsly stipulated that they should share and 
enjoy the possessions which their valour should conquer. 

Next to the general in order, the officers or principal men of the 
army were attended, on such expeditions, by their kinsfolk, friends, 
and dependants, who chose to attach themselves to their persons 
and fortunes respectively ; and such attachments gave these officers 
great power and consideration. 

On their conquest or seizure of any track of country, a certain 
portion thereof was allotted to the general for the maintenance of 
his person and household. The general then divided the remainder 
among his officers, to hold of him in fief, at the certain service of 
so many horse or foot, well armed and provided, &c., and pro- 
portioned to the value and extent of the land assigned. And the 
said officers again parcelled out the greatest part of the said pos- 
sessions among their respective followers, to hold of themselves in 
like manner and service as they held of their general. 

On the conquest of a country, they seldom chose to exterminate 
the natives or old inhabitants, but allotted to them also separate 
remnants of the land ; and admitted them to the common and equal 
participation of such laws or usages as they brought from their own 
3>untry, or chose to adopt. 

Independent of the military services above reserved, the prince, 
or chief, further reserved the civil service of personal attendance of 
his feudatory officers at certain times, and for certain terms, at 
his general or national court. This court was composed of three 
estates, the prince, the nobles, and such of the priesthood, whether 
Pagan or Christian, as held in fief from the prince ; and from this 
national council our parliament took its origin. 

The feudal officers also, on their part, reserved the like service 
and personal attendance of their proper tenants and vassals, at their 
respective courts of judicature. And forasmuch as, in such courts, 
no civil or criminal sentence could take place till the voice of the 
judge was affirmed by the court, which consisted of such as were 
peers or equals to the party accused ; from thence we derive our 
free, ancient, and sacred institution of juries. 

If we look back upon one of those fief or feudal kings, seated 
high on his throne, and encircled with all the ensigns of royalty ; 
when we find him entitled the sole proprietor of all the lands within 



TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 273 

his dominions ; when we hear his subjects acknowledge that he 
alone is the fountain from whence are derived all possessions, rights, 
titles, distinctions, and dignities ; when we see his most potent pre- 
fects and nobles, with lifted hands and bended knees, swearing 
fealty at his feet who would not take him for an arbitrary and 
most absolute prince ? 

Such a judgment, however, would have been very premature. 
No prince could be more limited. He had not the licence of doing 
hurt to the person or property of the meanest vassal throughout 
his dominions. But was he the less powerful, think you, for being 
less absolute? Quite the contrary. While he acted within the 
sphere of his compact with the people, he acted in all the persons 
and powers of the people. Though prescribed with respect to evil, 
the extent of his beneficence was wholly unconfined. He was not 
dreaded indeed, but on that account he was the more revered and 
beloved by his subjects. He was a part of themselves ; the prin- 
cipal member of their body. In him they beheld, with delight, 
their own dignity and strength so gloriously represented ; and, by 
being the proprietor of all their hearts, he became the master of all 
their hands. 

O! exclaimed Harry, who would wish, after this, to be unre- 
strained from any kind of evil? how frightful, how detestable is 
that power, which is not exercised in acts of benevolence alone ! 
and all who please may be infinite in the stretch of a good-will. 

True, my dear, said Mr. Fenton I have now, continued he, given 
you the rough and unformed rudiments of our Britannic constitu- 
tion. And here I deliver to you my little model of the finished 
construction thereof, as it now stands on the revolution just achieved 
by his present glorious majesty, King William. 

Your reading has informed you, and may further inform you, of 
the several steps and struggles whereby this great business was 
finally effected. It was not suddenly brought to pass ; it was the 
work of many ages ; while Britain, like Antaeus, though often de- 
feated, rose more vigorous and reinforced from every soil. Of times 
long passed, what stupendous characters ! what sacred names ! what 
watchful councils ! what bloody effusions ! what a people of heroes ! 
what senates of sages ! How hath the invention of nature been 
stretched, how have the veins of the valiant been exhausted, to 
form, support, reform, and bring to maturity, this unexampled con- 
stitution, this coalescence and grand effort of every human virtue, 
British Liberty ! 

[Here follows Mr. Fenton's short system of the beauties and 
benefits of our constitution. But, if the reader loves amusement 
preferable to instruction, he is at liberty to pass it over, and pro- 
ceed in the story.] 



THE king, in the constitution of Great Britain, is more properly 
the king of, than a king over the people, united to them, one of 
them, and contained in them. At the same time that he is ackno\v- 



274 TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

ledged the head of their body, he is their principal servant or 
minister, being the deputee of their executive power. 

His claim to the throne is not a claim as of some matter of pro- 
perty or personal right ; he doth not claim, but is claimed by the 
people in their parliament ; and he is claimed or called upon, not to 
the investiture of possessions, but the performance of duties. He 
is called upon to govern the people according to the laws by which 
they themselves have consented to be governed ; to cause justice 
and mercy to be dispensed throughout the realm ; and to his ut- 
most to execute, protect, and maintain the laws of the gospel of 
God, and the rights and liberties of all the people without dis- 
tinction ; and this he swears on the gospel of God to perform. And 
thus, as all others owe allegiance to the king, the Icing himself oweth 
allegiance to the constitution. 

The existence of a king, as one of the three estates, is immutable, 
indispensable, and indefeasible; the constitution cannot subsist 
without a king. But then his personal claim of possession, and of 
hereditary succession to the throne, is in several instances pre- 
carious and defeasible; as in case of any natural incapacity to 
govern, or of an open avowal of principles incompatible with the 
constitution ; or in case of overt acts demonstrative of such prin- 
ciples ; or of any attempt to sap or overthrow a fundamental part 
of that system which he was called in, and constituted, and has 
sworn to maintain. 

Though the claim of all kings to the throne of Great Britain is a 
limited and defeasible claim ; yet the world can afford no rival, in 
power or glory, to a constitutional sovereign of these free dominions. 

For the honour of their own body, they have invested this their 
head with all possible illustration; he concentrates the rays of 
many nations. They have clothed him in royal robes, and circled 
his head with a diadem, and enthroned him on high ; and they bow 
down before the mirror of their own majesty. 

Neither are his the mere ensigns or external shows of regency ; 
he is invested also with powers much more real than if they 
were absolute. 

There are three capital prerogatives with which the king is 
intrusted, which, at first sight, appear of fearful and dangerous 
tendency, and which must infallibly and quickly end in arbitrary 
dominion if they were not counterpoised and counteracted. 

His principal prerogative is to make war or peace, as also 
treaties, leagues, and alliances with foreign potentates. 

His second prerogative is to nominate and appoint all ministers 
and servants of state, all judges and administrators of justice, and 
all officers, civil or military, throughout these realms. 

His third capital prerogative is, that he should have the whole 
executive power of the government of these nations by his said 
ministers and officers, both civil and military. 

I might here also have added a fourth prerogative, which must 
have been capitally eversive of the constitution, had it not been 
limited in the original trust I mean a power of granting pardon 
to criminals. Had this power been unrestrained, all obligations 
to justice might be absolved at the king's pleasure. An evil king 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 275 

might even encourage the breach of law ; he must, unquestionably, 
have dispensed with all illicit acts that were perpetrated by his 
own orders ; and this assurance of pardon must, as unquestionably, 
have encouraged all his ministers and officers to execute his will 
as the only rule of their obedience. 

But God and our glorious ancestors be praised ! He is restrained 
from protecting his best-beloved ministers when they have effected, 
or even imagined, the damage of the constitution. He is also 
limited in appeals brought by the subject for murder or robbery. 
But on indictments in his own name, tor offences against his proper 
person and government, such as rebellion, insurrection, riot, and 
breaches of the peace by murder, main, or robbery, &c., here he is 
at liberty to extend the arm of his mercy ; forasmuch as there are 
many cases so circumstanced, so admissive of pitiable and pal- 
liating considerations, that summum jus, or strict justice, might 
prove summa injuria, or extreme injustice. 

All pardonable offences are distinguished by the title of " crimina 
laesae majestatis sins against the king : " all unpardonable offences 
are distinguished by the title of " crimina lees* libertatis sins 
against the constitution." In the first case, the injury is presumed 
to extend no further than to one or a few individuals; in the 
second, it is charged as a sin against the public, against the collec- 
tive body of the whole people. Of the latter kind are nuisances 
that may endanger the lives of travellers on the highway ; but 
more capitally, any imagination, proved by overt act or evil advice, 
tending to change the nature or form of any one of the three 
estates ; or tending to vest the government, or the administration 
thereof, in any one or any two of the said estates, independent of 
the other ; or tending to raise standing armies, or to continue 
them in time of peace without the consent of parliament ; or 
tending to give any foreign state an advantage over these realms 
by sea or by land, &c. 

The king hath also annexed to his dignity many further very 
important powers and prerogatives, though they do not so inti- 
mately interfere with the constitution as the capital prerogatives 
above recited. 

He is first considered as the original proprietor of all the lands 
in these kingdoms ; and he founds this claim, as well on the con- 
quest by William the Norman, as by the limited kings or leaders 
of our Gothic ancestors. 

Hence it comes to pass, that all lands to which no subject can 
prove a title, are supposed to be in their original owner, and are 
therefore, by the constitution, vested in the crown. On the same 
principle, also, the king is entitled to the lands of all persons who 
die without heirs ; as also to the possessions of all who are convicted 
of crimes subversive of the constitution or public weal. 

His person, while he is king or inclusive of the first estate, is 
constitutionally sacred, and exempted from all acts of violence 
or constraint. As one of the estates, also, he is constituted a 
corporation, and his Teste-Meipso, or written testimony, amounts to 
a matter of record. He also exercises, at present, the independent 
province of supplying members to the second estate by new 

T 2 



276 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

creation, a very large accession to his original powers. Bishops 
also are now appointed and nominated by the king, another con- 
siderable addition to the royal prerogative. His is the sole 
prerogative to coin or impress money, and to specify, change, or 
determine the current value thereof; and for this purpose he is 
supposed to have reserved, from his original grants of lands, a 
property in mines of gold and silver, which are therefore called 
royalties. 

As he is one of the three constitutional estates, no action can lie 
against him in any court ; neither can he be barred of his title by 
length of time or entry. And these illustrations of his dignity cast 
rays of answerable privileges on his royal consort, heir-apparent, 
and eldest daughter. 

The king hath also some other inferior and conditional powers, 
such as of instituting fairs and markets, and of issuing patents 
for special or personal purposes, provided they shall not be found 
to infringe on the rights of others. He is also intrusted with the 
guardianship of the persons and possessions of idiots and lunatics, 
without account. 

I leave his majesty's prerogative of a negative voice in the 
legislature, as also his prerogative (or rather duty) frequently 
to call the two other estates to parliament, and duly to continue, 
prorogue, and dissolve the same, till I come to speak of the three 
estates when in such parliament assembled. 

Here then we find, that a King of Great Britain is constitu- 
tionally invested with every power that can possibly be exerted in 
acts of beneficence ; and that, while he continues to move within 
the sphere of his benign appointment, he continues to be constituted 
the most worthy, most mighty, and most glorious representative 
of Omnipotence upon earth. 

In treating of the second and third estate, I come naturally to 
consider what those restraints are, which, while they are preserved 
inviolate, have so happy a tendency to the mutual prosperity of 
prince and people. 



or 

THE nobility, or second estate in the constitution of Great 
Britain, is originally representative. The members were ennobled 
by tenure, and not by writ or patent ; and they were holden in 
service to the crown and kingdom for the respective provinces, 
counties, or baronies, whose name they bore, and which they 
represented. 

A title to be a member of this second estate was from the 
beginning hereditary : the king could not anciently either create 
or defeat a title to nobility. Their titles were not forfeitable save 
by the judgments of their peers upon legal trial ; and when any 
were so deprived, or happened to die without heirs, the succession 
was deemed too important to be otherwise filled than by the 
concurrence of the three estates, by the joint and solemn act of the 
Parliament, or Commune Concilium Regni. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 277 

These truths are attested by many ancient records and parlia- 
mentary acts. And although this most highly ennobling; custom 
was, at particular times, infringed by particular tyrants, it was 
inviolably adhered to by the best of our English kings, and was 
observed even by the worst, excepting a few instances, till the reign 
of Henry VII., who wished to give consequence to the third estate 
by deducting from the honours and powers of the second. 

In truth, it is not to be wondered that any kings, who were 
ambitious of extending their own power, should wish to break and 
weaken that of the nobility, who had distinguished themselves by 
so many glorious stands for the maintenance of liberty and the con- 
stitution ; more particularly during the reigns of John, Henry III., 
the second Edward, and second Kichard. 

Till Harry VII. the nobles were looked upon as so many pillars 
whereon the people rested their rights. Accordingly we find that, 
in the coalition or grand compact between John and the collective 
body of the nation, the king and people jointly agree to confide to 
the nobles the superintendence of the execution of the great 
charter, with authority to them and their successors to enforce the 
due performance of the covenants therein comprised. 

"What an illustrating distinction must it have been, when patriot- 
excellence alone (approved before the country in the field or the 
council) could give a claim to nobility, and compel, as it were, the 
united estates of king, lords, and commons, to call a man up to a 
second seat in the government and steerage of the nation. 

Such a preference must have proved an unremitting incitement 
to the cultivation and exercise of every virtue; and to such 
exertions, achievements, and acts of public beneficence, as should 
draw a man forth to so shining a point of light, and set him like 
a gem in the gold of the constitution. 

The crown did not, at once, assume the independent right of 
conferring nobility. Henry III. first omitted to call some of the 
barons to parliament who were personally obnoxious to him, and 
he issued his writs or written letters to some others who were not 
barons, but from whom he expected greater conformity to arbitrary 
measures. These writs, however, did not ennoble the party till 
he was admitted by the second estate to a seat in parliament; 
neither was such nobility by writ hereditary. 

To supply these defects, the arbitrary ministry of Kichard II. 
invented the method of ennobling by letters patent at the king's 
pleasure, whether for years or for life, or in special or general tail, 
or in fee-simple to a man and his heirs at large. This prerogative, 
however, was thereafter in many instances declined and discon- 
tinued, more particularly by the constitutional king Harry the Fifth, 
till, meeting with no opposition from the other two estates, it has 
successively descended, from Harry VII., on nine crowned heads, 
through a prescription of near a century and a half. 

Next to the king, the people have allowed to their peerage 
several privileges of the most uncommon and illustrious distinction. 
Their Christian names, and the names that descended to them 
from their ancestors, are absorbed by the name from whence they 
take their title of honour, and by this they make their signature 



278 TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

in all letters and deeds. Every temporal peer of the realm is 
deemed a kinsman to the crown. Their deposition on their honour 
is admitted in place of their oath, save where they personally 
present themselves as witnesses of the facts, and saving their oaths 
of allegiance, supremacy, and abjuration. Their persons are at all 
times exempted from arrests, except in criminal cases. A defama- 
tion of their character is highly punishable, however true the facts 
may be, and deserving of censure. During session of parliament, 
all actions and suits at law against peers are suspended. In pre- 
sentments or indictments by grand juries, and on impeachments 
by the house of commons, peers are to be tried by their peers 
alone ; for in all criminal cases they are privileged from the juris- 
diction of inferior courts, excepting on appeals for murder or 
robbery. Peers are also exempted from serving on inquests. And 
in all civil cases, where a peer is plaintiff, there must be two or 
more knights impannelled on the jury. 

The bishops, or spiritual lords, have privilege of parliament, but 
have not the above privileges of personal nobility. In all criminal 
cases, saving attainder and impeachment, they are to be tried by a 
petit jury. Moreover, bishops do not vote, in the house of lords, on 
the trial of any person for a capital crime. 

All the temporal and spiritual nobles that compose the house of 
lords, however different in their titles and degrees of nobility, are 
called peers (pares), or equals ; because their voices are admitted 
as of equal value, and that the vote of a bishop or baron shall be 
equivalent to that of an archbishop or duke. 

The capital privilege (or rather prerogative) of the house of peers 
consists in their being the supreme court of judicature, to whom 
the final decision of all civil causes are confided and referred in 
the last resort. 

This constitutional privilege is a weighty counterpoise to his 
majesty's second prerogative of appointing the administrators of 
justice throughout the nation ; forasmuch as judges (who are im- 
mediately under the influence of the crown) are yet intimidated 
from infringing, by any sentence, on the laws or constitution of these 
realms, while a judgment so highly superior to their own impends. 

The second great privilege of the house of peers consists in their 
having the sole judicature of all impeachments commenced and pro- 
secuted by the commons. And this, again, is a very weighty coun- 
terpoise to his majesty's third prerogative of the executive govern- 
ment of these nations by his ministers ; since no minister can be so 
great as not justly to dread the coming under a judgment from 
which the mightiness of his royal master cannot protect him. 

The third capital privilege of the house of peers subsists in their 
share, or particular department of rights, in the legislature. This ex- 
tends to the framing of any bills, at their pleasure, for the purposes 
of good government ; saving always to the commons their incom- 
municable right of granting taxes or subsidies to be levied on 
their constituents. But on such bills, as on all others, the house of 
lords have a negative a happy counterpoise to the power both of 
king and commons, should demands on the one part, or bounties on 
the other, exceed what is requisite. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 279 

The change of the ancient modus in conferring nobility has not 
hitherto, as 1 trust, been of any considerable detriment to the weal 
of the people. But should some future majesty, or rather some 
future ministry, entitle folk to a voice in the second estate on any 
consideration save that of eminent virtue and patriotic service, 
might it be possible that such ministers should take a further 
stride, and confer nobility for actions deserving of infamy ; should 
they even covenant to grant such honours and dignities in lieu 
of services subversive of the constitution ; a majority of such a 
peerage must either prove too light to effect any public benefit, 
or heavy enough to effect the public perdition. 

fghe Bemocratical or tphird Estate. 

THE election of commoners to be immediate trustees and apt 
representatives of the people in parliament, is the hereditary and 
indefeasible privilege of the people. It is the privilege which they 
accepted, and which they retain, in exchange of their original in- 
herent and hereditary right of sitting with the king and peers IN 
PEESON, for the guardianship of their own liberties, and the insti- 
tution of their own laws. 

Such representatives, therefore, can never have it in their power 
to give, delegate, or extinguish the whole or any part of the 
people's inseparable and unextinguishable share in the legislative 
power ; neither to impart the same to any one of the other estates, 
or to any persons or person whatever, either in or out of parlia- 
ment. Where plenipotentiaries take upon them to abolish tha 
authority of their own principles, or where any secondary agents 
attempt to defeat the power of their primaries, such agents and 
plenipotentiaries defeat their own commission, and all the powers 
of the trust necessarily revert to the constituents. 

The persons of these temporary trustees of the people, during 
their session, and for fourteen days before and after every meeting, 
adjournment, prorogation, and dissolution of parliament, are equally 
exempted, with the persons of peers, from arrests and duress of 
every sort. 

They are also, during their session, to have ready access to the 
king or house of lords, and to address or confer with them on all 
occasions. 

No member of the house of commons, no more than of the house 
of peers, shall suffer, or be questioned, or compelled to witness or 
answer, in any court or place whatsoever, touching any thing said 
or done by himself or others in parliament, in order that perfect 
freedom of speech and action may leave nothing undone for the 
public weal. 

They have also, during session, an equal power with the house 
of lords, to punish any who shall presume to traduce their dignity, 
or detract from the rights or privileges of any member of the 
house. 

The commons form a court of judicature distinct from the judi- 
cature of the house of lords. Theirs is the peculiar privilege to 
try and adjudge the legality of the election of their own members. 



280 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

They may fine and confine their own members, as well as others, 
for delinquency or offence against the honour of their house ; but 
in all other matters of judicature, they are merely a court of in- 
quisition and presentment, and not a tribunal of definitive judgment. 

In this respect, however, they are extremely formidable. They 
constitute the grand inquest of the nation ; for which great and 
good purpose they are supposed to be perfectly qualified by a 
personal knowledge of what hath been transacted throughout the 
several shires, cities and boroughs from whence they assemble, and 
which they represent. 

Over and above their inquiry into all public grievances,, wicked 
ministers, transgressing magistrates, corrupt judges and justiciaries, 
who sell, deny, or delay justice ; evil counsellors of the crown, who 
attempt or devise the subversion or alteration of any part of the 
constitution ; with all such overgrown malefactors as are deemed 
above the reach of inferior courts, all come under the particular 
cognizance of the commons, to be by them impeached, and pre- 
sented for trial at the bar of the house of lords. And these in- 
quisitory and judicial powers of the two houses, from which no 
man under the crown can be exempted, are deemed a sufficient 
allay and counterpoise to the whole executive power of the king, 
by his ministers. 

The legislative department of the power of the commons is in 
all respects coequal with that of the peers. They frame any bills 
at pleasure for the purposes of good government. They exercise a 
right, as the lords also do, to propose and bring in bills for the 
amendment or repeal of old laws, as well as for the ordaining or 
institution of new ones. And each house, alike, hath a negative on 
all bills that are framed and passed by the other. 

But the capital, the incommunicable privilege of the house of 
commons, arises from that holy trust which their constituents re- 
pose in them ; whereby they are empowered to borrow from the 
people a small portion of their property, in order to restore it 
threefold in the advantages of peace, equal government, and the 
encouragement of trade, industry, and manufactures. 

To impart any of this trust would be a breach of the constitu- 
tion ; and even to abuse it would be a felonious breach of common 
honesty. 

By this fundamental trust, and incommunicable privilege, the 
commons have the sole power over the money of the people ; to 
grant or deny aids, according as they shall judge them either 
requisite or unnecessary to the public service. Theirs is the pro- 
vince, and theirs alone, to inquire and judge of the several occa- 
sions for which such aids may be required, and to measure and 
appropriate the sums to their respective uses. Theirs also is the 
sole province of framing all bills or laws for the imposing of any 
taxes, and of appointing the means of levying the same upon the 
people. Neither may the first or second estate, either king or 
peerage, propound or do any thing relating to these matters that 
may any way interfere with the proceedings of the commons ; save 
in their negative or assent to such bills when presented to them, 
without addition, deduction, or alteration of any kind. 



TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 281 

After such like aids and taxes have been levied and disposed of, 
the commons have the further right of inquiring and examining 
into the application of said aids ; of ordering all accounts relative 
thereto to be laid before them ; and of censuring the abuse or 
misapplication thereof. 

The royal assent to all other bills is expressed by the terms, " Le 
roy le veut the king wills it;" but when the commons present 
their bills of aid to his majesty, it is answered" Le roy remercie 
ses loyal sujets, et ainsi le veut the king thanks his loyal subjects, 
and so willeth." An express acknowledgment, that the right of 
granting or levying moneys for public purposes lies solely, in- 
herently, and incommunicably in the people and their represen- 
tatives. 

This capital privilege of the commons constitutes the grand 
counterpoise to the king's principal prerogative of making peace or 
war ; for how impotent must a warlike enterprise prove without 
money, which makes the sinews thereof! And thus the people 
and their representatives still retain in their hands the grand 
momentum of the constitution, and of all human affairs. 

Distinguished representatives ! Happy people ! immutably happy 
while worthily represented! 

As the fathers of the several families throughout the kingdom 
nearly and tenderly comprise and represent the persons, cares, and 
concerns of their respective households ; so these adopted fathers 
immediately represent, and intimately concentrate, the persons and 
concerns of their respective constituents, and in them the collective 
body or sum of the nation. And while these fathers continue true 
to their adopting children, a single stone cannot lapse from the 
great fabric of the constitution. 



<i>he $hr$e Estates in parliament. 

WITH the king, lords, and commons, in parliament assembled, 
the people have deposited their legislative or absolute power, in, 
trust, for their whole body ; the said king, lords, and commons, when 
so assembled, being the great representative of the whole nation, as 
if all the people were then convened in one general assembly. 

As the institution, repeal, and amendment of laws, together with 
the redress of public grievances and offences, are not within the 
capacity of any of the three estates distinct from the others ; 
the frequent holding of parliaments is the vital food, without which 
the constitution cannot subsist. 

The three estates originally, when assembled in parliament, sat 
together consulting in the open field. Accordingly, at Kunning 
Mead, five hundred years ago, King John passed the great charter 
(as therein is expressed) by the advice of the lords spiritual and 
temporal, by the advice of several commoners (by name recited), et 
aliorum fidelium, and of others his faithful people. And, in the 
twenty-first clause of the said charter, he covenants that, "for 
having the common council of the kingdom to assess aids, he will 
cause the lords spiritual and temporal to be summoned by his writs; 



282 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

and moreover, that he will cause the principal commoners, or those 
\vho held from him in chief, to be generally summoned to said 
parliaments by his sheriffs and bailiffs." 

In the said assemblies, however, the concourse became so great 
and disorderly, and the contests frequently so high, between the 
several estates, in assertion of their respective prerogatives and 
privileges, that they judged it more expedient to sit apart, and 
separately to exercise the offices of their respective departments. 

As there is no man or set of men, no class or corporation, no 
village or city, throughout the kingdom, that is not represented by 
these their delegates in parliament; this great body-politic, or 
representative of the nation, consists, like the body-natural, of a 
head and several members, which, being endowed with different 
powers for the exercise of different offices, are yet connected by 
one main and common interest, and actuated by one life or spirit 
of public reason, called the laws. 

In all steps of national import the king is to be conducted by 
the direction of the parliament, his great national council a council 
on whom it is equally incumbent to consult for the king with whom 
they are connected, and for the people by whom they are delegated, 
and whom they represent. Thus the king is, constitutionally, to be 
guided by the sense of the parliament, and the parliament alike is, 
constitutionally, to be guided by the general sense of the people. 
The two estates in parliament are the constituents of the king; and 
the people, mediately or immediately, are the constituents of the 
two estates in parliament. 

Now, while the three estates act distinctly within their respective 
departments, they affect, and are reciprocally affected, by each 
other. This action and reaction produces that general and system- 
atic control which, like conscience, pervades and superintends the 
whole, checking and prohibiting evil from every part of the con- 
stitution. And from this confinement of every part to the rule of 
right reason, ariseth the great law of liberty to all. 

For instance : the king has the sole prerogative of making war, 
&c. ; but then the means are in the hands of the people and their 
representatives. 

Again To the king is committed the whole executive power ; 
but then the ministers of that power are accountable to a tri- 
bunal from which a criminal has no appeal or deliverance to look 
for. 

Again To the king is committed the cognizance of all causes ; 
but should his judges or justiciaries pervert the rule of righteous- 
ness, an inquisition, impeachment, and trial impends, from whose 
judgment the judges cannot be exempted. 

Again The king hath a negative upon all bills, whereby his own 
prerogatives are guarded from invasion ; but should he refuse the 
royal assent to bills tending to the general good of the subject, the 
commons can also withhold their bills of assessment, or annex the 
rejected bills to their bill of aids, and they never failed to pass in 
such agreeable company. 

Lastly To the king is committed the right of calling the two 
estates to parliament ; but should he refuse so to call them, such a 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 283 

refusal would be deemed " an abdication of the constitution ; " and 
no one need be told at this day, that "an abdication of the 
constitution is an abdication of the throne." 

Thus, while the king acts in consent with the parliament and his 
people, he is limitless, irresistible, omnipotent upon earth; he is 
the free wielder of all the powers of a free and noble people a king 
throned over all the kings of the children of men. But should he 
attempt to break bounds should he cast for independence he 
finds himself hedged in and straitened on every side he finds him- 
self abandoned by all his powers, and justly left to a state of utter 
impotence and inaction. 

Hence is imputed to the sovereign head, in the constitution of 
Great Britain, the high and divine attribute the Idng can do no 
wrong ; for he is so circumscribed from the possibility of trans- 
gression, that no wrong can be permitted to any king in the 
constitution. 

While the king is thus controlled by the lords and the commons 
while the lords are thus controlled by the commons and the king 
and while the commons are thus controlled by the other two 
estates from attempting any thing to the prejudice of the general 
welfare ; the three estates may be aptly compared to three pillars, 
divided below at equidistant angles, but united and supported at 
top, merely by the bearing of each pillar against the others. 
Take but any one of these pillars away, and the other two must 
inevitably tumble. But while all act on each other, all are 
equally counteracted, and thereby affirm and establish the general 
frame. 

How deplorable then would it be, should this elaborate structure 
of our happy constitution, within the short period of a thousand 
years hence possibly in half the time fall a prey to effeminacy, 
pusillanimity, venality, and seduction ; like some ancient oak, the 
lord of the forest, to a pack of vile worms that lay gnawing 
at the root ; or, like Egypt, be contemptibly destroyed by " lice 
and locusts ! " 

Should the morals of our constituents ever come to be debauched, 
consent, which is the salt of liberty, would then be corrupted, and 
no salt might be found wherewith it could be seasoned. Those who 
are inwardly the servants of sin, must be outwardly the servants of 
influence. Each man would then be as the Trojan horse of old, 
and carry the enemies of his country within his bosom. Our own 
appetites would then induce us to betray our own interests, and 
state policy would seize us by the hand of our lusts, and lead us " a 
willing sacrifice to our own perdition." 

Should it ever come to pass that corruption, like a dark and low- 
hung mist, should spread from man to man, and cover these lands 
should a general dissolution of manners prevail should vice be 
countenanced and communicated by the leaders of fashion should 
it come to be propagated by ministers among legislators, and by 
the legislators among their constituents should guilt lift up its 
head without fear of reproach, and avow itself in the face of the 
Bun, and laugh virtue out of countenance by force of numbers 
should public duty turn public strumpet should shops come to be 



284 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

advertised where men may dispose of their honour and honesty 
at so much per ell should public markets be opened for the 
purchase of consciences, with an " O yes ! We bid most to those 
who set themselves, their trust, and their country, to sale," if such 
a day, I say, should ever arrive, it would be doomsday indeed to 
the virtue, to the liberty, and constitution of these kingdoms ! It 
would be the same to Great Britain as it would happen to the 
universe should the laws of cohesion cease to operate, and all the 
parts be dissipated, whose orderly connection now forms the beauty 
and common wealth of nature. Want of sanity in the materials 
can never be supplied by any art in the building. A constitution 
of public freemen can never consist of private constitutes. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

IN little more than a month, Harry made himself perfect master 
of the system of the British constitution, and wrote comments upon 
it much more voluminous than the text. As he had lost his friend 
Ned, little Dicky Clement became the principal companion of his 
hours of amusement, and Dicky with his good-will would never be 
from his heels. 

One morning as they strolled up the road, some distance from 
the town, Harry observed a crowd gathering fast on the way, and 
hastened like others to see what was the matter. 

As soon as he arrived, he perceived Mr. Gripe the constable at 
the head of the posse, with his painted staff of authority exalted in 
his hand. Pray, what are you about, Mr. Constable ? says Harry. 
I am going, sir, to seize a robber who has taken shelter in yonder 
waste hovel. And whom did he rob? He robbed Mr. Niggards 
here, that is to say, his boy here, of a sixpenny loaf. Perhaps the 
man was hungry, said Harry, and had not wherewithal to buy one. 
Pray tell me, my lad, how the affair was. 

Why, master, you must know as how Mr. Niggards, my master 
here, sent me this morning to the town with a shilling to buy two 
sixpenny loaves. So, as I was coming back, I met an able-looking 
man, who made me afraid with his pale and meagre face. My good 
boy, says he, will you give me one of those loaves in charity? I 
dare not, sir, says I ; they are none of my own. Here, says he, I 
will give you my hat for one of them ; but this I refused, as his hat, 
to my thinking, was not worth a groat. Nay, says he, I must have 
one of the loaves, that is certain, for I have a wife and seven 
children all starving in yonder hovel, and while there is bread in 
the world I cannot but snatch a morsel for them. So, as I told you, 
I was frighted. I gave him one of the loaves without any more 
words, and away he run as fast as his legs could carry him ; but I 
followed him with my eye till I saw him safe lodged. 

Here Harry wiped his eye, and mused a while. Tell me truly 
now, my good boy, continued he, if both those loaves had been your 
own, would you willingly have given one of them to keep the poor 
man and his family from perishing? 



TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 285 

I would, sir, said the lad, with a very good will. And, had I a 
sixpence of my own, I would have gone back with all my heart and 
have bought another loaf. But my master is a hard man, and so I 
was forced to tell him the truth. 

Here, my lad, says Harry ; here is a crown. Go back, buy two 
loaves for your master in place of the one he has lost, and keep the 
remaining four shillings to yourself for your trouble. You see, Mr. 
Constable, continued he, you never can make any thing like felony 
of this matter. The boy confesses that he gave the bread with a 
very good will, and that he would not have informed had it not 
been for fear of his master. 

It is very true, please your honour, replied Mr. Gripe ; I myself 
do pity the poor man from my heart, and will have nothing more 
to say in this business. 

Stay a while, says Harry, perhaps we may find some further 
employment for you. I think I should know the face of yonder 
man. Is not that the Niggards whom you had in custody the other 
day, and for whose deliverance I paid five-and-twenty pounds to his 
creditors ? The very man, sir, says Gripe. 

Harry then put his hand in his pocket, and taking out a small 
scrip of parchment, exclaimed I am glad of what you tell me, with 
all my heart ! Indeed, I did not like the looks of the man at the 
time, and that made me accept an assignment of this action. Here, 
Mr. Gripe, take your prisoner again into custody in my name. 
Away with him to jail directly ! As the holy gospel has it : " He 
shall not depart thence till he has paid the utmost farthing." No, 
no, Mr. Niggards ! I will not hear a word. Go and learn hence- 
forward to be merciful yourself, if you would look for any mercy 
from God or man. 

Dicky, my dear, go back again, says Harry; our neighbour 
Joseph here will see you safe home. I will not suffer any one to 
go in my company, for fear of putting the poor man or his family to 
shame. 

Harry had not advanced fifty paces toward the hovel, when his 
ears were struck with the sound of sudden and joint lamentation ; 
and turning, he perceived that the inquisitive crowd had gathered 
at his heels. My friends, says he, I entreat, I beseech you to leave 
me for the present. I would not choose any witnesses to what I 
am about. Pray, oblige me so far as to depart on your own 
occasions. 

Hereupon, being loth to offend him, they retired a few steps, and 
stood together aloof, attentive to the event of this uncommon 
adventure. 

Mean while the cry continued with a bitterness that thrilled 
through every nerve of our hero ; and, as he now approached the 
place, he did his utmost to restrain himself, and quell the feelings 
within him, and he drew his hat over his eyes to prevent the parties 
from seeing the emotion that they caused. 

The hovel was of mud walls, without any roofing; but, as 
there was an opening where a door had once been, Harry stole 
to the entrance, casting an under eye of observation about 
him. 



286 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

Hereupon a woman turned. She had been fearfully peering over 
the wall at the crowd which had not yet dispersed ; but, having 
notice of Hariy's entrance, she looked toward him, and dropped on 
her knees. 

sir ! she cried, if you are the gentleman who owned the loaf, 
for Christ his sake I pray you to have mercy upon us ! Money, in- 
deed, we have not; but we have these shreds remaining, and we 
will strip ourselves of our covering to make you a recompense. 
Alas ! alas ! could we have guessed how my husband came by it, 
we would have famished a thousand times rather than touch a 
morsel. But he, dear good man, did it all for our sakes, for the 
sake of the heavy burden with which he is overladen. Ah, I would 
to heaven we were all dead, hanged, or drowned, out of his way ! 
He might then walk the world at large, and be happy, as he 
deserves. 

Here again she set up her wailing, which was accompanied by 
her seven children, in such a woful concert as the heart of Harry 
could not sustain, neither suffer him for a season to interrupt or 
appease. 

At length he said with a faltering voice Pray, be not alarmed, 
madam, for I discern that you are a gentlewoman, though in a very 
unhappy disguise. The affair of the loaf is settled to your satis- 
faction ; and here are ten guineas, it is all that I have about me, 
and it is only to show you for the present that you are not quite so 
friendless in the world as you thought. Mean time I request that 
you will all come with me to Hampstead, where we will try to do 
something better for you. 

Here the woman looked with an earnest and eager rapture at 
him. May Jesus Christ, she cried, be your portion, fair angel ! and 
he is already your portion ; he is seen in your sweet face, and 
breaks out at your eyes in pity to poor sinners. 

Harry was now stepping forth, and the rest prepared to follow 
him; when the poor man, who for shame had not yet uttered a 
syllable, gently stayed him at the opening. Turn, generous master, 
said he ; pray turn, and hear a small apology for my transgression. 
I am a very unhappy man, I have seen better times; but I am 
driven by cruel usage from house, and home, and maintenance. I 
was going to London to apply to the law for relief, when my 
youngest child, who was on the breast, fell desperately sick about 
four days ago. As we had no money to hire lodging, and had 
begged the means of life for the two foregoing days, we were com- 
pelled to take up with this shelterless hovel. From hence I fre- 
quented the road, and for the last three days begged as much as 
sustained us in coarse bread and water. But this morning my boy 
died, and his brothers and I, with our sticks and our hands, dug his 
grave that you see yonder, and I placed that flag over him to pre- 
serve his tender limbs from the pigs and the hounds, till it may 
please heaven to allow me means to bury him according to the holy 
rites of our church. This melancholy office, sir, detained me so 
long, and exercise had made the appetites of my children so out- 
rageous, that I was in a manner compelled to do what I did. As 
I had no coffin nor winding-sheet, I took the waistcoat from my 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 287 

body, and wrapped it about my babe, and would willingly have 
wrapped him with my flesh and my bones, that we might quietly 
have lain in one grave together. 

Harry answered not a word, but walking onward before his com- 
pany, plentifully watered the ground with his tears as he passed ; 
while the poor man took his youngest son in his arms, and the 
woman her youngest daughter on her back, and thus, with a leisurely 
pace, they all arrived at Mr. Fenton's. 

The door being opened, Harry led his nine guests to the back 
parlour, where he instantly ordered plenty of bread and butter and 
milk for the children, with cold meat, ale, and cakes for the father 
and mother : and this was a matter too customary in this house to 
be any cause of wonder to any member of the family. 

As soon as they were refreshed, he took them all to his wardrobe, 
where he constrained the parents to take of the very best things for 
themselves and their children ; and having so done he walked out, 
and left them to dress. 

Mr. Fenton was in his study, and had just finished a letter as 
Harry entered with a smiling countenance. I have been very 
lucky this morning, sir, says he ; I think I have got the prettiest 
family of boys and girls that is to be found within five shires. Do 
you know any thing about them, Harry? Nothing further as yet, 
sir, than that they and their parents are exceeding poor, and have 
fallen, as they say, into great misfortunes. The mother is a very 
handsome and genteel young woman, and the father a portly and 
very comely man, save that he has a large purple mark on the left 
side of his face. A purple mark ! cried Mr. Fenton, and started. 
Go, my dear, and bring that man to me directly. Why, pray, sir, 
do you know him ? No, my love, I should not know him though he 
stood before me ; but I would give a thousand pounds that he may 
prove the man I mean, and that I shall discover on a short 
examination. 

By this time the father of our new family was dressed, and Harry, 
taking him by the hand, bade him be of good courage, and led him 
to his uncle. He bowed twice, and with an awful and timid respect, 
while Mr. Fenton rose and looked earnestly at him. I rejoice, sir, 
says he, to find that my son here has been of some little matter of 
use to you and your family. Pray, take a seat nearer to me, sir, if 
you please. He tells me you have met with misfortunes; I also 
have had my share. I think myself nearly of kin to the unhappy ; 
and you will singularly oblige me by as much of your story as you 
shall please to communicate. I am interested in it. 

I have nothing to conceal from your honour, answered the 
stranger. And I shall willingly give you an open and faithful 
narrative of my short but sad history. 

My name is Giifard Homely. My father was a farmer in easy 
circumstances near Stratford. He bound me apprentice to a tanner, 
and, when my time was out, gave me a hundred and twenty pounds 
to set me up in my business. But, dying soon after, he bequeathed 
the bulk of his substance to my elder brother. 

Though my brother was a spendthrift, yet I loved him dearly, 
and, when his creditors fell upon him, I became his bail for two 



288 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

hundred pounds. Within a few months after he suddenly dis- 
appeared, and I never could learn further tidings concerning him. 

A writ was thereupon marked against me, and put into the hands 
of bailiffs. But liberty was precious. I left all my substance to 
the possession of my pursuers, and, passing at a great rate, I escaped 
into Lincolnshire. 

There I joined myself to Anthony Granger, the tanner. Inde- 
pendent of his trade, he held a very beautiful and well-parked farm 
under Sir Spranger Thornhill, the lord of the manor. And as I 
served him with great zeal, affection, and application, his affairs 
prospered under my hands. 

He had an only child, a very lovely girl, of about ten years of 
age ; her manners, like her countenance, were extremely engaging, 
and I took vast delight, at all leisure hours, in teaching her to read 
and write, and in diverting her with a variety of little plays and 
amusements. 

I had no intention, at that time, of gaining her young heart, but 
that happened to prove the miserable consequence ; and a heavy 
price it is that my poor dear girl has since paid for her affection. 

Year after year she now grew in stature, but much more in love- 
liness, at least in my eyes ; and yet I flattered myself that I affected 
her merely for her own sake. I used to please myself with the 
prospect of her being advanced to high fortune : and I thought that 
I would willingly have given her up at the altar to some lord of 
the land. 

One twelfth-night a parcel of young folks of us were diverting 
ourselves about the fire with several pastimes, and among the rest 
the play was introduced of, I love my love with an A, because she is 
amiable, and so on through the alphabet. 

When it came to my Peggy's turn, she said I love my love with 
an H, because he is very honest, and I never will hate him for his 
being homely. And this might have passed without any observation, 
had she not cast a glance at me, and blushed exceedingly, which 
threw me also into equal confusion. 

As this was the first discovery that I made of her affection, 
it also served to open my eyes to the strength of my own passion, 
and this cost me many a sleepless night and aching heart. I did 
not look upon myself as a sufficient match for her ; I reflected that 
it would be very ungenerous to lessen the fortune or happiness of 
the girl that I loved ; and I resolved a hundred times to quit the 
country, that my absence might cure both her and myself of our 
foolish fondness for each other, But though this was what my 
reason still prompted and approved, my heart still held me back, 
as it were, for a while longer when I was on the brink of departure. 

Peggy was just arrived to her fifteenth year on the 24th of 
April, and was elected by the neighbours to be queen of the fol- 
lowing May, and to deliver the prizes to the victors at the wake. 

T had made a vow wilhin myself to forsake her and the country 
the very day after her regency ; but, in the mean while, I could not 
resist the temptation of showing my address before the queen of 
my wishes. 

Accordingly, on that day I entered the lists among the other 



TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 289 

young candidates. But I will not burden your honour with a par- 
ticular detail of our insignificant contests. You have unquestionably 
been witness to the like on several occasions. It will be sufficient 
to inform you, that as I had the fortune to get the better at the 
race and at wrestling, when I successively went to receive the re- 
spective prizes my Peggy's eyes danced, and her feet went pit-a-pat 
with joy, as I approached her. 

Cudgels came next in play, and a little stage of boards was 
erected for the purpose, that the spectators might see with the 
better advantage. I had long learned this art from a famous 
master in Stratford ; and, as I was confident of my superiority, I 
hurt my rivals as little as possible, only just sufficient to make them 
acknowledge that they were foiled. 

At length one Hector Pluck, a butcher, mounted the stage. He 
had, it seems, been quite an adept at this sport, and for ten fore- 
going years had carried off the prize in several neighbouring shires ; 
but he was now come to settle near Lincoln, and was to have been 
married the following day to a farmer's daughter, who was one of 
the fair spectators at the wake. 

The moment he assailed me, I perceived that his passions were 
up, and that his eye was a plain interpreter of the deadliness of his 
heart. He fought cautiously, however, and kept on a watchful 
reserve ; and we had long attacked and defended, without any ad- 
vantage on either part, when, with a motion and fury quick as 
lightning, he made a side-stroke at me, and aimed to cut me across 
the face with the point of his stick. This was a blow which I had 
not time to intercept, or even to see. The villain, however, happily 
missed of his intention ; for his cudgel, being something advanced, 
only bruised my cheek, when instantly I gave him an exasperated 
stroke on the head, and, cutting him in the skull, laid him 
sprawling on the stage, whereat all who knew me gave a great 
shout. 

After some time he rose, and advancing a little toward me, he 
stretched out his left hand as if in token of reconciliation ; while, 
pulling out his butcher's knife from a sheath in his side-pocket, he 
with his right hand made a stab at my heart, and, suddenly leaping 
off the stage, attempted to escape. 

Immediately the blood poured from me in a stream, and ran 
along the boards. I found myself growing weak, and, sitting down 
on the stage, I had the presence of mind to open my bosom, and, 
taking out my handkerchief, I held it to the wound. 

In the mean time the whole concourse was in an uproar. The 
cry went about that Giffard Homely was murdered! Giffard 
Homely was killed ! My poor dear Peggy fell senseless from her 
throne, and was carried home in a fit. Several horsemen hasted 
away, of their own accord, for a surgeon ; and the butcher was pur- 
sued, knocked down, hard pinioned, and conveyed with following 
curses to the jail of Lincoln. 

Among others who came to condole with me, little Master Billy 
Thornhill, our landlord's son and heir, came running, and desired 
to be lifted upon the stage. 

As soon as he saw the blood, and how weak and pale I looked, 

u 



290 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

he broke out into a passionate fit of tears Giffard, my Giffard, 
my poor Giffard! he cried; I fear you are a dead man! *You will 
no more be my holiday-companion, Giffard! Never more will you 
go a-birding with me, or set gins for the rabbits, or catch little 
fishes for me, or carry me on your back through the water, or in 
your arms over the mire. Alack ! alack ! what shall I do if I lose 
you, my poor Giffard ! 

The surgeon came at full gallop. As soon as he had seen the 
greatness of the gash Say your last prayer, my friend, he cried ; 
in a very few minutes you must be a dead man. But when he had 
probed the wound, his face turned to cheerfulness. A most won- 
derful escape, he cried; the weapon has missed your vitals, and 
only glanced along the rib. Be of good courage ; I engage, in a 
few weeks, to set you once more upon your legs. 

Mean tune my loving neighbours made a litter and bed for me 
of the tents and tent-poles, all striving who should carry me, and 
all escorting me home. 

The good Mr. Granger had been that day confined by a 
sprain in his ankle, and now sat weeping by his child, who fell 
out of one fainting fit into another, till she was told that I was 
brought home, and that the doctor had pronounced me out of 
danger. 

As soon as I was put to bed, and my kind attendants withdrawn, 
Mr. Granger on a crutch came limping, and sat down by me. He 
had endeavoured to restrain his tears before the crowd; but as 
soon as he was seated they broke out anew. 

O Giffard, Giffard! he cried; my dear Peggy is very ill, and 
you are very ill ; and to lose you both at once would be hard upon 
me, indeed ! 

Notwithstanding a short fever, the doctor happened to keep his 
promise, with the assistance of youth and a good habit, and I began 
to gather strength and recover apace. 

As soon as I was up and about, I observed that Miss Peggy 
seemed no longer desirous of restraining her kind looks or her 
kind offices ; and this gave me some concern, till I also observed 
that her father took no umbrage or no notice of it. 

One evening, as we sat over a tankard of October Giffard, says 
he bluntly, what would you think of my Peggy for a wife ? Nothing 
at all, sir, says I. I would not marry your daughter if she would 
have me to-morrow. Pray, why so, Giffard ? Peggy is very pretty, 
and deserving, as I think, of as good a man as you. Her deservings, 
sir, said I, are my very objection; I scarce know a man in the 
land who is deserving of her. If that is the case, Giffard, her 
hand is at your service, with all my heart. Oh, sir! I replied, 
I have no suitable fortune ; but know you are pleased to banter ; 
I am no match for her. You are an industrious and a making 
young man, said he ; and such a one is richer in my eye than a 
spender with thousands. Beside, you are loving and good-natured, 
my son ; and I shall not lose my child by you, but gain another 
child in you as dear to me as herself. 

Here I was so transported, so overpowered by the kindness of 
the dear good man, that I could not get out a syllable ; but, sinking 



TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 291 

before him, I eagerly grasped his legs, and then his knees, and 
rising went out to vent my passion. 

In about a month after, Sir Spranger Thornhill and my young 
friend, Master William, honoured our nuptials with their presence ; 
and all our kind neighbours came crowding to the solemnity, and, 
by their joy, appeared to be pai'ties to our union. 

For eight following years never was known a happier family. 
But about that time Sir Spranger Thornhill sickened and died, 
and was attended to the dark mansion of the bodies of his ancestors 
by the greatest concourse of true mourners that ever was seen 
in the shire, all lamenting that goodness was not exempted from 
mortality. 

Our dear father could never be said to hold up his head from that 
day. He silently pined after his old friend and patron, Sir Spranger; 
and all our cares and caresses were not able to withhold him from 
following the same appointed track. 

Never, sure, was grief like mine and my Peggy's. In looking 
at each other we saw the loss that we had sustained ; and while 
we lay arm in arm, often, often have we watered the good man's 
memory with our tears. 

Time, however, who has many severe sorrows in prospect, helps 
to soften and lessen those that he brings in his train. An in- 
creasing family of children, sweetly tempered like their mother, 
called for all my concern ; and our young landlord, Sir William, 
whenever he came from college, used to make our house his home, 
and take me with him wherever he went, till Lord Lechmore, his 
guardian, took him from the university, and sent him abroad, with 
a tutor and servants, on his travels. 

As I had made considerable savings, and now looked to have a 
number of children to provide for, I resolved to realize all that 
I could for the poor things ; so I built a malthouse and windmill, 
and planted a large orchard, with other profitable improvements, 
that cost me to the amount of about eight hundred pounds. 

Whilst these things were in agitation, Sir Freestone Hardgrave, 
one of the knights for our shire, came into that part of the country. 
He had lately purchased a fine estate adjoining to the west side of 
my concern; and was a man of vast opulence, but a stranger 
among us at that time. 

Though Sir Freestone was an old bachelor, and had one of the 
most remorseless hearts that ever informed the shape of man, he 
had yet a pleasing aspect and insinuating address, and always 
applied those qualities to the purpose of betraying. Alas ! I was 
informed, but too late, of his character that his avarice outgrew 
even the growth of his wealth ; and that his desires increased in 
exact proportion as age happened to deduct from his ability to 
gratify them. 

Unhappily he cast a greedy eye at iny little farm. Like another 
lordly Ahab, he coveted the vineyard of poor Naboth ; and at 
length compassed his ends by means equally iniquitous. 

When he proposed to give me more than value for it, I an- 
swered that I myself had taken a fancy to it, for the sake of the 
dear man who had given it to me in trust for his child and her 

u2 



292 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

posterity, and that I would not part with it for twenty times an 
equivalent. With this, however, he did not appear in the least 
disconcerted ; but said that he esteemed and affected me the more 
for my gratitude to the memory of my old benefactor. 

I was afterwards told, and learned by dear experience, that he 
never pardoned an offence, nor even a disappointment ; but nothing 
of this appeared for the present. He visited made it his business 
to meet me in several places sought and seemed quite desirous 
of cultivating an acquaintance with me did me many little friendly 
offices with my richer neighbours condescended to toy with my 
little ones appeared to take a huge liking to my two eldest 
boys stood godfather to my little girl that is now in her mother's 
arms said he wondered how I contrived to maintain so numerous 
a family upon such slender means and promised to procure me a 
beneficial post in the collection of the customs. 

After a course of such specious kindnesses, and while my heart 
glowed with gratitude, in the recollection of his favours both passed 
and proposed, he came to my house in a mighty hurry. My dear 
Homely, says he, I have just struck up a most advantageous bargain 
with our neighbour, Squire Spendall. But he wants the money 
immediately I have not the whole about me ; and yet, if I do not 
pay him down directly, some cursed disappointment may intervene. 
Do run and bring me all that you have quickly. I will repay 
you within two or three days at farthest. 

Here I hasted with joy to the corner where I had deposited my 
cash, as well for payment of rent as another little matter that 
I had in my eye ; and, bringing out a leathern bag, I laid it on the 
table. There, sir, said I, are two hundred and thirty guineas ; 
take but the trouble to count them out, and give me a short 
acknowledgment. No, said he, my dear Homely, never heed it for 
the present, I will be back with you the moment I have paid the 
purchase ; and so saying, he caught up the bag and huddled away 
as fast as his old legs could scamper, while I sat still through 
astonishment, my heart misgiving me at the time, as if it foreboded 
the mischiefs that were to follow. 

I waited with great anxiety for his return till evening, when, 
hastening to his lodge, I was there informed that he had set out 
for London five hours before. This threw me into a panic, though 
not altogether without a mixture of hope, and so I waited till the 
three days of his promise should expire. Mr. Snack then came 
to me and demanded the rent. He was a Lincoln attorney, whom 
Lord Lechmore had lately preferred to the care of my landlord's 
concerns, upon the death of Mr. Kindly, the good old agent. I told 
him ingenuously how matters had happened, and said I would 
hurry to London and bring back the money directly. 

Accordingly I posted away, and rested not till I arrived at the 
great city. There, for seven days successively, I besieged the 
doors of Sir Freestone, hourly knocking and requesting to be 
admitted to his presence ; but he was either not up, or just gone 
out, or had company with him, or was just then very busy, and not 
to be spoken to, and so forth. 

At length, when he found that I would not quit his house without 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 293 

an answer, he ordered me before him. His chariot waited at the 
gate, and he stood dressed in the hall. As 1 approached, and 
bowed with the respect and mortified air of a petitioner, he put 
on a look of the most strange and audacious effrontery I ever 
beheld. Who are you, friend, said he, and what may your business 
be with me ? I am come, and it please your honour, humbly to 
tell you that I am called upon for my rent ; and to beseech your 
honour to restore me the two hundred and thirty pieces you had 
from me the other day. Here, says he to his servants, this must 
be some desperado who is come to rob me in broad day, and in 
the middle of my own people. The fellow says I owe him money : 
I know not that I ever saw his face before. I desire that you will 
not suffer such a dangerous villain to enter my doors any more. 
And so saying, out he stepped, and away he drove. 

O, sirs, how I was struck to the heart at that instant ! I sneaked 
out, scarce half alive, not remembering where I was, or whither 
I was to go. Alas ! I was far from making the speed back again 
that I had done in going. I knew not how to show my face to my 
Peggy or her dear little ones, whom I had plundered and stripped 
of their substance, by stupidly surrendering it without witnesses, 
or a single line whereby I might reclaim it. At length I got 
home, if home it might be called, that had then nothing in it, or 
at least nothing for me. 

Mr. Snack had taken the advantage of my absence to possess 
himself of my farm, and of all that I was worth. Under colour 
of distraining for rent, he had seized every thing, even the beds 
whereon my wife and children lay, with all their wearing apparel, 
save what they had on their backs. The bill of appraisement, 
which I have here, comes to upward of six hundred pounds ; but 
when the cattle and other effects were set up to sale, the auctioneer 
and bidders proved of Mr. Snack's providing ; all were intimidated 
from offering any thing save those who offered in trust for this 
charitable agent, and the whole of my substance went off within 
the value of one year's rent, being one hundred and eighty-five 
pounds. 

Never ! exclaimed Mr. Fenton ; never did I hear of so barefaced 
and daring a violation of all laws divine and human, and that too 
under sanction of the most perfect system of law that ever was 
framed. But what will not power effect, when unrestrained by 
conscience, when prompted by avarice, and abetted by cunning? 
And is there no remedy, sir? cried out our hero. None that I 
know of, my Harry, save where power opposes power in favour of 
weakness, or wealth opposes wealth in favour of poverty. 

But we will see what may be done. Mean while let Mr. 
Homely proceed in his narrative. 

When my family, continued Homely, were thus turned out of 
doors, an old follower made way for them in his own cottage, and 
retired with his wife and daughter to a cowhouse hard by. Mean 
while my loving neighbours supplied them with sufficient bedding, 
and daily kept them in victuals, even more than they could eat. 

While I went slowly to see them, stopping and turning every 
minute toward our old habitation, all the horrors of our situation 



294 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

flew upbraidingly in my face, and I accused myself as the robber 
and murderer of eight persons, for any one of whom I would have 
spent my life. 

When I stooped to enter their lowly roof, all trembling and sick 
at heart, I expected to meet nothing but faces of aversion and ex- 
pressions of reproach ; but when they all set up a shout of joy at 
my appearance, when they all crowded clasping and clinging about 
me, the violence and distraction of my inward emotion deprived 
me of sensation, and I swooned away. 

When I revived, I cast a look about me, and perceived that their 
grief had been as extreme as their joy was at my arrival. Ah, 
my Peggy ! I cried, how have I undone you ! By you I got all 
my possessions, and, in return, I have deprived you of all that you 
possessed. You were every blessing to me, and I have repaid you 
with nothing but misery and ruin. 

Do not be concerned, my love, said she, nor repine at the conse- 
quences of your own goodness and honesty. You are not as God 
to see into all hearts ; the wisest may be deceived ; and the best, 
as I believe, are the most subject to be imposed upon. Common 
charity must have supposed that there could not be such a soul as 
Sir Freestone upon earth. But be of good courage, my husband, 
I have good news for you; I dreamed that our dear father 
appeared to me last night. Do not be disheartened, my child, says 
he ; bear the cross that is laid upon you with a cheerful and free 
will, and all shall be restored to you sevenfold upon earth, and 
seventy-seven fold in the life that has no ending. 

When I found that my Peggy, instead of distaste and upbraiding, 
had nothing but love in her looks, and consolation in her ex- 
pressions, I folded her to my bosom, and to my soul that went to 
meet her, and I would willingly have made her one with my own 
being. 

My neighbours were not as birds of the season ; they neither 
despised nor forsook me because of my poverty. They came 
crowding to condole with me ; they advised me to apply to the 
law against Sir Freestone and attorney Snack ; and they offered to 
contribute towards my journey. They also joined in this written 
testimony of my character, and prosperous circumstances, before 
Snack made his seizure ; and two of them have witnessed, in this 
bit of paper, that when the alarm came of Mr. Kindly's death, and 
of a strange agent being put in his room, they heard me say that I 
did not matter the worst he could do, and saw me count down 
twenty pieces over and above my year's rent. 

The late frights and fatigues which Peggy underwent during 
Snack's operations, together with her extremes of joy on my 
return, and of grief at the fit into which I had fallen, hastened 
on her labour, and she was delivered before her time of that 
weakly little babe whom I buried this morning. 

Within six weeks after her childbirth we prepared for our 
journey. Our neighbours, like the good Samaritan, had com- 
passion upon him who fell among the thieves. They made me up 
a purse of thirty-five pounds, and promised to contribute further 
toward the carrying on of my suit. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 295 

We travelled happily, by easy journeys of a few miles a day, till, 
nine days ago, we reached a small village the other side of St. 
Alban's ; there we took up our rest for the night at a house that 
had no sign, but let occasional lodgings, and sold bread and small 
beer. 

As I desired a separate apartment for ourselves, we were put 
into a kind of waste room, that had no fastening to the door except 
a latch. After a slender supper we lay down to sleep, and I stuffed 
my breeches close under my head with all possible caution. We 
had made an extraordinary journey that day, and I was par- 
ticularly fatigued by carrying several of my tired children succes- 
sively in my arms, so that we all slept but too soundly ; and, when 
I awoke in the morning, neither money nor breeches were to be 
found. 

Such a loss, at another time, would have been as nothing to me ; 
but, in our present circumstances, it was a repetition and doubling 
of all that we had lost before. I instantly summoned the people 
of the house, and in a good deal of warmth charged our landlord 
with the felony, telling him that I had been robbed of above thirty- 
three pounds. "Why, master, says he, I know nothing to the con- 
trary ; but it would be very hard indeed if I was to be answerable 
for the honesty of every one who goes this road. If you had given 
your money in charge to me, I would have been accountable for it. 
I believe, by the grief you are in, that you must have been losers : 
I will therefore forgive you your reckoning, and give you a pair of 
breeches of my own into the bargain ; but this is all I will do till 
the law forces me. 

As there was no remedy, at least for the present, I accepted 
his overture, and set out. But, O sir ! it is impossible to describe 
the horrors of my soul as I silently stepped along, casting an eye 
of mingled pity and despair upon my children. I cursed in secret 
my own existence, and wished for some sudden thunderbolt to 
crush me into nothing. All trust in God, or his providence, had 
now wholly forsaken me, and I looked upon him as neglecting all 
other objects of his wrath, and exerting his omnipotence against 
me and mine alone. 

Peggy, as I suppose, perceived how it was with me, and kept 
behind a while, that she might give way to the present tumult 
and distemper of my mind. At length, hoping to administer some 
matter of comfort to me, she came up, and silently put a few 
shillings into my hand, saying Courage, my dear husband, all 
cannot be lost while we have a God who is infinitely rich to depend 
upon. Ah ! said I, these are the fruits of your dreams, these are your 
promised blessings that heaven had in store for us. And still has 
in store, she replied ; the same hand that holds the rod, holds the 
comforting staff also. Tell me not of comfort, I cried ; I see that 
the face of God is set in blackness and blasting against me. But 
for me it matters not, had he not taken me at an advantage. He 
sees that I have eight lives, all dearer than my own, and he is 
determined to kill me in every one of them. 

Do not cast from you, my love, she said, the only crutch that the 
world and the wretched have to rest upon. God is pleased, 



29o TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

perhaps, to take all human moans from us, that he may show forth 
the won lers of his power in our relief. While any other hope is 
left, wo are apt to trust to that hope, and we look not toward 
the secret hand by which we are fed and supported ; but when 
all is lost, all gone, when no other stay is left, should sudden 
come upon us, our comforter then becomes visible, he stands 
revealed in his greatness and dory before us, and we are com- 
pelled to cry out, with unbelieving Thomas My Lord and my 
God ! 

Though th^>e pious expostulations of my dearly beloved preacher 
had little influence at the time for appeasing my own passions. 
I was yet pleased that my Peirgy had her secret consolations, 
but little imagined that her prophecy approached so near to its 
completion. 

For two days we held on, living on such bread and milk as we 
could purchase at the cottages that had the charity to receive us. 
But my boy who was on the breast grew exceedingly sick ; so we 
were obliged to shorten our journeys for the two succeeding days, 
partly begging, and partly paying for such victuals as we could 
procure. Toward evening we came within sight of this town. 
Our little money was quite exhausted, and our child grown too ill 
to bear further travel; so I looked about, and perceived some 
roofless walls that stood off from the highway, and thither we 
turned and took up our bleak abode. 

For the three following days I frequented the road, and by 
begging procured what scantily kept my family from perishing! 
Mean tune my spirit was tamed and subdued by the habit of morti- 
fication, and I looked up to heaven, and cried Pardon, pardon, 
O my God! the offences and blasphemies of my murmurings 
against you ! You formerly blessed me with an over-abundance of 
blessings, and that, too, for a long season ; and, as Job justly says, 
Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive 
evil ? O Friend and Saviour of sinners ! if thou lovest whom thou 
chastenest, and receivest those whom thou dost scourge, when 
death shall have put a period to the sufferings of mortality, may I 
not humbly look to find grace at the footstool of the throne of thy 
mercy? 

At length our child died this morning, and we buried him in our 
hovel, and watered his grave with the tears that we shed for him, 
and for each other. The rest, sir, you know, till this angel of 
God was sent to accomplish the prediction of my Peggy in all its 
fulness. 

Here Homely concluded : and after a pause and a deep sigh Mr. 
Fenton demanded : Have you told me the whole of your history, 
Mr. Homely? I have so, please your honour, through every par- 
ticular of any signification. I am sorry for it. Pray think again. 
Did you never meet with any adventure that is yet unrecited ? 
Did you never save any person at your own peril? Xo, sir. O, 
now I recollect ! 

Some two or three and twenty years ago, as I fled from the 
bailiffs who pursued me, as I told you, for the bail of my brother, I 
came to the river Avon ; the flood was great and rapid after the 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 207 

late rains, and I thought of looking for a place of smoother water 
for my passage, when a gentleman and lady, attended by a train 
of servants, came riding along the banks. As they rode, chatting 
and laughing, a fowler, who \vas concealed in a copse just at hand, 
let fly at a bird, whereupon the fiery horse that the gentleman 
was on took fright, and, with a bound, suddenly plunged into the 
current, whereat the lady gave a loud shriek, and fell senseless to 
the ground. The horse rose without his rider, and swam down the 
stream. Soon after the rider appeared, and the attendants were 
divided between their care of the lady and their lamentations for 
their master on the edge of the bank. Then, seeing no other 
help, my heart smote me, and I cast myself in without reflection. 
I kept aloof, however, for fear he should grapple at me, and 
sink us both together ; so I supported and shoved him before 
me toward land, till, having reached the bank, I laid hold on it 
with one hand, and with the other raised him up within the 
reach of his servants, who had stretched themselves flat upon the 
brink to receive him ; then, being already drenched, and having 
nothing further to do, I turned and swam over, and so made my 
escape. 

Did you ask the name of the party whom you saved in the 
manner you say? No, truly, sir, there was no leisure for such 
an inquiry. Why did you not wait for the recompense that was so 
justly your due for so great a deliverance ? Recompense ! ] 'lease 
your honour, I could have done no less for the beggar that begs 
at the comer. 

Noble, noble fellow ! exclaimed Mr. Fenton ; I am he I am he 
whom you saved that day, my brother ! And so saying, he arose 
and caught Homely in his arms, and pressed and pressed him over 
again to his bosom ; while Harry, all impatient, seized hold of 
Homely also, and struggled hard to get him to himself from his 
father. 

When they were something composed, and all again seated Ab, 
Homely ! says Mr. Fenton, I have sent and made many inquiries 
after you, but not for many years after the day in which you saved 
me. I hated, I loathed you, for having prolonged my life to such a 
misery as no other man ever endured. Oh, that lady ! that lady ! 
But no matter for the present (and, so saying, he wiped the swelling 
tear from his eye). Tell me, Homely that devil, Sir Freestone 
I am not of a malicious temper, and yet I wish for nothing more 
than full vengeance on his head. Don't you believe that he went 
to you with a felonious intention of defrauding you of your property? 
Believe it, sir! I can swear it. The circumstances, and their 
consequences, are full evidence thereof. 

Very well, said Mr. Fenton, though we may not be able to carry 
a civil action against him, we may assail him with better advantage 
in a criminal way. I will draw up and take your deposition myself ; 
and, to-morrow, I will send you with a note to Lord Portland, 
where more may be done for you, my Homely, than you think. 

In the mean time, you and your family shall take up your abode 
in the back part of my house, and from thence you shall not depart 
till, as your Peggy's dream has it, all your losses shall be restored 



298 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

to you sevenfold upon earth ; what your portion may be in heaven 
must be your own care, and may the Spirit of grace guide you in 
the way you should go ! 

Early the next morning Mr. Fenton sent Homely to London with 
his deposition and several papers, accompanied by a letter from 
himself to Lord Portland. In the evening Homely returned, and, 
entering with a face of triumph, he seized Mr. Fenton's hand, and 
eagerly kissing it Blessed, blessed be the hand, he cried, that hath 
the power of God among men for good works. When I sent in your 
honour's letter I was not detained a moment. His lordship made 
me sit down, perused my papers with attention, questioned me on 
the particulars, grew inflamed against Sir Freestone, and gave him 
two or three hearty curses for an execrable villain. He then called 
a gentleman to him who was in waiting, and ordered an attachment 
to be instantly issued against the knight. It was accordingly 
executed upon him, and he now lies in Newgate. God be praised ! 
said Mr. Fenton ; so far there is equity still extant upon earth. 

It is not unnatural to suppose that Mr. Fenton's family were im- 
moderately fond of those whose father had saved the life of their 
most dear master. Mr. Clement, in particular, took pains and 
pleasure in forwarding the boys in their letters ; and Mrs. Clement 
passed most of her time very happily with Peggy and her little 
girls. 

Frank, the butler, had been abroad upon an expedition at the 
time that Mr. Homely's family arrived, and did not return till 
Homely had come back from Lord Portland's. He was then in- 
formed, with joy, of the guests they liad got ; and he waited with 
impatience till the man he longed to see should come out from his 
master. As soon as he appeared he catched one of his hands in 
both of his, and looking lovingly at him, cried Do I once more 
behold that happy face, Mr. Homely ? I was the man to whose 
hands you delivered my precious lord from the devouring of the 
floods. Gladly, Heaven knows ! would I have sacrificed my own 
life for the salvation of his. But, alas ! I had no skill in contending 
with the waters, and the sure loss of my own life would not have 
given the smallest chance for the recovery of my master. You are 
the person, Mr. Homely, to whom God committed that blessed task 
and trust : and Mr. James, and I, and all of us, have agreed to make 
up a hundred pounds a-piece for your children, hi acknowledgment 
of the benefit you did us on that day. 

Here Homely took Frank very affectionately into his arms, and 
with a faltering voice said Your offer, sir, is dear, very dear indeed, 
unto me, as it is a proof of that love which you all so warmly bear 
to our common lord and master. If there is any occasion, I will 
not refuse this extraordinary instance of your benevolence ; but our 
master's influence and bounty are doing much in my behalf ; and, 
in the mean time, I will take it as a very particular favour if you 
will be pleased to introduce me to my fellow-servants of this 
house. 

Within the following fortnight, a servant in a rich livery came on 
a foaming horse, and, delivering a letter at the door, rode away 
directly. The letter ran thus : 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 299 

"To HENRY FENTON, Esq. 

"Dear Sir, The trial of our recreant knight is at hand; and, if 
you insist upon it, shall be prosecuted to the utmost extent of our 
laws. The wretch, indeed, deserves to be gibbeted. But he has 
relations of worth and consideration among us. They have be- 
sought me to shield them from shame on this occasion ; and I join 
them in requesting you to accept the enclosed order for three 
thousand pounds in favour of your client, together with his farm 
and effects, which attorney Snack shall immediately restore. 

" Let me have your answer within three days ; and believe me 
Your true, as well as obliged servant, " PORTLAND." 

The day following Mr. Fenton sent Harry in his chariot, attended 
by Mr. James and two servants in livery, to return his acknow- 
ledgments to the favourite of the king. 

Lord Portland received our hero with pleasure and surprise 
equally evident in his countenance. As he piqued himself on being 
one of the finest personages in the nation, he secretly respected his 
own resemblance in another. 

After a few mutual compliments, and some occasional discourse, 
the earl told Harry that he must take a private dinner with him. 
We are quite alone, says he, only two viscounts, a baronet, and four 
or five gentlemen of the ministerial quill. Pray, my lord, said 
Harry smiling, is a dinner the whole of their pension? Not so, sir, 
I confess ; they are the Swiss of the lettered world, and fight for 
pay. They were formerly of the opposite junto, but they have 
changed their opinions along with their party; and our honour 
obliges us to give them at least as much in the cause of the crown, 
as they formerly got in the cause of the populace. I doubt, my 
lord, returned Harry, that their silence would answer your ends 
full as well as their oratory, unless your treasury could hold out in 
bribing people to read also. Very pleasantly severe, indeed, replied 
the laughing earl. But come, the bell calls us to dinner. 

When dinner was over, and cheerfulness circulated with the 
bottle I would give a good deal to know, Mr. Harry, said the earl, 
what you and your father think of his majesty and his ministers. 
Should I speak my downright sentiments, my lord, answered 
Harry, in some things I might offend, and in others appear to flatter. 
0, you cannot offend in the least, cried the earl ; we are daily 
accustomed to be told of all the faults whereof we are, or may be, 
or might have been guilty ; and, as to flattery, you know it is the 
food of us courtiers. Why, my lord, you want no champion for the 
present, said Harry : you are all, as I perceive, on one side of the 
question ; and if some one does not appear, however impotent, to 
oppose you, the shuttlecock of conversation may fall to the ground. 
Right, very right, my sweet fellow, rejoined his lordship; pro- 
ceed, you shall have nothing but fair-play, I promise you. 

To be serious then, said Harry, my father thinks, in the first 
place (for I have no manner of skill in such matters) he thinks, I 
say, that his majesty is one of the greatest warriors and one of the 
wisest statesmen that ever existed. He thinks, however, that he 



300 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

has attachments and views that look something further than the 
mere interests of the people by whom he has been elected ; but he 
says that those views ought, in a measure, to be indulged in return 
for the very great benefits that he has done us. lie is therefore 
grieved to find, that his majesty has met with so much reluctance 
and coldness from a nation so obliged. 

You are a darling of a politician ! exclaimed the earl ; but we 
will not thank you for your compliments till we know what you 
have further to object against us. 

My father admits, my lord, that his majesty and his ministers have 
re-established and exhibited, in a fair and open light, the most 
glorious constitution that ever was constructed. But then he ap- 
prehends that you are beginning to sap the foundations of the pile 
that you yourselves erected. 

As how, my dear young mentor? By being over bounteous in 
paying former friends, and by being still more profuse in procuring 
new adherents. Child of honour! cried the earl, another less 
elegant than yourself would have said, that we are sapping the 
constitution by bribery and corruption. You have indeed, my Harry, 
delicately tempered your admonitions even like the cup of life 
the sweets with the bitters. But what say you, gentlemen, shall a 
babe lately from the breast bear away the whole palm from people 
grown grey in politics ? 

The young gentleman, says Mr. Veer (the principal of the court 
writers), talks wonderfully for one not versed in the subject of 
which he treats. The people of England are stupidly proud and 
licentiously ungovernable ; they are the most ignorant, and yet most 
obstinate, of any people upon earth. It is only by their being 
selfish that they become in any degree manageable. If their voices 
were not bought, they would either give them to persons of their 
own stupid cast, unknowing in our laws or pur constitution, or to 
men of anti-monarchical and republican spirit, who would be per- 
petually putting rubs before the wheels of good government, 

I never knew till now, sir, returned Harry, that, in order to make 
people true to their country and their king that is, in order to 
make men honest it was necessary to corrupt them. But I have 
still good hopes that the picture which you have drawn of our 
governors is not altogether a just one. 

Governors ! cries Veer, I spoke not a word of governors. You 
spoke of the people, sir, says Harry, and they, as I take it, are our 
governors. The people our governors ! this is the most wonderful 
and the newest doctrine that ever I heard. A doctrine even as old 
as the constitution, rejoins Harry. They are not only our governors, 
but more absolutely so than any so styled. His lordship is the only 
man in company whose person, in some instances, is exempt from 
their jurisdiction ; but his property remains still subjected to their 
decision. 

No law can be made in Britain but by the people in their proxies ; 
and, when those laws are made, the people are again constituted 
the judges thereof on their jury-tribunals, through their respective 
shires ; as also judges of facts and rights, whether civil or criminal, 
throughout the realm. 



TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 301 

Thus their privilege of making laws for themselves in PAE- 
UAMENT, and of judging of the said laws (when made) on JUEIES, 
composes, as it were, a rudder, whereby the people are admitted 
(gloriously) to steer the vessel of their own commonwealth. 

Would it not be a pity, then, that so great a people should be no 
other than such as Mr. Veer has described them a parcel of 
ignorant, licentious, selfish, base, venal prostitutes, unenlightened 
by reason, and uninfluenced by conscience ? 

If they should be reduced if it is possible, I say, that they 
should ever be reduced to so very vile and deplorable a state, it 
can only be by the very measures that Mr. Veer has recommended. 
The character, as ye know, of a certain old tempter, is not over 
amiable, and 1 should be sorry that any whom I love and respect 
should follow in his steps. 

And now, gentlemen, take the argument home to yourselves. 
The people have the disposal of our lives, liberties, and properties. 
Which of you, then, would like to have life itself, and all that is 
valuable in it, at the arbitration of a pack of wretches, who, being 
wholly selfish, can have no kindred feelings or compassion for you ? 
who, being themselves devoid of honour and equity, cannot judge 
according to the one or the other ; who, being already accustomed 
to influence and prostitution, have their ears and hands open to all 
who would whisper or bribe them to your prejudice ? 

I, as a fool, gentlemen, utter the dictates of wisdom ; for I speak 
the sentiments of a much wiser and much better man than myself. 
Should a general corruption take place in the land, adieu to all 
virtue ; adieu to humanity, and all social connections ! all reason 
and law, all conscience and magistracy, all public and private weal, 
must vanish or be confounded in one chaos together. And from 
hence it is self-evident, that he who debauches the morals of the least 
of his majesty's subjects, is an enemy to his king, to his country, 
and mankind. 

I protest, said his lordship, with some little confusion, I never 
beheld this matter in the same light before ; but I shall take care 
to inspect and examine it at better leisure. 

Here the company rose to separate, when Harry, stepping 
towards Veer with an affectionate pleasantry in his countenance 
Mr. Veer, says he, I fear I have misbehaved a little to-day ; I am 
naturally warm, and am apt to be too much so on particular 
subjects. O, sir ! says Veer, I am an old prize-fighter, and ac- 
customed to cuts ; but I now know my man, and shall hereafter 
avoid engaging, or keep barely on the defensive ; do me the honour, 
however, as old combatants were wont, to shake hands at parting, 
in token of hearts free from malice. In the contest of love, Mr. 
Veer, you shall never foil me, cried Harry. 

Now, my lord, if you have any commands for my father, pray, 
let me have the pleasure of being your messenger. Upon my 
honour, my dear boy and that is the oath of a lord you shall not 
part from me for this night at least. My father, sir, will be uneasy. 
I will despatch one to him directly. I have particular designs upon 
you ; you must go with me to the levee. I cannot refuse myself 
the pleasure of introducing you to his majesty ; I expect to get 



302 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

credit by you. I rather fear, my lord, that I may do you some 
disgrace. 

O ! cried the earl, you think you are not fine enough ! Why, 
truly, you will see folks there of much more illustrious attire. 
But let others disgrace their ornaments ; be you humbly content, 
my child, with adorning your dress. Harry blushed and bowed. 

When they arrived at court, the earl left his young friend a while 
in the levee-room, and went to impart some matters to the king in 
his closet. 

While our hero stood in the crowd, some one came and pinned a 
paper to his back, whereon was written in capital letters THE 
FOOL. 

However, it did not remain long enough to do him much disgrace. 
A young gentleman, of a graceful figure and very amiable aspect, 
pressed close behind Harry, and gently stole the writing away ; 
then, taking him by the hand, requested to speak with him apart. 

I wonder, sir, said the stranger, who it was that could be so 
malicious, or so base, as to fasten this title on your back ; I am 
certain he must never have seen your face. O, sir ! said Harry, 
blushing and smiling together, this must have been the office of 
some old acquaintance ; it is the title to which I have been 
accustomed from my infancy, and I am well contented to carry it 
with me to the grave. I am much affected, sir, however, by this 
uncommon instance of humanity to an unknown ; pray, add to the 
obligation, by letting me know to whom it is that I am so 
endearingly bound. 

My name, sir, is Thornhill. I am just arrived from my travels ; 
and I would willingly go my long journey over again to become 
just such another fool as you are. 

Harry seized him by the hand, and gave him at once the squeeze 
and the look of love. Sir William Thornhill, I presume? The 
same, my dear sir. I have been enamoured of your character 
before I saw you, Sir William. My name is Harry Fenton ; I live 
on Hampstead-hill ; I see that your pleasure lies in communicating 
pleasure. I am therefore persuaded you will indulge me with 
a call at some leisure hour. I will not defer that advantage a single 
day. I shall have the longings of a lover till you arrive. 

Here the king entered, and all converse was broken off. Lord 
Portland, looking about, discovered Harry, and, taking him by the 
hand, led him up, and left him standing before his majesty. Then 
approaching the royal ear May it please you, sire, says he, this is 
the son of the gentleman who advanced us two hundred thousand 
pounds on our expedition from Holland. 

The King turned to Harry with a solemn and piercing look ; and, 
having eyed him for some time, he again turned to the earl, and 
cried Ay, Portland, this is something ; this, indeed, is a gem fit 
to set in the crown of a monarch. He then reached forth his hand, 
and, while our hero stooped to kiss it, he pressed Harry's shoulder 
with his other hand. 

My dear child, said the king, we are much obliged to your father. 
You, by inheritance, are attached to our crown, and you may justly 
demand whatever we can bestow. We humbly thank your majesty, 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 303 

answered Harry ; we only claim the privilege of serving you with 
all our hearts and all our powers. 

Which would you choose, the army or the court? Indeed, I 
should best like to have you about my own person. That is the 
pitch to which I aspire, answered Harry, as soon as I am capable 
of so high a duty. 

But why have you been such a stranger ? said the king ; had we 
seen you before, I think we should not have forgot you. O sire ! 
said Harry, I am but as a bird from the nest, and this is the 
first of my unfledged excursions. If a bird, cried the king, it must 
be a young eagle. Not so, sire, answered Harry ; I should then 
better support the brightness of the sun that is now before me. I 
would give one of my kingdoms that you were my son! I am 
already one of the millions of happy sons and daughters who have 
the glory ot calling you their royal father. 

So saying, our hero bowed twice, and drew back ; while the king 
looked toward him in silence and wonder. 

After some talk with his courtiers, his majesty retired. And 
Lord Portland took Harry, and was followed by a number of the 
young gentry, to the ball-room. 

There the queen, at the upper end, was seated under a canopy, 
her maids of honour attending, and two brilliant ranges of foreign 
and British ladies were seated on either hand. 

The earl gave a whisper to the master of the ceremonies, and he 
immediately led Harry up to the presence, where he had the 
honour of kissing Queen Mary's fair hand. 

After some whispering chat between her majesty and Lord 
Portland, the ball was ordered to be opened by our hero and the 
lovely young princess of Hesse. 

All eyes were fixed upon them with attention still as night, while 
they moved like Homer's gods, without seeming to press the 
ground ; or like a mist before the breeze along the side of some 
stately hill. 

As soon as the minuet was closed, the princess said softly to 
Harry, in French, The Louvre, sir, if you please. 

This was a dance of the newest fashion, and was calculated to 
show forth and exhibit a graceful person in all the possible 
elegances of movement and attitude. As soon as they had finished, 
the whole assembly could scarce refrain from breaking forth in 
loud plaudits, as at the public theatre ; and a humming of mixed 
voices and patting feet was heard throughout. 

When Harry had led the princess to her seat, and left her with 
a bow of the most expressive respect, he happened to see Lady 
Louisa, and, hinting to the lord chamberlain his desire to dance 
with her, his lordship readily indulged him. 

When Harry had finished, the lord chamberlain honoured Sir 
William Thornhill with Lady Louisa's hand ; and, after four or five 
more minutes, the country dances began, in which all the younger 
part of the company joined, except Lord Bottom, who refused 
to step forth, and sat apart ruminating and feeding on his own 
cogitations. 

The princess and our hero led up the dance, and Louisa and Sir 



304 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

William were appointed the next in course, in order to do the 
principal honours to the two young strangers. 

In the intervals of dancing, Lady Louisa took occasion to say to 
Harry You are a great stranger, sir ; but we desire you should 
be so, since we did not treat you with the respect that your merit 
should have commanded. That, madam, answered Harry, is not 
wholly the cause of my distance ; but there are persons whose 
loveliness is more formidable to me, than a whole regiment of sabred 
hussars with their fierce-looking moustaches. 

Harry had no sooner said this than his heart smote him with 
remorse ; for, though Louisa was indeed lovely, and he felt for her 
the propensities and tenderness of a brother, yet she was not of that 
species of beauty that was formed to fix his heart ; and he secretly 
reproached himself for having attempted to raise the vanity or draw 
the affections of an innocent girl, with no other view than of making 
a parade of his own talents a measure, he justly adjudged, unbe- 
coming a man of a spark of honour or integrity. 

As soon as the dances were ended, and that all had mixed, and 
chatted, and roved about a while, Harry observed Sir William 
coming towards him in a little fluster. What is the matter, my 
friend, says Harry ; pray, what has discomposed you ? Tell me, my 
dear Harry, that jackanapes in the blue and gold, do you know 
who he is ? I protest, had it not been for the respect I owe the 
presence, I would have chastised him on the spot. The dance was 
no sooner done than he came up with a most provoking sauciness in 
his look. I wonder, sir, said he, at the insolence of one of your 
rank ; you ought to have had more modesty than to suffer yourself 
to be paired with a lady so far above you. 

! cried Harry, taking Sir William very lovingly under the arm, 
pass this matter over, my sweet friend, I beseech you. That is 
young Lord Bottom, the very person who, I am pretty confident, 
contrived the honour of the pasquinade on my back this day. But 
he is brother to the sweet girl with whom you danced. For her 
sake, for my sake, forgive him, I entreat you ; but, above all, forgive 
him for the sake of his dear father, the Earl of Mansfield, one of the 
noblest nobles, and one of the worthiest men that ever stepped on 
English ground. He has been these two years past abroad upon an 
embassy ; and, while he is promoting the interests of the public, has 
left his own household unchastened and unguided. 

Here the converse of the friends was suddenly broken off. The 
lord chamberlain came, and, tapping Harry on the shoulder, told 
him that the queen desired to speak with him. 

When he had with a lowly reverence advanced to the throne 
You are, said the queen, the most accomplished cavalier that ever I 
beheld ; and, had I sufficient youth and beauty, I would choose you 
for my knight, to bear my fame through the world. I would rather, 
said Harry, that your majesty would employ me on some more 
dangerous enterprise. How is that? said the queen. Why, 
answered Harry, your majesty's champion could have little or 
nothing to do, as all would willingly acknowledge the justice of 
his cause. 

You are, cried the queen, the loveliest and the sweetest fellow 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 305 

I ever knew. My eye has followed you all along, and marked 
you for my own, and I must either beg or steal you from our good 
friend your father. I therefore want no token to put me in mind 
of you, but you may want some token to keep your friends in your 
memory. Here are two pictures the one is the portrait of our 
master and sovereign lord, the other is the picture of the woman who 
sits before you, lowly, simple, unadorned : choose which you please. 

Give me the plain picture, cried Harry, with a kind of rapture ; 
it shall henceforth become my riches and my ornament. 

So saying, he bent his knee, and, taking the little portrait, he 
pressed it to his lips with the ardour of an ancient lover in romance. 
Then, putting it into his bosom, he gracefully arose and retired 
from the presence. 

O the fool ! the egregious fool ! muttered some. Nobly, most 
nobly done ! cried others. 

As Harry \vas following the Earl of Portland down-stairs, Lord 
Bottom came up in the crowd, and in a half-whisper said You are 
too great a man to-day, sir, to acknowledge your old acquaintance. 
But not so great a fool, retorted Harry, as not to be taught my 
distance with those who, like Lord Bottom, have a right to look 
down upon me. 

After a short but sound sleep, Harry hurried home to prepare 
for the reception of his new friend. He told Mr. Fenton that Sir 
William was returned ; how he had been obligingly made known to 
him in the forementioned instance of his humanity to a stranger ; 
and that he had promised to be with them that morning. But 
pray, sir, don't tell Homely a word of the coming of his landlord, 
till we place them, as it were by surprise, face to face. 

In about an hour after a chaise and four came rapidly to the 
door; and Harry instantly sprung and caught his friend in his 
arms before he came to the ground. 

The two friends entered the parlour, caressing and caressed, and 
casting looks of cordial love and delight on each other. My father, 
sir, said Harry, and led Sir William by the hand to Mr. Fenton, 
who received him with a countenance of that heart-speaking com- 
plaisance which never fails to attach the soul of the person to 
whom it is directed. Ah, my Harry! cried Sir William, I no 
longer wonder at you, I see that you are all that you are by 
inheritance. 

But, sir, continued he, you had like to have lost your son last 
night. Their majesties were most unwilling to quit their hold of 
him, and I believe in my soul, would willingly have adopted him 
the heir of their crown. I should be very sorry, Sir William, 
replied Mr. Fenton, to see a circle about his head that would give 
him an aching heart. I am sure that is the case with the present 
royal proprietors. In a limited monarchy like ours, the station of 
the prince is looked upon with a malignant eye by the envious, and, 
at the same time, rendered uneasy by the perpetual contests 
between rights and privileges on the one part, and prerogative on 
the other. 

Moreover, Sir William, I shall never wish to see one of my child's 
disposition on the throne of Great Britain. I should be jealous of 



306 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

such a person in behalf of my country. No people could be more 
tenacious of their liberties than the Swedes, till Gustavns the son of 
Eric ascended the throne. His manners were so amiable, his 
virtues so conspicuous, his government so just, and he made so 
popular an use of all his powers, that his subjects thought they 
could never commit enough into his hands. But what was the 
consequence ? His successors made his power a precedent for their 
own, without attending to the precedent of his administration. 

Thus you see that a prince of qualities, eminently popular, might 
prove of dangerous tendency to a free people, forasmuch as he 
might charm the eyes of their jealousy to sleep, and so seduce 
them from that guard which is ever necessary to preclude the 
encroachments of ambition. 

But, Sir William, may we not order your horses up ? You must 
not think of going till you take a plain dinner with us. A supper 
too, sir, most joyfully answered the knight. I leave London in the 
morning on a certain expedition, and shall not have the pleasure 
of embracing you again for some time. 

Mr. Fenton then addressing the baronet with a smile Our 
Harry here, Sir William, never saw a court before ; it is natural, 
therefore, to think that he must have been greatly amused, and 
his young heart deceived by the splendour and parade. But you 
have seen and observed upon many courts of late ; pray, what do 
you think of the entertainment they afford? 

As of the dullest of all dull farces, answered the knight. All the 
courts that I have seen are nearly of the same cast. Conceive to 
yourself, sir, a stage or theatre of comedians without auditors or 
spectators. They are all actors, and all act nearly the same part 
of solemn complaisance and nauseous grimace. Each intends to 
impose, and yet no one is imposed upon ; where professions are 
taken to imply the very reverse of what they express. 

What do you say to this, Harry? said Mr. Fenton. I have very 
little to say, sir, in favour of the actors ; but the actresses, as I 
take it, afford better entertainment. Here Sir William and Mr. 
Fenton laughed ; and Harry, upon a wink, stepped out to bring in 
Homely, as it were by accident. 

Sir William, said Mr. Fenton, there is a man come to this house 
who once saved my life at the risk of his own. It is a great many 
years ago, and I have not seen him since the action till very lately. 
I have sent Harry for him, that you may learn the particulars, and 
advise with me what recompense he ought to receive. 

If the recompense is to be proportioned to the value of the life 
he saved, my honoured sir, I should not know where to fix the 
bounds of retribution. And in truth, Mr. Fenton, from my 
knowledge of you this day, I also hold myself very highly his 
debtor. 

At this instant Harry led in Homely by the hand, and left him 
standing directly opposite to the baronet. 

Homely gazed with all his eyes, and stood mute through astonish- 
ment. At length he exclaimed Bless me ! mercy upon me as 
sure as I hope for heaven it is I think it is my dear young 
master ! 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 307 

Sir William, at the voice, lifted up his eyes to Homely, and, 
remembering his marked man, rose quickly, and springing forward, 
embraced him with much familiar affection ; while Mr. Fenton sat, 
and his Harry stood beside him, both wrapped in their own 
delicious sensibilities. 

My dear Homely, my old companion and brother sportsman! 
cried Sir William, how in the world comes this about ? so joyfully, 
so unexpectedly, to meet you here ! How is your wife and pretty 
babes? I hope you left, all well at home. 

Yes, please your honour, they are all well wonderfully well in 
this house, I assure you ; for, indeed, your Homely has no other 
home upon earth. 

What you tell me is quite astonishing, replied the knight ; no 
home for you within the manor or demesne of your friend? 
What misfortunes, what revolutions, could bring this wonder to 



Sit down, said Mr. Fenton; pray be seated, Mr. Homely, and 
give your lord a succinct but deliberate account of the inimitable 
pair, Sir Freestone and his coadjutor. 

As soon as Homely had told his tale, from the commencement of 
his distresses to his arrival at the hovel, he stopped short, and 
said I have something more to impart ; but I hope your honour 
will pardon me. I am loth to deprive your friends of your 
company ; but then my Peggy and my boys will be so transported 
to see your dear face again, that I cannot but beseech you to 
indulge them, a minute or two, with that blessing. 

Sir William rose with a troubled humanity in his countenance, 
and followed to a back apartment, where Homely again stopped 
him short ; and, before he would take him to his Peggy, he gave 
him a minute detail of all his obligations to what he called this 
wonderful family. But pray, sir, continued he, let them know very 
little of what I have told you ; for nothing puts them to so much 
pain as any kind of acknowledgments. 

After a short visit to Peggy and her children, Sir William 
returned to his friends, with such an inward awe and veneration for 
their characters, as for a while sunk his spirits, and solemnized his 
features. This poor man, sir, said he, has been miserably treated ; 
but God has been exceedingly gracious to him, in casting the ship- 
wrecked wretch on such a happy shore as this. But this makes no 
discharge of any part of my duty toward him. 

Mark me, Homely, I am now of age, and Lord Lechmore has no 
further authority in my affairs; wherefore, before I leave this 
house, I will give you a letter of attorney for the whole agency of 
the manor. Thank your honour, thank your honour ! cried Homely 
in a kind of transport; if I do not prove as faithful to you as 
another, I will do you justice on myself with the first rope I can 
lay hold on. 

As for that reprobate Snack, continued the knight, I will take 
care to be up with him. He owes the executors of my father six 
hundred and seventy pounds. I will have that matter put directly 
in suit, and, as soon as it is recovered, it shall be laid out on a com- 
mission for your son, my friend Tom ; as I do not choose yet to ask 

x 2 



308 TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

any favour from the ministry. Lastly, that you may no more be 
distressed for rent, I will never accept a penny of it till you are 
decently and competently provided for. 

O, sir! exclaimed Homely, I shall be too rich, quite over- 
burdened ; I shall not know where to lay my treasures. Not RO 
fast, my good friend, replied Sir William smiling : you have not 
heard of the drawback that I propose to have upon you. When- 
ever I reside in the country, you are to have a hot dish ay, and a 
cool hogshead too ready for me and my company. Agreed, sir, 
cried Homely, provided I may have the liberty, during your absence, 
to drink your honour's health out of that same hogshead. A just 
reserve, said Harry laughing. And full as grateful as it is jovial, 
cried Mr. Fenton. Why, gentlemen, rejoined Homely, a man of 
spirit would scorn to accept such benefits without making conditions. 

After twelve o'clock at night, and an affectionate and tender 
adieu, Sir William set out by moonlight for London. 

The two following days were employed in preparing for Homely 's 
departure ; and a coach and four, with a chaise, were provided for 
the conveyance of him and his family. 

The night before their parting, Mr. Fenton desired that Homely 
and his wife should be sent to him to his closet. As soon as they 
entered, he closed the door. My dear friends, said he, as I may not 
be up in the morning to take a timely leave of you, it might do as 
well to go through that melancholy office to-night. Here, Mrs. 
Homely, here is some little matter apiece toward beginning a for- 
tune for your three pretty daughters. Pray, Homely, take care 
to have it disposed of for them upon good securities. Here he put 
three orders upon his banker, for five hundred pounds each, into 
Peggy's hand ; then, turning to Homely, and taking him straitly 
in his arms God be with you and your dear Peggy, my Homely, 
he cried, and give us all a blessed meeting where friends shall part 
no more ! 

The distressed Homely was past utterance ; but disengaging, and 
flinging himself at the feet of his patron, while Peggy kept on her 
knees weeping and sobbing beside him ; 0, he cried, at length, 
next to my God ! O, next to my Lord and my God ! My lord and 
my master, my master and my lord ! 

The next morning before sunrise Harry was up, and, going to 
Homely's apartment, embraced him and his wife. He then kissed 
and caressed all the girls and boys round, and gave to each of them 
a gold medal to keep him in their remembrance ; when Homely 
and his Peggy, with open arms, trembling lips, and swelling eyes, 
began to take their leave. God be with you ! God be with you ! 
sobbed Homely aloud ; never, never till I get to heaven, shall I 
meet with such another dear assembly ! 

Mr. Fenton now judged it time to forward his Harry's education, 
especially with respect to his knowledge of the world, of the views, 
pleasures, manners, bent, employments, and characters of mankind. 

For this purpose, he proposed to leave Arabella sole regent of 
his family, and, for a few weeks, to stay with Clement and Harry 
in London, there to show him whatever might gratify his curiosity, 
or merit his inspection. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 309 

"While the coach was in waiting, and they all stood on the hill, 
the great city being extended in ample view beneath them, Mr. 
Fenton exclaimed Oh, London ! London ! thou mausoleum of dead 
souls, how pleasant art thou to the eye, how beautiful in outward 
prospect ; but within, how full of rottenness and reeking abomina- 
tions ! Thy dealers are all students in the mystery of iniquity, of 
fraud and imposition on ignorance and credulity. Thy public 
offices are hourly exercised in exactions and extortion. Thy courts 
of judicature are busied in the sale, the delay, or perversion of 
justice ; they are shut to the injured and indigent, but open to 
the wealthy pleas of the invader and oppressor. Thy magistracy 
is often employed in secretly countenancing and abetting the breach 
of those laws it was instituted to maintain. Thy charities sub- 
scribed for the support of the poor, are lavished by the trustees in 
pampering the rich, where drunkenness swallows till it wallows, 
gluttony stuffs till it pants, and unbottons and stuffs again. Even 
the great ones of thy court have audaciously smiled away the 
gloom and horrors of guilt, and refined, as it were, all the gross- 
ness thereof, by inverting terms and palliating phrases. While the 
millions that crowd and hurry through thy streets are universally 
occupied in striving and struggling to rise by the fall, to fatten by 
the leanness, and to thrive by the ruin of their fellows. Thy 
offences are rank ; they steam and cloud the face of heaven. The 
gulf also is hollow beneath that is one day to receive thee. But the 
measure of thy abominations is not yet full ; and the number of 
thy righteous hath hitherto exceeded the proportion that was found 
in the first Sodom. 

That evening they went to the opera, where Harry was so cap- 
tivated by the sentimental meltings and varied harmony of the 
airs, that he requested Mr. Fenton to permit him to be instructed 
on some instrument. Not by my advice, my dear, answered Mr. 
Fenton ; I would not wish you to attempt any thing in which you 
may not excel. Music is a science that requires the application of 
a man's whole life in order to arrive at any eminence. As it is en- 
chanting in the hand of a master, it is also discordant and grating 
in its inferior degrees. Your labours have been employed to much 
more valuable purposes ; and I would not, as they say, give my 
child's time for a song. Harry instantly acquiesced with the best 
temper imaginable, as the will of his beloved patron was, truly 
speaking, his own will ; and that he only wanted to know it, to- 
be at all times, and on all occasions, comformable thereto. 

A few following days were employed in visiting the Tower, 
in surveying the armoury, regalia, &c., in viewing the Monument 
and Exchange ; and lastly, in contemplating the solemnity of West- 
minster Abbey, with the marbled effigies and monumental deposits 
of the renowned in death the place, as Mr. Fenton affectingly 
observed, to which all the living must finally adjourn. 

The next night they went to the theatre, to see the feats of 
Signer Vplanti, the celebrated Italian posture-master, rope-dancer, 
and equilibrist. Such wonders are now so common as to be scarce 
entertaining; but, at that time, they were received with bursts 
and roars of applause. 



310 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

Our hero felt himself attached by the similar excellencies of his 
own activity in another ; and, going behind 1he scenes, he accosted 
Volanti in French. Signor, said he, I have been highly entertained 
by your performance this night, and here are five guineas hi return 
of the pleasure you have given me. The foreigner looked at Harry, 
and then at the money, with a kind of astonishment. I thank you, 
noble sir, he cried ; my poor endeavours are seldom so liberally 
rewarded. Pray, how long do you stay with us ? In about a fort- 
night, so please your nobleness, I intend to leave London ; but, 
before I go, I would do something to leave a name behind me. A 
day or two before my departure, I will fly from the spire of Saint 
Clement's church, in the sight of all the people ; and this I will do 
gratis, or rather in acknowledgment of the favours I have received 
in this kingdom. But is it possible to execute what you propose ? 
With all ease and safety, sir ; I have done nearly as much three 
times in Germany, and once at Madrid. 

Here an arch thought struck Harry, and musing a moment Will 
you permit me, said he, to be the conductor of this affair ? Allow 
me only to appoint the day, and draw up your advertisement, and 
I will make you a present of twenty pieces. Agreed, sir, cried 
Volanti, and twenty thousand thanks to confirm the bargain. 
Accept these five guineas, then, in earnest of my engagement ; my 
servant here will tell or show you where I am to be found. That 
night at supper, Mr. Fenton remarked an unusual pleasantry in 
the muscles of his darling's sweetly sober countenance. My Harry, 
I find, said he, does not always impart all his secrets to his friends ; 
he has certainly some roguish matter in cogitation. Magicum calles, 
sir, cried Harry ; you are a conjurer, that is certain. Why, the 
public, as you know, sir, have put the fool on me from my birth ; 
Homer says, that revenge is sweet as honey to the taste ; and so 
I am meditating in turn how to put the fool upon the public. And 
how do you contrive it, Harry? Only by acting the old proverb, 
That one fool makes many. But pray ask me not about the 
manner, till I bring the business to some bearing. 

The next day being Thursday, they all went in Mr. Fenton's 
coach to Smithfield, where numbers of tents were set up, and 
several drolls and pantomimes, &c., prepared, in imitation of the 
humours of Bartholomew Fair. The weather was fair and calm, 
and they let down all the glasses, that they might see, without 
interruption, whatever was to be seen. Their coach stopped just 
opposite to an itinerant stage, where a genius, wKo comprised 
within his single person the two important functions of a tumbler 
and merry-andrew, by his successive action and oratory extorted 
plaudits and huzzas from all the spectators. 

Among the rest a countryman, who rode upon a mule, sat gaping 
and grinning by intervals, in all the ecstatic rapture that can be 
ascribed to enthusiasm. While his attention was thus riveted, two 
knavish wags came, and, ungirthing his saddle, supported it on 
either hand till a third of the fraternity led his mule away from 
under him, and a fourth came with a three-legged horse, such as 
housewives dry their linen on, and, having jammed it under the 
saddle, they all retreated in peace. 



TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 311 

The populace were so delighted at this humorous act of felony, 
that, instead of interrupting it, it only served to redouble their 
joys and clamours. Harry, too, greatly chuckled and laughed at 
the joke. But, when he saw the beast led off, and that the amazed 
proprietor, on stooping to take the bridle, had fallen precipitately to 
the ground, his heart twitched him with a kind of compunction, and 
throwing himself out of the coach, he made all the speed that the 
press would admit, and, recovering the mule, brought it back to its 
owner. 

Here, friend, said he, here is your beast again; take care the 
next time that they do not steal your teeth. Thank you, master, 
said the clown ; since you have been so honest as to give him to me 
back, I will never be the one to bring you to the assizes or sessions. 
I am much obliged to your clemency, answered Harry ; but pray 
let me have the pleasure of seeing you safe mounted. So saying, 
he held the stirrup, while the booby got up and said Well, my 
lad, very well ; if we happen to meet at Croydon, we may take a 
pot together. 

In the evening they adjourned from coffee to David's Harp in 
Fleet Street, in order to hear Marmulet, the famed Genoese musi- 
cian, who performed on the psaltery, the viol d'amor, and some 
other instruments not known till then in England. 

They took Mr. James with them to partake of the entertainment, 
and were shown to a large room, where each paid half-a-crown 
at the door. 

The room was divided into a number of boxes, where each com- 
pany sat apart, while they were jointly gratified and charmed by the 
inimitable execution of the musician. 

A flask of burgundy was set before Mr. Fenton and his friends, 
while Mr. Hardy and Mr. Hilton, who sat in the next box, were 
regaling themselves with a glass of rosa solis. 

All was silence and attention till there was a pause in the per- 
formance. Then said Mr. Hardy Do you know, Jack, that the 
Earl of Albemarle is to have a mask on Monday night ? I am sorry 
to hear it, said Mr. Hilton, as I am obliged to be out of town. I 
may happen to save something by that, said Hardy ; you must lend 
me your domino. Indeed I cannot ; it was torn to fritters in a 
scuffle, as I came out from the last masquerade. Lend me your 
mask, then. That, too, was lost at the same time ; but what occa- 
sion can you have for a mask, Hardy ? I'm sure no one will take 
that for a natural face. Mine is the face of Mars, Hilton ; yours 
that of Adonis, with which no modern Venus will ever be smitten, I 
promise you. I will engage to outrival an army of such jackan- 
apes in an assault on the fail*. If impudence may compensate for 
the want of other artillery, I believe you may do wonders, Hardy. 
And it does compensate, my friend. Women, take my word 
and experience for it, love nothing of their own resemblance except 
in the glass. They detest any thing that looks like an ambiguity 
in the sex. While what you are pleased to call impudence, Jack, 
spares their modesty, saves them the appearance of an advance 
on their part, and gives them the pleasure of piquing themselves on 
their extraordinary virtue, in case they should happen to make a 



312 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

defence. However, since you have complimented me on my assur- 
ance, I will put it to the test on this occasion, and go to his ex- 
cellency's ball, without any other vizard save this which nature, 
in her great bounty, hath bestowed. 

"When our company were on the return to their lodgings Harry, 
said Mr. Fenton, would you not like to go to this masquerade? 
Why, sir, as I have not yet seen one, perhaps it might not be amiss 
to satisfy my curiosity for once in my life. In truth, said Mr. 
Fenton, I wish they never had been introduced into this kingdom, 
as they are inlets to intrigue, and give countenance to licentious- 
ness. However, for once in your life, as you say, you shall be 
gratified, my Harry. Be pleased to tell me, sir, are they very en- 
tertaining ? They would be extremely diverting, my dear, if people 
acted up to the characters that they pretend to represent. But, on 
the contrary, they have sailors who don't know a point in the 
compass, or the name of a rope in the ship ; shepherds and shep- 
herdesses who never eloped from the Cockney dialect of the city ; 
Indian queens who can say nothing as to their subjects or their 
sovereignty ; gods and goddesses totally ignorant of their own history 
in the mythology ; and Italian cardinals, who will swear you in the 
phrase of a Yorkshire fox-hunter. 

But what shall we do for tickets, Harry ? I don't care to apply 
to my friends, for fear of discovering that we are in town. O sir ! 
said Mr. James, I am acquainted with his excellency's major-domo, 
and can procure you as many tickets as you please. 

Mr. Fenton assumed to himself, for the present, the appointment 
of Harry's character and dress. As the plainness of your garb has 
hitherto, said he, been a mask and disguise to your internal orna- 
ments, the brilliancy of your dress shall now, on the other hand, 
disguise and conceal the simplicity of your manners. 

About two hours before the opening of the ball, Harry wrapped 
himself in a black domino, and stepped into a hackney coach with 
Mr. James, who had promised to introduce him to his friend, in 
order for him to reconnoitre the several scenes of operation before 
the action began. 

The major-domo received Harry with the utmost complacence, 
for he held his mask in his hand, and the loveliness of his aspect 
shone with peculiar lustre through the blackness of his attire. 

After surveying several apartments, they passed through the long 
room, and entered by an arched gateway into a kind of saloon, at 
the upper end of which was a pedestal of about five feet in height, 
whereon a celebrated statue of the Hercules Farnese had formerly 
stood. 

Harry eyed it attentively, and, conceiving a sudden frolic, he in- 
stantly cast away his cloak, clapped on his mask and winged helmet, 
grasped his caduceus with his right hand, and, laying his left on the 
top of the pedestal, sprung lightly up, and threw himself into that 
attitude to which the statuaries have formed their Mercury when 
just preparing for flight. 

His headpiece was of thinly-plated but polished gold, buckled 
together at the joining by four burning carbuncles. His silk jacket 
exceeded the tint of an Egyptian sky. It was braced cldle to hia 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 313 

body with emerald clasps, that showed the fitness of his proportion 
to inimitable advantage ; and over the whole, in celestial confusion, 
were sewn stars of different magnitudes, all powdered with diamonds. 

The moment that Harry cast himself into his posture, the major- 
domo started back seven or eight paces, and, raising his hands, with 
staring eyes and a mouth of open amazement, at length he exclaimed 
Stay a little, my dear sweet master ! do now ; do but stay just as 
you are for a minute, and you will oblige me past expression ; I will 
be your own for ever. 

So saying, he turned off, and running to an adjacent apartment, 
where their majesties, with the Princess of Denmark, the Princess 
of Hesse, and the chief of the court, were gathered, he told his 
master aloud that he had the greatest curiosity to show him that 
human eye ever beheld. 

All rose with precipitation and crowded after the earl and the 
royal pair, as close as decency would admit, till they came to the 
saloon, and beheld, with astonishment, the person, shape, attitude, 
and attire of our hero. 

Some doubted, but most believed, that he was a real statue, 
placed there by his excellency on purpose for a surprise. Mr. 
Fielding, who was the acknowledged connoisseur of the age, and 
was, in fact, what the people of taste call an elegans formarum 
spectator, exclaimed with some vehemency Never, never did I be- 
hold such beauty of symmetry, such roundings of angles ; where, 
where my lord, could you get this inestimable acquisition ? Others 
cried Phidias, Phidias never executed the like ; all the works of 
Praxiteles were nothing to it ! 

The earl, however, was well apprised of the deception, and knew 
that our Mercury was no part of his property. Son of Maia, said 
he aloud, what tidings from heaven ? A message, answered Harry, 
from my father, Jupiter, to their majesties. And, pray, what may 
your errand intend ? Matters of highest importance ; that they are 
the favourite representatives of my father upon earth ; and that, 
while their majesties continue the monarehs of a free and willing 
people, they are greater than if they were regents of an universe of 
slaves. All buzzed their applause and admiration. It must be he, 
whispered the king. It can be no other, cried the queen. 
Albemarle, whispered his majesty, we have marked this youth for 
our own ; keep your eye upon him, and do your best endeavours to 
engage and bind him to us. 

In the mean time, Harry, on delivering his celestial message, flew 
like a feather from his post, and, casting his cloak about him, 
vanished into an adjoining closet. 

The company now began to gather fast, and Harry, stealing from 
his retreat, kept his cloud about his sky, and mingled in the crowd. 
Mr. Clement had accompanied Mr. Fenton in dominoes. They soon 
discovered Harry, and were highly diverted by the account which 
he gave them of his metamorphosis into a statue. 

"While the assembly was dividing into pairs and chatty parties, a 
phenomenon entered that drew all their attention. The Honourable 
Major Gromley, the lustiest and fattest young man in the kingdom, 
advanced without a mask, in petticoats, a slobbering bib, and apron. 



314 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

He carried a large round of bread and butter in one hand, while 
Lady Betsy Minit, an elderly miss of about three feet high, held his 
leading-strings with her left hand, and in her right brandished a 
birch rod of lengthened authority. His governante pressed him 
forward, and seemed to threaten chastisement for his delay ; while 
the jolly, broad, foolish, humorous, half-laughing, half-crying, baby- 
face of the major, extorted peals of laughter from all who were 
present. And this is sufficient to convince us, that the performers 
of the ancient drama could not possibly in masks excite the passions 
of nature. No excellence of voice or gesture, of action or emphasis, 
could compensate for the exclusion of the immediate interpreters 
of the soul, the living speech of the eye, and varied expression of 
the countenance. 

After the major had leisurely traversed the full length of the 
room, and inimitably executed the whole of his part, he retired to 
undress and assume a new appearance. 

Mean while, two females entered in very unusual habits. The 
first was dressed in a choice collection of old English and Scotch 
ballads, from Chevy-Chace and the fragment of Hardi-Canute, down 
to Barbara Allan and the Babes in the Wood. The other was all 
hung from top to bottom with looking-glasses. 

Immediately the crowd gathered about them. All who were fond 
of their own history, preferable to that of others, paid their homage, 
in a circling throng, to the queen of the looking-glasses ; while the 
few who preferred instruction, were intent in perusing the fair 
covered with knowledge. But the lady of the mirrors did not long 
retain her votaries ; her glasses were all emblems of her own dis- 
position they were the glasses of scandal and calumny, and re- 
presented the human species in the most distorted view; some 
lengthened and some widened their objects beyond measure, while 
others wholly inverted and turned them topsy-turvy. All slunk 
away in disgust from such prospects of their own persons, and the 
reflecting lady was justly left to glitter apart from society. 

The next who entered was a Goliath, all sheathed in complete 
steel. He advanced with slow and majestic steps to the sideboard, 
and, asking for a flask of champagne, turned it down without 
taking it once from his head. He then demanded another, and 
another, and so on, till the provedore, who had looked and longed 
in vain to see him drop, ran panic-struck to his master, and in a 
half-whisper said My lord, your cellars will scarcely suffice to 
quench the thirst of one man here ; he has already turned down 
fifteen flasks of champagne, and still is unsatisfied, and calls for 
more. Then give him fifteen hogsheads, replied the earl, laughing ; 
and, if that will not answer, send out for more. 

In the mean time, the mailed champion had withdrawn from the 
sideboard, and, with a large drinking-glass in his hand, advanced 
till he got into the midst of the assembly. He then turned a little 
instrument that was fixed in a certain part of his double-cased 
armour, and filling the glass to the brim, he unclasped the lower 
part of his beaver, and accosting a Peruvian princess who stood just 
opposite Permit me the honour, madam, says he, of drinking your 
highness's health; so saying, the liquor was out of sight in a 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 315 

twinkling. Will your royal highness, continued he, be pleased to 
try how you relish our European wines ? I am obliged to you, sir, 
said she, I am actually athirst ; then, raising her mask below, she 
pledged him to the bottom. Her companion, a shining Arcadian, 
advanced and requested the same favour. Then another, and 
another lady, and several others in succession, all of whom he 
graciously gratified till he was nearly exhausted. Some of the men 
then pressed to him, and entreated for a glass. No, no, gentlemen, 
said he, go and be served elsewhere ; I am a merchant for ladies 
alone ; I import no liquors for vile male animals. 

Our former acquaintance, Mr. Hardy, had adventured, according 
to promise, without a mask. After looking about a while for some 
object of his gallantry, he fixed upon a lady of a very elegant shape 
and sprightly appearance. 

When they had bandied between them some occasional chat, of 
more smartness than humour, and more wit than meaning, he called 
for a favourite air, and led the fair one a minuet, in which they 
both performed assez Hen. 

He now began to grow more warm in his addresses. If your 
face, madam, said he, should happen to be answerable to the en- 
chantments of your form, and the siren in your voice, I beseech you 
to keep that mask on for ever ; the safety of mankind is interested 
in my request. But suppose, said she, that my face should happen 
to prove an antidote to the danger of my other charms? Then, 
madam, let me see it by all means ; and make haste, I pray you, 
before I am past remedy. I see, said she, tittering, I see that you 
are already more than half a dying man ; poor wretch, I pity you, 
and have taken it into my head to slay you outright, in order to put 
you out of pain ! 

So saying, she drew her mask on one side, and showed him 
indeed a very lovely countenance. But while his flood of compli- 
mentary eloquence was just upon breaking forth Hush, sir ! cried 
the lady, I will not hear a syllable till you first return the compli- 
ment that I have paid you, and let me see what you have got 
under that vizard of yours. Here Hardy, in spite of impudence, 
stood mute with astonishment. The lady burst into a laugh the 
joke was caught and spread like wildfire the laugh grew uni- 
versal all eyes were on poor Hardy, and a hundred tongues cried 
at once Your mask, sir, your mask, sir! take off your mask 
for the lady! This was something more than human assurance 
could stand. Hardy retired with precipitate confusion, and justly 
suffered for the presumption of his boasted facility of conquests 
over the fair. 

Our hero had hitherto kept himself concealed, being secretly 
ashamed of the lustre of his apparel ; but, at Mr. Fenton's desire, 
he laid his cloak aside, and instantly all the eyes of the assembly 
were upon him. In order to avoid their gaze he advanced into 
the throng, where a parcel of circling females asked him a number 
of insignificant questions, to which he returned in kind answers 
pretty nearly as insignificant. 

At length a Diana approached, whose diamond crescent was of 
the value of a princely ransom. She took him carelessly by the 



316 TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

hand and said Come, brother Mercury, let us give these mortals 
a sample of what we celestials can perform. Lead where you 
please, madam, said Harry, I cannot miss my way while I tread 
in the light of so fair a moon. 

The lady called to the orchestra for a saraband, and all made 
ample room, attentive to the motions of the shining pair. 

The dance began, and the spectators in a manner suppressed 
their breathing for fear of giving or receiving the smallest interrup- 
tion. The performers stepped music, their action was grace, and 
they seemed with difficulty retained to the floor over which they 
moved. They ended, and the assembly was still mute with astonish- 
ment, till they broke out into a general murmur of praise. 

Mr. Mercury, said Diana, the story of Argus tells us that you 
were formerly accustomed to set folk to sleep; but, for the present, 
you have opened all eyes to observation. Ah, madam ! answered 
Harry, could I have guessed at the moon that was to shine this 
night, I should have assumed a very different character. What 
character, I pray you ? That of Endymion, madam. I wish, she 
whispered, that you were a prince, or that I were a peasant ; and 
so saying, she turned from him and mixed in the crowd. 

Harry was next addressed by a shepherdess, and again by a nun. 
But he declined as honourably as he could to tend the flock of the 
one, or to be the cause of any breach of vows in the other, observing 
to her that she had already taken the veil. The boy is a FOOL ! 
said she ; I know it, said Harry. 

A gipsy then accosted, and taking him by the hand Will you 
be pleased, sir, to be told your fortune? said she. By no means, 
my sweet-voiced Cassandra, answered Harry ; I would avoid, above 
all things, prying into futurity. Knowledge, sir, is surely desirable, 
and, above all, foreknowledge. Not so, said Harry, foreknowledge 
of evil would but double the misery ; and foreknowledge of good 
would deprive me of hope by certainty ; and hope is a blessing 
perhaps preferable to possession. Tell me, sir, and tell me truly, 
did you ever yet see the girl that you could like? Yes, madam, 
two or three, for whom I have conceived a very tender friendship, 
but no one yet for whom I have conceived a passion. Ah, then, 
Mr. Mercury ! said the gentle prophetess, I have only to desire the 
last cast of your office ; when I am dead, be so grateful as to waft 
my friendly spirit to the shades of Elysium, there to join Dido and 
other unfortunate lovers. 

So saying, she turned and retired with a sigh that entered and 
sunk into the heart of our hero. 

The company now began to depart, when the Earl of Albemarle, 
coming up to Harry, took him a little apart, and throwing his arm 
over his shoulder, pressed him to him and said My dear fellow, 
you have done me singular honour this night; pray, double the 
favour to me by letting me see you again speedily, and as often 
as you can. For the present, you must not go till their majesties 
have spoken with you. Not to-night, so please your excellency, 
answered Harry ; at all other times I shall be ready to attend and 
serve their majesties without any mask. 

The next morning Mr. Fenton was much surprised by a visit 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 317 

from the great man. During breakfast the earl pressed eagerly 
for Harry's attendance at court, and promised every advantage and 
honour that the crown could bestoAv. You must pardon me, my 
lord, said Mr. Fenton ; I am willing to advance to you two hundred 
thousand pounds more towards his majesty's present expedition 
against the French, whom I look upon to be our natural and 
salutary enemies. They are as Carthage was to Rome ; they hold 
us in exercise, and keep a quarrelsome people from falling out 
among themselves. Indeed, my lord, I am desirous of gratifying 
my royal master with any thing except the sacrifice of my child. 
I cannot part with him till his education is completed ; and then, 
if he answers my expectations, I doubt I may be more unwilling 
to part with him 'than ever. 

In the afternoon our company went again to the Tower, to 
see as well as to hear the recent story of the great lion and the 
little dog. 

They found the place thronged, and all were obliged to pay treble 
prices, on account of the unprecedented novelty of the show, so 
that the keeper in a short space acquired a little fortune. 

The great cage in front was occupied by a beast who, by way of 
pre-eminence, was called the king's lion ; and, while he traversed 
the limits of his straitened dominions, he was attended by a small 
and very beautiful black spaniel, who frisked and gamboled about 
him, and at times would pretend to snarl and bite at him ; and 
again the noble animal, with an air of fond complacence, would 
hold down his head, while the little creature licked his formidable 
chops. Their history, as the keeper related, was this : 

It was customary for all who were unable or unwilling to pay 
their sixpence, to bring a dog or cat as an oblation to the beast 
in lieu of money to the keeper. Among others, a fellow had 
caught up this pretty black spaniel in the streets, and he was 
accordingly thrown into the cage of the great lion. Immediately 
the little animal trembled and shivered, and crouched and threw 
itself on its back, and put forth its tongue, and held up its paws, in 
supplicatory attitudes, as an acknowledgment of superior power, 
and praying for mercy. In the mean time, the lordly brute, instead 
of devouring it, beheld it with an eye of philosophic inspection. 
He turned it over with one paw, and then turned it with the 
other ; and smelled to it, and seemed desirous of courting a further 
acquaintance. 

The keeper, on seeing this, brought a large mess of his own 
family-dinner ; but the lion kept aloof, and refused to eat, keeping 
his eye on the dog, and inviting him as it were to be his taster. 
At length, the little animal's fears being something abated, and 
his appetite quickened by the smell of the victuals, he approached 
slowly, and, with trembling, ventured to eat. The lion then ad- 
vanced gently and began to partake, and they finished their meal 
very lovingly together. 

From this day the strictest friendship commenced between 
them a friendship consisting of all possible affection and tender- 
ness on the part of the lion, and of the utmost confidence and 
boldness on the part of the dog; insomuch that he would lay 



318 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

himself down to sleep within the fangs and under the jaws of his 
terrible patron. 

A gentleman who had lost the spaniel, and had advertised a re- 
ward of two guineas to the finder, at length heard of the adventure, 
and went to reclaim his dog. You see, sir, said the keeper, it 
would be a great pity to part such loving friends. However, if you 
insist upon your property, you must even be pleased to take him 
yourself ; it is a task that I would not engage in for five hundred 
guineas. The gentleman rose into great wrath, but finally chose 
to acquiesce rather than have a personal dispute with the lion. 

As Mr. Fenton had a curiosity to see the two friends eat together, 
he sent for twenty pounds of beef, which was accordingly cut in 
pieces, and given into the cage ; when immediately the little brute, 
whose appetite happened to be eager at the time, was desirous 
of making a monopoly of the whole, and putting his paws upon the 
meat, and grumbling and barking, he audaciously flew in the face 
of the lion. But the generous creature, instead of being offended 
by his impotent companion, started back, and seemed terrified at 
the fury of his attack; neither attempted to eat a bit till his 
favourite had tacitly given permission. 

When they were both gorged, the lion stretched and turned 
himself, and lay down in an evident posture for repose, but this his 
sportive companion would not admit. He frisked and gamboled 
about him, barked at him, would now scrape and tear at his head 
with his claws, and again seize him by the ear, and bite and pull 
away ; while the noble beast appeared affected by no other senti- 
ment save that of pleasure and complacence. 

But let us proceed to the tragic catastrophe of this extraordinary 
story, still known to many, as delivered down by tradition from 
father to son. 

In about twelve months the spaniel sickened and died, and left 
his loving patron the most desolate of creatures. For a time, the 
lion did not appear to conceive otherwise than that his favourite 
was asleep. He would continue to smell to him, and then would 
stir him with his nose, and turn him over with his paw ; but, find- 
ing that all his efforts to awake him were vain, he would traverse 
his cage from end to end at a swift and uneasy pace, then stop 
and look down upon him with a fixed and drooping regard ; and 
again lift his head on high, and open his horrible throat, and prolong 
a roar as of distant thunder, for several minutes together. 

They attempted, but in vain, to convey the carcase from him ; 
he watched it perpetually, and would suffer nothing to touch it. 
The keeper then endeavoured to tempt him with variety of victuals, 
but he turned from all that was offered with loathing. They then 
put several living dogs into his cage, and these he instantly tore 
piecemeal, but left their members on the floor. His passion 
being thus inflamed, he would dart his fangs into the boards, and 
pluck away large splinters, and again grapple at the bars of his 
cage, and seem enraged at his restraint from tearing the world 
to pieces. 

Again, as quite spent, he would stretch himself by the remains 
of his beloved associate, and gather him in with his paws, and put 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 319 

him to his bosom ; and then utter under roars of such terrible 
melancholy as seemed to threaten all around, for the loss of his 
little playfellow, the only friend, the only companion, that he had 
upon earth. 

For five days he thus languished, and gradually declined, with- 
out taking any sustenance, or admitting any comfort; till one 
morning he was found dead, with his head lovingly reclined on the 
carcase of his little friend. They were both interred together, 
and their grave plentifully watered by the tears of the keeper and 
his loudly lamenting family. But to return. 

When our company were on their way from the Tower to their 
lodgings Sir, said Harry, what we have just seen reminds me of 
the opinion of my friend Peter Patience, that one who is fearless 
cannot be provoked. You saw how that little, teasing, petulant 
wretch had the insolence to fly in the face of his benefactor, with- 
out offending or exciting in him any kind of resentment. True, 
Harry, for the lion was sensible that his testy companion was little 
and impotent, and depended upon him, and had confidence in his 
clemency, and therefore he loved him with all his faults. Anger, 
however, in some cases is not only allowable, but becomes a duty. 
The scripture says " Be angry, but sin not." We ought to feel 
and fear for others ; and lust, violence, and oppression of every 
sort will excite the indignation of a generous and benevolent 
person, though he may not fear for himself. 

After supper, Harry appeared to ruminate, and said How comes 
it, sir, that creatures not endued with reason or conscience shall 
yet, in the affections that are peculiarly called humane, exceed even 
most of the human species ? You have seen that it was the case 
between the lion and the little dog. 

It was the opinion, my Harry, of an ancient philosopher, that 
God was the soul and spirit of brutes ; and this he judged from 
observing that what we call instinct was incomparably wiser, more 
sagacious, and more accomplishing for attaining its ends, through- 
out its sphere of action, than the most perfect human reason. Now 
had this philosopher, instead of saying that God was the soul of 
brutes, barely alleged that he ruled and dictated within them, he 
would not have gone a tittle wide of the truth. 

God, indeed, is himself the beauty and the benefit of all his 
works. As they cannot exist but in him and by him, so his im- 
pression is upon them, and his impregnation is through them. 

Though the elements, and all that we know of nature and crea- 
ture, have a mixture of natural and physical evil, God is, however, 
throughout, an internal, though often a hidden principle of good, 
and never wholly departs from his right of dominion and operation 
in his creatures ; but is, and is alone, the beauty and beneficence, 
the whole glory and graciousness that can possibly be in them. 

As the apostle says, " The invisible things of God are made mani- 
fest by the things that are seen." He is the secret and central 
light that kindles up the sun, his dazzling representative ; and he 
lives, enlightens, and comforts in the diffusion of his beams. 

His spirit inspires and actuates the air, and is in it a breath of 
life to all his creatures. He blooms in the blossom, and unfolds hi 



320 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

the rose. He is fragrance in flowers, and flavour in fruits. He 
holds infinitude in the hollow of his hand, and opens his world of 
wonders in the minims of nature. He is the virtue of every heart 
that is softened by a sense of pity or touch of benevolence. He 
coos in the turtle and bleats in the lamb ; and, through the paps of 
the stern bear and implacable tigress, he yields forth the milk of 
loving-kindness to their little ones. Even, my Harry, when we 
hear the delicious enchantment of music, it is but an external 
sketch and faint echo of those sentimental and rapturous tunings 
that rise up, throughout the immensity of our God, from eternity to 
eternity. 

Thus all things are secretly pregnant with their God. And the 
lover of sinners, the universal Redeemer, is a principle of good 
within them, that contends with the malignity of their lapsed state. 
And thus, as the apostle speaks "All nature is in travail, and 
groaneth " to be delivered from the evil ; till the breath of the 
love of God shall kindle upon the final fire, out of which the new 
heavens and new earth shall come forth, as gold seven times re- 
fined, to shine for ever and ever ! 

Harry, agreeable to his covenant with Signer Volanti, had penned 
the following advertisement, and inserted it in all the public papers, 
to wit : " On Saturday next, between the hours of ten and twelve in 
the forenoon, the celebrated Dominico Jachimo Tonino Volanti will 
take his flight from the spire of Clement's steeple, and alight at the 
distance of two bows shot, on the Strand ; and this he will perform 
before the eyes of all people." 

On the impatiently-expected morning, Harry took Mr. Clement 
with him in a hackney chaise, and found an innumerable concourse, 
as well of the gentry in their carriages as of the populace on foot. 
London had poured forth its numbers to behold this astonishing 
flight. The windows were all eyes on every side, and the house- 
tops were hung with clusters of people as of bees. 

After Harry had surveyed the crowd with inward titillation, ho 
whispered to Clement, and said You shall see now what a sudden 
discomfiture I will make of this huge army. 

He then put forth his head and said to all around Do not ye 
perceive, my friends, what fools we are all made ? do not ye remem- 
ber that this is the first of April ? 

He had scarce spoken the words, when they spread from man to 
man, and soon were muttered throughout the assembly. And then 
louder, and more loud, the first of April ! the first of April ! was re- 
peated all about. 

The company now began to be in motion. All heads were in- 
stantly withdrawn from the late thronged windows, and the house- 
tops began to be cleared with a shameful caution. 

Immediately was heard the rolling of many wheels, and the lashing 
of many whips, while every coachman pressed through the crowd, im- 
patient to deliver his honourable freight from public shame. But 
the public now began to relish a joke that was so much against 
their betters; and in peals of laughter, and united shouts of 
triumph, they echoed and re-echoed after them, April fook! April 
fools! 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 321 

Among others Lord Bottom had come with his friend Rakely., in 
an elevated phaeton, of which his lordship was charioteer. As 
they happened to brush close by Harry's carriage, swearing and 
puffing, and lashing and cursing at the crowd, Harry cried to his 
old enemy You need not be in so violent a hurry, my lord; 
perhaps you are not so great a FOOL as you imagine ! 

The fools of fashion were scarce withdrawn, when a long and 
strong rope was let down from the top of the steeple, to which it 
was fastened at the upper end. A man then, laying hold on it 
below, dragged it along through the crowd, and braced it, at a great 
distance, to an iron ring that was stapled into a post, purposely sunk 
on a level with the pavement. They then brought a large and 
well stuffed feather-bed, and fixed it under the cord where it 
joined the ring. 

In the mean time Volanti appeared on the top of the steeple, and 
bending cautiously forward, and getting the cord within an iron 
groove that was braced to his bosom, he pushed himself onward, 
and with a kindling rapidity flew over the heads of the shouting 
multitude, poising himself with expanded legs and arms as he 
passed, till he was landed without damage on his yielding receiver. 
And in the very next papers Harry published the following ad- 
vertisement, to wit : 

" Before the first of April next, Signor Dominico Jachimo Tonino 
Volanti, by the help of canvas wings contrived for the purpose, 
purposes to fly over-sea from Dover to Calais, and invites all his 
London friends to come and see him set out." 

Harry had now seen whatever London could exhibit of elegant, 
curious, or pleasing ; and Mr. Fenton judged it time to hold up to 
him the melancholy reverse of this picture to show him the house 
of mourning, the end of all men to show him the dreary shades 
and frightful passages of mortality, which humanity shudders to 
think of, but through which human nature of necessity must go. 

For this purpose he took him to the GENEBAL HOSPITAL, where 
death opened all his gates, and showed himself in all his forms. 
But the great poet, on this occasion, has anticipated all descrip- 
tion : 

Immediately a place 

Before his eyes appear'd sad, noisome, dark. 
A lazar-house it seem'd, wherein were laid 
Numbers of all diseased, all maladies 
Of ghastly spasm, of racking torture, qualms 
Of heart-sick agony aU fev r rous kinds, 
Convulsions, epilepsies, fierce catarrhs, 



Intestine stone and ulcer ; cholic pangs, 
Demoniac frenzy, moping melancholy, 
And moonstruck madness : pining atrophy, 



, 

Dropsies, and asthmas, and joint-racking rheums. 
Dire was the tossing, deep the groan Despair 
Tended the sick, busiest from couch to couch, 
And over them triumphant Death his dart 
Shook, but delay'd to strike, though oft invoked 
With vows as their chief good. 

MILTON. 

While Mr. Fenton led his pupil through groaning galleries, 
and the chambers of death and disease, Harry let down the leaf of 
his hat, and drew it over his eyes to conceal his emotions. All 
that day he was silent, and his countenance downcast; and at 

Y 



322 TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

night he hastened to bed, where he wept a large tribute to the 
mournfully inevitable condition of man's miserable state upon 
earth. 

The next day Mr. Fenton took him to the Bethlehem Hospital 
for idiots and lunatics. But when Harry beheld and contemplated 
objects so shocking to thought, so terrible to sight when he had 
contemplated, I say, the ruin above all ruins, human intelligence 
and human reason so fearfully overthrown ; where the ideas of the 
soul, though distorted and misplaced, are quick and all alive to 
horror and agony; he grew sick and turned pale, and suddenly 
catching his uncle by the arm Come, sir, let us go, said he, I can 
stand this no longer. 

When they had reached home, and that Harry was more com- 
posed : Are all the miseries, sir, said he, that we have witnessed 
these two days, the consequences of sin ? Even so, indeed, my 
Harry; all these, and thousands more, equally pitiable and dis- 
gusting, are the natural progeny of that woe-begetting parent. Nor 
are those miseries confined to hospitals jalone; every house, nay 
every bosom, is a certain though secret lazar-house, where the sick 
couch is preparing, with all the dismal apparatus, for tears and 
lamentations, for agonies and death. 

Since that is the case, sir, who would laugh any more ? Is it not 
like feasting in the midst of famine, and dancing amidst the tombs ? 

All things in their season, my dear, provided that those who 
laugh be as though they laughed not, remembering that they must 
weep ; and provided that those who weep be as though they wept 
not, having joy in their knowledge that the fashion of this world 
quickly passeth away. 

On the following day, Mr. Fenton returned to Hampstead, leaving 
Harry and Mr. Clement ability to indulge the benevolence of their 
hearts. 

One evening, as our companions were drinking tea in the Temple 
Exchange Coffee-house, a man, advanced in years but of a very 
respectable appearance, got up and addressed the assembly : 

Gentlemen, said he, among the several hospitals and other charit- 
able foundations that have done honour to the humanity of the 
inhabitants of this city, there is one still wanting which, as I con- 
ceive, above all others, would give distinction to the beneficence of 
its founders ; it is a house for repenting prostitutes, an asylum for 
unhappy wretches who have no other home to whom all doors 
are shut, to whom no haven is open, no habitation or hole for rest 
upon the face of the earth. 

Most of them have been seduced from native innocence and 
modesty by the arts of cruel men. Many have been deceived under 
promise and vows of marriage ; some under the appearance of the 
actual ceremony, and afterwards abandoned or turned forth to 
infamy by their barbarous and base undoers. Shall no place, then, 
be left for repentance, even to those who do repent? Forbid it, 
charity ; forbid it, manhood ! Man is born the natural protector of 
the weakness of woman ; and, if he has not been able to guard her 
innocence from invasion, he ought at least to provide a reception 
for her return to virtue. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 323 

I have the plan of this charitable foundation in my pocket ; and 
if any of you gentlemen approve my proposal, and are willing to 
subscribe, or to solicit your friends to so beneficent a purpose, I 
request your company to the tavern over the way. 

Here the speaker walked toward the door, and was followed 
by Harry and Clement, and thirteen or fourteen more of the 
assembly. 

When the company was seated round a large table, the gentleman 
produced his plan, with a summary of the rules and institutes for 
the conduct of the house, which he proposed to call the Magdalene 
House : a plan which hath since been espoused and happily 
executed by others, without ascribing any of the merit to the first 
projector. 

As all present applauded the manner of the scheme and intention 
of the charity, each of them subscribed from a hundred to twenty 
pounds, till it came to Harry's turn, who subscribed a thousand 
pounds in Mr. Teuton's name. 

I suppose, sir, said one of the company, that your largest contri- 
butions will arise from the ladies, as the whole is intended for the 
benefit of the sex. I shall not, answered the gentleman, apply to a 
single lady on this occasion. Not one of them will dare to con- 
tribute a penny, lest it should be thought that they partly allow in 
themselves the vices that they can pardon or patronize in others. 
It is this that makes the case of the wretches whom we are about 
to befriend, deplorable beyond measure. They are first betrayed 
by our sex, and then driven out to irretrievable infamy and misery 
by their own. For women to women are as turkeys to turkeys ; do 
but cast a little dirt upon the head of any one of them, and the rest 
of the flock combine in an instant to pick out her eyes and to tear 
her to pieces. 

Mr. Mole, a learned philosopher, and a man of principal figure 
in the present company, then addressed the projector, and said If 
you will admit me, sir, into partnership in the conduct of your 
scheme, I will engage to levy contributions to the amount of some 
thousands over and above the hundred I have already subscribed. 
You are heartily welcome, sir, replied the gentleman, either to 
join or take the conduct of the whole upon yourself ; provided the 
good is done, I care not by what means. All my ends will be 
answered ; I wish to be nameless. That is not fair, neither, said 
another of the company ; you, Mr. Goodville, had the trouble of 
contriving this business, and you ought at least to have the honour, 
if not the conduct, of your own plan. 

Mr. Goodville ! Mr. Goodville ! exclaimed Clement in a surprise, 
eagerly staring at him, and recollecting, as from a dream, the 
altered features of his quondam friend and benefactor. Pray, sir, 
do you remember any thing of one Clement, a worthless young 
fellow, whom once in your goodness you condescended to patronize ? 
Clement ! Clement ! cried Mr. Goodville, getting up and hastening 
to him, and catching him in his arms. My dear, my dear Clement, 
my man of merit and misfortunes, how rejoiced am I to find you ! 
God be praised, God be praised ; it is at length in my power to do 
something material for you ! But come with me to another room, 

Y 2 



324 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

I have something to say to you ; we will leave these gentlemen the 
while to think further of the plan that lies before them. 

When Mr. Goodville and Clement had withdrawn Mr. Mole, 
said one of the company, you are concerned in a number of these 
public benefactions. Yes, gentlemen, answered Mole, I believe 
there is no charitable institution of any note in London in which I 
am not a trustee, and to which I am not a contributor. For, though 
I do not set up for sanctification by faith, yet I think I may pretend 
to some justification by charity. Let the vulgar herd pay their 
priesthood for cheating them out of their senses I give nothing to 
the fat impostors, or their lucrative fable ; my substance is little 
enough for myself and the poor. Why, pray, sir, said Harry, are 
you not a Christian ? No, indeed, master, answered Mole, nor any 
man who has sense enough to think for himself. Be pleased then, 
cried Harry, to hand me that paper a moment ; here, sir, I dash my 
name and contribution from the list of the subscribers. He who 
denies glory to God in the highest, can never have peace or goodwill 
toward men ; and so, sir, you shall never be the almoner of a penny 
of my money. 

You talk as you look, my dear, cried Mole ; like one just eloped 
from the nursery, where you were affrighted by tales of ghosts and 
hobgoblins. I acknowledge, gentlemen, the benefit and beauty of 
morality in its fullest extent ; and had Jesus, the Christian prophet, 
confined himself to his system of moral precepts, I think he would 
justly have been esteemed the greatest philosopher and legislator 
that ever breathed ; but when he, or rather his disciples in his 
name, in order to enhance the authority of their mission, pre- 
tended to divinity in their master, the low-bred and ignorant 
wretches pulled together against the grain, and compounded such 
a strange medley of fighting inconsistencies, and self-evident ab- 
surdities, as are wholly eversive of every principle of right reason 
and common- sense. They taught that God was made a man that, 
in order to expiate the sins of the world, the innocent was appointed 
to suffer for the guilty that the sins of all offenders were to be 
imputed to one who had never offended, and that the righteousness 
of him who had never offended was to be imputed to criminals of 
the deepest dye that the Creator submitted himself to the 
malignity of his creatures, and that God himself died a shameful 
death on the cross. And this, gentlemen, makes such a heap of 
ridiculous incoherences such contradictions in sense and terms as 
exceeds even the worship of apes and serpents, leeks and onions, 
and the other garbage of Egypt. 

You are a villain, and a thief, and a liar, cried Harry, altogether 
inflamed with choler. Mole, on hearing these terms of highest 
affront and reproach, instantly caught up a bottle and threw it at 
our hero's head ; but it happily missed him, and only bruised the 
fleshy part of the shoulder of the gentleman who sat next. Harry 
instantly sprang up and made at Mole, while the company rose also 
and attempted to interfere ; but some he cast on one hand and some 
on the other, and overturning such as directly opposed him, he 
reached Mole, and with one blow of his fist on the temple, he laid 
him motionless along the floor. Then, looking down on his adversary 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 325 

I should be sorry, said he, that the wretch would die in his 
present state of reprobacy ; here, drawer, run quickly and bring 
me a surgeon. Then, returning to his place, he sat down with 
great composure. 

After a pause, he looked round I hope, gentlemen, said he, that 
none of you are hurt. Indeed, I am much concerned for having in 
any degree contributed to your disturbance. But, had any one of 
you a dear benefactor and patron, to whom you were bound beyond 
measure, whom you loved and honoured above all things, could you 
bear to hear him defamed and vilified to your face ? No, certainly, 
answered one man. No man could bear it, cried another. But 
pray, asked a third, how came you to call the gentleman a thief? 
Because, replied our hero, he attempted to rob me of my whole 
estate. He endeavoured to thieve from me the only friend I had in 
the universe the friend of my heart the peace and rest of my 
bosom my infinite treasure my never-ending delight the friend 
without whom I would not choose to be without whom existence 
would become a curse and an abhorrence unto me. Happy young 
creature ! exclaimed an elderly gentleman, I understand you ; you 
mean your Christ and my Christ the friend who has already 
opened his early heaven within you. 

By this time Mr. Mole began to move ; whereupon Harry rose, 
and putting his hand in his pocket Here, gentlemen, said he, is 
one guinea for the surgeon and another for the reckoning. "When 
my companion returns be pleased to tell him I am gone to our 
lodgings ; for I will not stay to hold further converse or altercation 
with that bane of society that pest, which the rulers in darkness 
have commissioned to spread contagion, distemper, and death 
among men. 

Harry went early to bed, but lay restless and much disturbed in 
his spirit all night. Mr. Clement had heard the particulars of our 
hero's behaviour, which he partly disapproved ; but, as he saw 
him already dejected, he did not choose to expostulate with him 
for the present. 

The next day they returned to Hampstead, where Mr. Fenton, 
notwithstanding the constrained smiles of his Harry, observed an 
unusual cloud and uneasiness in his countenance. I want to speak 
with you, my love, said he ; and, beckoning him into his closet, he 
took him aflectionately by the hand and made him sit beside him. 
What is the matter, my dear, said he, looking concernedly in his 
face ; what is it that has disturbed the peace of the bosom of my 
beloved ? 

Ah, sir ! cried Harry, I am indeed very unhappy. I doubt that 
I am partly losing my faith, and the fear of that has given me 
inexpressible horror. It is like tearing me from a fort, out of 
which there is no home or rest for me in the universe. 

Here Harry made a recital of the late affair to his patron, and 
having closed his narrative Is not this very wonderful, sir, said he, 
how or where in the world could this Mole have mustered together 
such arguments against reason such appearances against truth? 
How must the vulgar and illiterate be staggered by such objec- 
tions, when even I, who have been bred, as I may say, at the feet 



326 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

of Gamaliel, have not been able to answer them otherwise than by 
the chastisement which the blasphemer received at my hand ? 

Here Mr. Fenton smiled, and said Do not be alarmed, my love. 
We shall quickly dispel the thin mists of infidelity that were 
collected to shut the sun of righteousness from your eye. I confess, 
indeed, that this spawn of Antichrist has compiled a summary of all 
that has ever been uttered against " the Lamb who was slain from 
the foundation of the world ; " yet he is but a Mole in nature as 
well as name ; and he with his brother moles know no more, and 
see no further, than the little heap of dirt and rubbish that the 
working of their own purblind and floundering reason hath cast 
about them. 

Sacred depths and stupendous mysteries belong to this matter, 
and, when you are able to bear them, they shall be clearly and 
fully unfolded to you, my Harry ; in the mean space, a few simple 
observations will suffice to re-establish the peace of your sweet and 
pious heart. 

As Christianity was instituted for the salvation of the vulgar, the 
principal truths thereof are very obvious and plain, and want no 
learning, no letters, to inculcate or teach them. They speak the 
language of nature, and all nature is expressive of the sense and 
the sound thereof. Whatever is within you, whatever is without 
you, cries aloud for a Saviour. For sin hath been as the Mezentius, 
of whom you read in Virgil, who bound the bodies of the dead to 
the persons of the living. Thus it is that the sin of fallen angels, 
and of fallen men, hath bound change and corruption, distempera- 
ture and death, to the elements, to the vegetables, to animals, and 
even to the immortal image of God himself in the humanity ; so 
that all things cry out with the apostle St. Paul "Who shall 
deliver me from the body of this death ? " so that all things cry 
out with the apostle St. Peter " Save, Lord, or I perish ! " 

These are inevitable truths, my Harry, which all men, at some 
time, must feel throughout their existence, whether they read them 
or not. And he alone, who never experienced, nor never shall ex- 
perience, frailty, error, or sickness, pain, anguish, or dissolution, 
is exempt from our solar system of salvation from sin. 

But what sort of a Saviour is it for whom all things cry so 
loudly? Is it a dry moralist, a legislator of bare and external 
precepts, such as your Mole philosopher required our Christ to be ? 
No, my darling, no ! The influence and existence of the Kedeemer 
of nature must, at least, be as extensive as nature herself. 

Things are defiled and corrupted throughout ; they are distem- 
pered and devoted to death from the inmost essence of their being ; 
and nothing under him, in whom they live, and move, and have 
their being, can redeem them, can restore them. 

O, sir ! exclaimed Harry his countenance brightening up why 
could I not think of this ? I should then have been able to foil my 
malignant adversary even at his own weapons. 

Our Jesus himself, continued Mr. Fenton, appeals to the truth I 
have told you, where he says to the sick of the palsy " Son, be of good 
cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee." But when the Pharisees there- 
upon concluded that he blasphemed, he demonstrated his influence 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 327 

in and over the soul, by the sensible evidence of his operation 
and influence in and over the body. "What reason ye in your 
hearts ? " said Jesus ; " Whether is it easier to say, ' Thy sins be 
forgiven thee ! ' or to say, ' Kise up and walk ? ' " Then said he to 
the sick of the palsy, " Arise and take up thy couch, and go to 
thine house." And immediately he rose up before them, and took 
up that whereon he had been carried, and departed to his own 
house, glorifying God. 

Here it was" necessary, for the performance of this wonderful 
and instantaneous cure, that Jesus should instantly operate in 
and through every member, nerve, and fibre of the sick of the 
palsy. And it was equally necessary, for that purpose, that the 
sick of the palsy should have lived, and have had his being, in Jesus. 
In like manner, also, his sins must have been pardoned by an 
inward salvation, by imparting to the will of the sinner a new and 
rectified will, and by informing his spirit with a detestation of evil, 
and a love of goodness and virtue. 

But pray, sir, if it is not too profound a mystery for me, be 
pleased to inform me how God could be made man ? For this was 
one of the principal objections of Mole. 

God was never made man, my Harry. God cannot be debased. 
He could not degrade himself by any change into manhood, though 
he could exalt and assume humanity into God. Neither could God 
die or suffer. To this, Christ himself, who was God and man, bears 
testimony, where he cries out, in the agonies of his suffering 
humanity, "My God! my God! why hast thou forsaken me?" 
And again, where, crying with a loud voice, he said, " Father, into 
thy hands I commend my spirit." But you are leading me some- 
thing deeper than I choose to go for the present. 

From eternity, God saw that, should he produce any creatures 
in his own image, to be glorious by his likeness, and happy by his 
communication, he must of necessity create them intelligent and 
free ; and that consequently, as creatures, they must be finite ; and 
that, as creatures who were free, they should also be fallible. 

He therefore saw that all might fall, and he also foresaw that 
some would fall. But his graciousness had provided two infallible 
remedies for this evil of fallibility. He had provided a Saviour, 
and he had also provided suffering. The Saviour was to restore 
them by an inward redemption, by a reinfusion and new birth of 
his own nature in their essence ; and suffering was to prepare and 
open his way, by humbling their pride, by mortifying their lust, 
and thus compelling them to unfold their hearts to their own 
happiness. 

Indeed, had no creature ever fallen, God could not have been 
duly glorified to all eternity. Millions of his infinitely amiable 
qualities must have lain an inscrutable secret to worlds upon 
worlds. While all his creatures were happy in him, and parti- 
cipated of him, no distinction could be duly made between them 
and their Creator. Had evil never been, goodness would have sunk 
unspeakably in the sense of its value, which is now infinitely height- 
ened and glorified by the contrast. Free grace and free mercy on 
the part of our God, and penitence and thanksgiving on the part of 



328 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

humbled sinners, would have been prevented of their thousand 
endearing connections. And all the amities and charities through- 
out the brotherhood of man ; all the melting and fond relations 
which the vine Christ infuses throughout his ingrafted branches, 
bearing blossoms and fruits of divine fragrance and flavour, 
must ever have remained unblessing, and as dead, from eternity to 
eternity. 

But our God, my child, is as powerful as he is gracious and wise, 
to bring light out of darkness, and life out of death, and infinite and 
ever-enduring good out of the limited and short state of transitory 
evil. 

To prove that no being beneath himself could stand of their own 
sufficiency, God permitted his two principal creatures the most 
immediate and most glorious representatives of his divine perfec- 
tions to fall off from their allegiance, and consequently from their 
happiness, with all their progeny. The first was the angel Lucifer 
who fell through pride, and the second was the man Adam who fell 
through lust. These two capital sins of pride and of lust are the 
genuine parents of all moral and natural evil, of all the guilt or 
misery that ever did, or ever can, rise throughout duration ; and our 
heavenly Father, in his love, hath appointed intense suffering to 
abate and abase the one, to mortify and slay the other, that trans- 
gressors may finally be capable of his mercy, through the salvation 
and grace of his Christ. 

The first of these arch-felons deemed himself worthy of Deity, 
and being inexperienced in the power with whom he had to con- 
tend, he attempted to arrogate all worship to himself, and to rob 
his divine benefactor of glory and godhead. 

The second of these felons was tempted by the first to aspire, 
through his own merits, at a godlike independence ; to cast off his 
allegiance to the author of his being ; and to expect intelligence and 
knowledge from the sensual fruits of this world, after which he 
lusted. He accordingly took and eat of the tree that was pregnant 
with all the goods and all the evils of this external, elementary, and 
transient system ; " according to his faith it was done unto him ;" ac- 
cording to his lust his desire was accomplished ; his nature became a 
partaker of temporary nature ; and he fell, with his progeny, into all 
the depravity and evils that the sin of fallen Lucifer had introduced 
into these vast regions, now made more exceedingly corrupt and 
sinful by the sin of fallen Adam. 

Why, pray, sir, demanded Harry, had Lucifer any concern in this 
world before the fall of our first parents ? 

Yes, my dear ; all the space that is now occupied by this earth 
and these elements, with the sun, moon, and stars, to an incon- 
ceivable extent, was once the heaven and dominion of Lucifer and 
his angels. But when, by their apostasy from the light, and love, 
and goodness of God, they had caused darkness and malignity, 
envy, rage, and uproar, and every species of evil and horror, to be 
predominant throughout their kingdom, God determined, by a new 
creation, to take it out of their hands. Accordingly he compacted 
it into the present system of temporary nature, whose duration is 
to be measured by the revolution of our luminaries, until the ap- 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 329 

pointed period of the great consummation, when all the malignity 
that remains and is compacted therein, shall be finally done 
away. 

To this truth Moses bears testimony, where he tells you that, at 
the commencement of the creation, darkness was upon the face of 
the great deep. And again, where he tells you, that the tree of the 
knowledge of the goods and evils of this world sprung up even in 
the midst of the paradise of God. But it is altogether impious and 
blasphemous to suppose that God would create evil, or infuse a 
tendency thereto into any of his works. Again, the same truth is 
attested by many passages of the sacred writings, where Lucifer, 
or Satan, tells Christ to his face, that this world, with all its glories, 
are his portion and property ; that they were delivered unto him ; 
and that he giveth them to whomsoever he will. And again, where 
Christ calls him " the prince of the air ; " and again, where he says, 
" The prince of this Avorld cometh, and hath no part in me." 

Now when God, by this new creation, had delivered this system 
of things from the influence and dominion of evil spirits, they 
became altogether prisoners in their own darkness. But when 
Adam, the second lord of this vast domain, by a second apostasy 
had brought additional sin and evil into temporary nature, the para- 
dise of God, that was over all, vanished ; and the new guilt of 
Adam opened a new and wide gate for the re-admission of Lucifer 
into his ancient possessions. And he remains a prince and a ruler 
in the elements and hearts of men unto this evil day. 

These two capital apostates, Lucifer and Adam, who had thus 
robbed their kind God of their affections and allegiance, were there- 
after represented by the two thieves who suffered in company with 
Christ, who reached out to each of them a bleeding arm of his 
mercy. The one accepted his grace, and on that day entered para- 
dise along with his Lord. The other rejected the Christ with con- 
tempt and reproach, and therefore, if ever reclaimable, must be con- 
strained by suffering to open his heart to redemption ; when, after 
a process of many agonizing ages, blaspheming and indignantly 
spurning at the power of his punisher, he may be compelled to cry 
out seed of the woman ! heal, heal the head thou hast crushed, 
and admit me also, though last, to some, the least portion of thy 
pardoning salvation ! 

These two, my Harry, even Lucifer and Adam, were also the 
thieves among whom the traveller fell, going from Jerusalem to 
Jericho, from the city and place of peace to the place of destruc- 
tion. He represented the wretched race of fallen man, whom 
Lucifer, and their first father, had robbed of all their substance, 
and stripped of their robe of righteousness, and wounded and left 
half dead in trespasses and sins. Neither did the law or the priest- 
hood avail anything for their cure, till JESUS, the good SAMARITAN, 
had compassion upon them, and bound up their wounds, pouring 
therein the oil of his grace and the wine of his gladness ; and ex- 
pended twopence, even the two precious pence of his own body 
and blood, for perfecting their recovery. 

But, my dearest sir, said Harry, if my question does not intrude, 
pray, how was it consistent with justice that the sufferings of the 



330 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

innocent should atone both for, and instead of, the guilty? For 
this also was one of Mole's cardinal objections. 

Your question, said Mr. Fenton, falls aptly in its place. When 
Adam, as I have told you, apostatized from his God, and lusted 
after the gross and sensual fruits of this world, and fed upon them, 
and thereupon became a partaker of their nature and malignity ; 
he fell from his paradise and sovereignty together, and he became 
a poor subject, and miserable slave, to all the evils and inclemencies 
of that temporary nature, over which he had been constituted a 
throned lord and controller. 

Here was a deep and woful fall, my Harry, from sovereignty 
to slavery, from eternity into time, from immortality into corrup- 
tion, from bliss into misery, and from life into death ! The very- 
state in which the wretched heirs of his fallen nature find them- 
selves at this day. How then was he to rise, if ever to rise again ? 
Could this be effected by any powers of his own? If he did not 
stand in the state of his strength, how shall he recover and be 
able to re-ascend in the state of his weakness? How think you, 
my Harry ? A self-evident impossibility, answered Harry. 

Here then, continued Mr. Fenton, we find the universe of man 
depraved, fallen and sunk into the darkness of sin and error, into 
the dungeon of gross and corruptible flesh, and circled about and 
closed in by the barriers and gates of death. And these prisons 
were to be broken through, these gates were to burst open, before 
he could re-enter upon light and immortality. All the enemies 
who had conquered man, sin, Satan, and temptation, were also to 
be conquered. 

But how was this to be done? A world lay at stake, and the 
great question was, Whether the whole race of man should continue 
in endless guilt and misery, or be restored to ever- enduring purity 
and blessedness? Wherefore, what all the powers of creation 
were not able to attempt, Jesus, in the humanity, undertook to 
accomplish. 

Here you see, my child, that justice had little to do in the case. 
It was not the justice of punishment, but the mercy of deliverance, 
that the love of our heavenly Father required. Justice indeed 
affirmed that suffering was due to sin, and was the necessary 
attendant and consequence thereof; and this also the love of our 
Christ willingly took upon himself. He conquered suffering through 
sufferings, and was thereby made the perfect and accomplished 
captain of our salvation. He entered into our flesh, he went 
through all the passages of this vale of tears and region of misery 
into which we are fallen ; through poverty, contempt, rejection, 
reproach ; through all that the rage and rancour of men and devils 
could inflict, his bloody sweat and horrors of hell, bonds, buffetings, 
spittings, scourgings, the bloody mockery of a thorny crown, and 
all the soul-rending tortures of an agonizing crucifixion, till at last 
he triumphantly cried " It is finished ! " and gave up the ghost. 
From the cross he descended into the grave : from the grave again 
he rose in glory, and ascended into heaven, where he led captivity 
captive, and showed the powers of darkness bound ; that he might 
lead all the followers of his beatific cross, in his own divine process, 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 331 

to conquest through sufferings, to glory through abasement, to 
exaltation through humiliation,, through death into life, and 
through the calamities of time to a never-ending, ever-blessing, 
ever-joyful eternity ! 

But, sir, said Harry ; was the humanity of our blessed Saviour 
the same as ours is ? for so the scripture seems to intimate, where 
it says " He was made man, like unto us in all things, sin only 
excepted." 

This was only spoken, answered Mr. Fenton, with respect to his 
outward humanity. His creaturely soul indeed, and the flesh 
which he derived from his mortal mother, were even as ours are, 
sin only excepted. But these were only as the husk or case of 
his internal and divine humanity, which was conceived from the 
essence of the FATHEE, by the operation of the Hoi/x SPIEIT in 
the womb of a pure virgin. It was this humanity to which JESUS 
was intimately united, and that became one with the ever-blessed 
TEINITY. And it was of the ubiquity of this humanity that Christ 
speaketh, when he says to Nicodemus, " No man hath ascended up 
to heaven but he that came down from heaven, even the son of 
man which is in heaven." But when the external humanity of 
Jesus was, by sufferings and death, prepared to be swallowed up 
in glory, the whole CHEIST was then assumed up into Godhead. 
He saw all things in Jesus, as they were and shall be from eternity 
to eternity. And, though the glory of his personal appearance 
may be visible in certain places, yet he is invisibly present in all 
places and in all hearts, begetting in them a new birth of his own 
divine humanity ; that their bodies may also be fashioned like unto 
his glorious body ; and that, when our corruptible shall have put 
on incorruption, and when that our mortal shall have put on 
immortality, " we all may be made one, as he is in the Father, 
and the Father in him, that we also may be one in them." 
An elevation sure, well worth the hardest striving, the highest 
ambition. 

Thus I have shown you, my Harry, the inevitable necessity of 
the sufferings of our innocent Christ for the salvation of guilty 
sinners. And this also shows you the equal necessity of his taking 
upon himself the external imputation of the sins for which he 
suffered ; that he might thereby be inwardly imputed to us, and 
become to us, and in us, the LOED OUE EIGHTEOUSNESS ; and be 
to us a better Adam, a second and divine father, regenerating us 
to a birth of his own heavenly nature. And thus, as the first 
Adam died unto God, and lived to fallen nature, there was a 
necessity that Christ, as well in his own person as his redeemed 
progeny, should die to the fallen nature, that through him they 
might live again unto God. 

I thank you, thank you, sir, cried Harry; I shall henceforth 
be enabled to give an account, to all who ask, of the faith that 
is in me. But, pray, did the divine humanity of our Christ suffer 
in the crucifixion? 

I believe it did, Harry, even as our souls are found to suffer in 
our bodies, though of a nature so very different from them. It 
was the suffering of this divine humanity that caused such violent 



332 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

repugnance and convulsions in nature ; that shut up the world 
from light even at mid-day ; that rent the rocks ; that opened the 
graves, and gave up the dead to attend their Lord, and revive in 
the life of his resurrection. 

Will you be pleased, sir, to indulge me in one question more? 
Could not God, in his omnipotence, have effected the salvation of 
man by some other means than the sufferings of our dear Christ? 
I think, were it to be done again, I would rather forfeit my salvation 
than that he should endure such agony on my account. 

I will not pretend, my Harry, to give limits or directions to the 
measures of my God, neither to say what he might or might not 
do within his own world, and with regard to his own creatures. 
But it is certain that he chose the most effectual method for 
compassing his great and eternal purpose that infinite love could 
dictate, infinite wisdom contrive, and infinite power execute. 
O, my Harry ! how unutterably endeared must this measure make 
our God to the universe of his creatures, and that to all eternity ; 
it is herein that the nature of our God is revealed ; it is hereby 
alone that he could ever have been duly known known to be the 
God of love to be nothing but love, in this his wonderful work 
of mercy, transcending mercy ; and of grace, transcending grace, 
that he might bring us to glory transcending glory. 

In this stupendous work of redemption, I say Jesus makes 
himself as it were little, that we may become great ; he stoops into 
manhood, that he may exalt us into God. He came not arrayed 
in the fool's coat of the lustre of this despicable world, nor in the 
weakness of its power, nor in the meanness of its dignity ; but over 
his immensity he threw the appearance of limitation, and with 
time he invested his eternity ; and his omnipotence put on frailty ; 
and his supremacy put on subjection ; and with the veil of mortality 
he shrouded his beauty, that he might become familiar to us, that 
we might behold and converse with him face to face, as man con- 
verses with man, and grows fond of his fellow. 

Before the incarnation, God was feared in his thunders, and 
adored in the majesty and magnificence of his works. But it is in 
the meek and lowly Jesus that he becomes the object of affection ; 
in the bleeding, the suffering, the dying Jesus, we behold him 
with weeping gratitude, we love him with a love of passion and 
burning, a love that languishes for him, that cannot bear to exist 
without him. 

How could that perverse people shut their eyes to the divinity 
of their gracious Messiah, while he gave such hourly and ocular 
proofs of the power and extent of his godhead in and over all 
things? while he went about doing good, carrying healing in his 
breath, in his touch, in his garments ; while the lame sprung up 
as a bounding roe at his bidding ; while the tempest heard his 
voice and was still, and the sea spread itself as a carpet beneath 
the foot of its creator ; while the deaf ear was opened, and the 
dumb tongue loosed to utterance; while he poured the beams 
of his light upon the new opening eyes of the blind-born gazer ; 
and while in death, and amidst the tombs, his word was life and 
resurrection ? 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 333 

Thus, my Harry, you find yourself united to your Saviour by 
many endearing and intimate connections, by creation, by redemp- 
tion, by brotherhood, by fatherhood in the flesh, in the spirit ; by 
his being bone of your bone, and spirit of your spirit ; by being 
the " first-born of many brethren," and by being the divine father 
of a new and celestial progeny. 

But what need we further? the world from the beginning is 
fraught with him, and speaks of him. The world is, in itself, no 
other than a history of the two capital and eternally important 
truths the greatness of the fall in Lucifer and Adam, and the 
greatness of the redemption in Jesus Christ. These truths are 
engraven in the rocks as deep as the centre ; they are written on 
both sides of every leaf in nature. All that is within us, all that 
is without us, utters forth the same language, proclaims the same 
tidings aloud. All ceremonials, all institutions of divine authority, 
all ancient predictions and prophecies, were pregnant with, and in 
travail of the great deliverance to be achieved by the Shiloh who 
was to come. They give us a previous history of his whole process 
upon earth, from his birth to his resurrection, as circumstantially, 
as minutely as though it were a bare transcript of what had 
recently passed before their eyes. But I shall only dwell a minute 
on three principal articles first, that Messiah was to be God ; 
secondly, that he was, however, to be a suffering Messiah; and 
thirdly, that he was to give himself to death for the salvation 
of sinners. 

First. With respect to his divinity, Daniel says " I saw in the 
night-visions, and, behold, one like unto the Son of Man came with 
the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of Days, and 
they brought him near before him. And there was given him 
dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and 
languages should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting do- 
minion, which shall not pass away." Again Isaiah : " Behold, a 
virgin shall conceive and bear a son. For unto us a child is born, 
unto us a son is given, and the government shall be upon his 
shoulder; and his name shall be called "Wonderful, Counsellor, 
The Mighty God, The Everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. 
Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, 
upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom to order it, and 
to establish it, with judgment and with justice, from henceforth 
even for ever." 

Secondly. With respect to his character of rejection and suffering : 
"Who hath believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the 
Lord revealed ? He is despised and rejected of men, a man of 
sorrows and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our 
faces from him ; he was despised, and we esteemed him not. He 
was oppressed and he was afflicted ; he is brought as a lamb to the 
slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so opened 
he not his mouth. He was taken from prison and from judgment ; 
and who shall declare his generation ? for he was cut off" out of 
the land of the living ; for the transgression of my people was he 
stricken. And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the 
rich in his death." Isaiah liii. David too says "Dogs have 



334 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

compassed me, the assembly of the wicked have enclosed me ; they 
pierced my hands and my feet. They part my garments among 
them, and cast lots for my vesture. But a bone of him shall not 
be broken. They shall look on him whom they pierced." 

Thirdly. With respect to his being a willing offering for sin, 
Isaiah says in the same chapter, " Surely he hath borne our griefs, 
and carried our sorrows ; yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten 
of God, and afflicted. But he was wounded for our transgressions, 
he was bruised for our iniquities ; the chastisement of our peace 
was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. All we like 
sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own 
way, and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all." 
Jeremiah too 

Here Mr. Fenton was interrupted. His man Frank entered 
booted, and all bespattered with dirt, and, having whispered 
something in his master's ear, Mr. Fenton turned aside his head 
to hide his concern from Harry, and stepping to his closet locked 
himself in. 



CHAPTER 

BUT it may now be thought full time to return to the head 
branch of this noble family. 

Nearly nine years had now elapsed since the earl and his lady 
had seen or heard of their Harry, except by two or three anony- 
mous notes in a year, giving a short account of his health and 
accomplishments ; insomuch that time and long absence had, in 
a measure, worn him from the regrets of the family ; excepting 
his brother Richard, on whom Harry's generosity, in taking his 
quarrel upon himself, had left an affecting and indelible impression. 

Lord Clinton was indeed sweetly dispositioned by nature, and of 
an aspect and person extremely elegant; and, as he had tutors 
in all branches in which he chose to be instructed, he learned 
sufficient, by way of amusement, to render him one of the most 
accomplished youths in the nation. He was also naturally un- 
assuming, and modestly disposed : but the unremitted adulation 
of domestics and dependants, with the complimentary artillery 
of all the neighbours and visitants, could not fail of some im- 
pression, at least so far as to make it evident that he was conscious 
of his condescension when he became familiar with you. 

He was, however, easy to all who applied to him for any favour ; 
exceeding charitable to the poor ; and particularly fond of our 
Harry's foster-mother, and kind to her for Harry's sake. 

He was turned of nineteen years of age when his parents, for 
his amusement and the finishing of his education, resolved to 
accompany him on a tour to France. 

They set out with a suitable equipage and a nominal tutor, 
whom they engaged, rather with a view of being a watch upon 
our young lord's motions, than the intendant of his principles or 
the former of his manners. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 335 

Nothing material happened till their arrival at Paris, where the 
earl took a sumptuous palace in the Kue de Vaugirard. 

When he had settled his household, he went to inquire after 
his intimates of fifty years ago. Some three or four of them still 
survived. He renewed his acquaintance with them, and engaged 
them, their friends and families, to rich and frequent entertain- 
ments, whereby his palace speedily became the resort of one of 
the most elegant circles in Paris. 

Young Clinton quickly entered into familiarity and confidence 
with such of the young nobility as frequented his father's ; and 
they took him abroad on several parties of pleasure, and introduced 
him to the birds of their own distinguished feather. 

Our young Englishman swam gracefully down the stream of 
pleasure ; a warm imagination susceptible of the slightest im- 
pressions, a spirit apt to receive and impart the kindliest feelings, 
made him the idol of his home, and the desire of the brilliant 
society he moved in and adorned. But, alas for the stability of 
all earthly bliss! he was seized with the smallpox, which was 
then sweeping through Paris like a plague; and, though the 
eruption was but slight, yet on the seventh day Lord Clinton was 
suddenly taken with convulsions, and in less than an hour expired. 

The old countess had never left his room since he had taken 
to his bed, and was now carried off in a deep swoon. She never 
after recovered her senses except by deplorable starts, to lament 
that she was the most wretched of all that ever was created, and 
on the second day she also expired. 

The miserable earl, now an unit in creation, had their bodies 
embalmed and deposited in leaden coffins, ready for conveyance 
to his own vault in England, whither he now prepared to go. 

At length he set out with his sighing and silent train ; and after 
a voyage, lengthened by woe, arrived finally at Enfield. 

Never was seen such a concourse at any funeral since the funeral 
of Jacob, on which all Egypt attended; they crowded from a 
distance of thirty miles round. But when they saw the old and 
reverend patron of the country all covered with sad and solemn 
weeds; when they beheld his countenance exceeding all pomp 
of sorrow, and conceived the weight and wringing that was then 
at his heart, envy was quite blunted and robbed of its sting. 
They now lamented the living more than they mo^irned the dead ; 
and the poorest among the poor looked down with an eye of 
compassion upon the great man, now rendered, as they deemed, 
more pitiable and desolate even than themselves ; without child 
or kindred ; without any to continue his name or his honours ; 
without any who could claim a share in his wealth or his woe; 
without any cause of further comfort, or further care upon earth. 

During the following week the earl kept his chamber, and would 
admit of no visitor till Mr. Meekly arrived. 

Mr. Meekly had long estranged himself to Enfield ; he had gone 
elsewhere, seeking the houses of mourning, and breathing peace 
and consolation wherever he went; but, as soon as he heard of 
the affliction of his noble friend, he hastened to help him to bear 
up under the weight of his calamity. He entered and seated 



336 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

himself in silence beside the earl, he there wept near an hour 
without uttering a syllable. 

My lord was the first who spoke Mr. Meekly, said he, my 
Heart gratefully feels this melting proof of your love. You weep 
for me, my friend, because you see, and kindly feel, that there is 
no other comfort for me on this side the grave. 

God forbid ! God forbid ! said Mr. Meekly ; the best and greatest 
of all comforts is coming to you, my lord. Eternal Truth has 
promised it, ani he will make it good to you : " Blessed, blessed 
are they who mourn, for they shall be comforted." 

Ah, Mr. Meekly ! replied the earl, the comfort that you mention 
is promised only to the deeply contrite and broken of heart; to 
those who duly lament the baseness of their offences against so 
great and good a God. Neither do I despair, my friend, but that 
I also may finally share some portion of that same comfort ; for, 
as I feelingly acknowledge myself the greatest of all sinners, so 
I wish for grace to make me the greatest of penitents. 

God be praised, cried Meekly, for the grace already given! 
There was a time, my lord, when, as you told me, you had nothing 
of these divine dispositions ; when the world, as you said, seemed 
to hold out happiness to you on either hand ; when fortune, title, 
precedence, circling honours about you, and within you youth and 
health, and a revelling flow of blood and spirits, wholly disguised 
and concealed the state of your nature from you ; when they hid 
from you your own body of frailty, distemper, sin, and death, and 
left you no occasion to call out for a Saviour, as you felt nothing 
from which you desired to be saved. But God has now been 
graciously pleased to send you his monitors, and to call upon you 
by affliction, that you, in your turn, may call upon him who alone 
can give you consolation. 

It is not, my lord, to the mourners for sin alone to whom 
comfort is promised : the state of suffering and mourning is in 
its nature extremely salutary, and of happy tendency to man ; 
and it is, therefore, that the suffering JESUS hath pronounced 
it blessed. 

The God of all love takes no delight in the sufferings of his 
poor and pitiable creatures; neither would he have made this 
state of our mortality a vale of tears, and a state of misery, had 
it not been in order to conduct us through transitory evils to 
ever-enduring bliss, where "he himself will wipe all tears from 
our eyes." 

When Adam, by his apostasy and falling off from his Maker, 
had converted all the goods of his temporary state into evil in- 
citements to lust, covetousness, and sensuality, God determined, 
by a gracious reverse, to turn all the evils of corrupt and fallen 
nature into means of enduring good to his fallen and frail creatures: 
he therefore appointed pain, affliction, distress, and disease, to be 
his ministers, his monitors, and preachers within us, to convince 
us of all the evil of our depraved and mortal nature ; to wean us 
from a world that is full of false promises, but empty of true 
enjoyment ; to remind us that we are strangers and pilgrims upon 
earth; to turn our eye to the star that hath visited us from on 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 337 

high ; and finally, through our sufferings, to accomplish the great 
work of his own salvation in us. 

Thank you, thank you, Mr. Meekly ! these are comforting things 
indeed. They pluck comfort from the very depth and abyss of 
affliction ; I love that my God should be lovely to my heart. You 
have now rent the dark veil that long hung before my eyes ; and 
the Sun of Eighteousness breaks upon me through the clouds of 
my mortality. But what of death, Mr. Meekly? what of death,, 
my friend ? I am interested in the question ; my time is approach- 
ing. When this body shall fall to dust, and all these organs of 
sensation be utterly cut off, what remains what then shall follow ? 
by what means shall my spirit attain the powers of new perception ? 
or am I to lie in the grave, in a state of total insensibility, till 
the last trumpet shall sound? My nature shrinks, I confess, from 
a total deprivation of the sense of existence. 

It is no way evident to me, my lord, that body, or at least such 
gross bodies as we now have, are necessary to the perceptions and 
sensibilities of our spirit. God himself is a Spirit, an all-seeing, 
all-hearing, all-tasting, all-smelling, all-feeling, all-knowing, and 
all-governing Spirit. "He who made the eye, shall he not see? 
He who made the ear, shall he not hear?" Wherefore, as our 
spiiits are the offsprings of his divine Spirit, we may justly presume 
them endowed with like capacities. But if body is necessary to the 
perception of spirit, as Zoroaster, the illuminated philosopher, seems 
to intimate, where, speaking of God, he says, " whose body is light, 
and whose soul is truth ; " in this case, 1 say, we may reasonably 
suppose that, when our spirits shall be parted from these gross and 
frail bodies, they shall be instantly clothed upon with more pure and 
permanent bodies. Or, as I rather think, that those pure and per- 
manent bodies are already forming, and pregnant within our gross 
and corruptible bodies ; and that when the midwife, death, shall 
deliver us from the dark womb of our woful travail and mortality, 
we shall immediately spring forth into incorruption and glory. 

Of this, my lord, I am as confident as I am of my being, that he 
who by faith hath already put on Christ, shall break through death 
in the brightness of the body of his new birth, incorruptible, im- 
mortal, and blessed to all eternity. 

Tell me, then, my dearest Meekly, what mean you by the body 
of this new birth ? for, alas ! I am but too apt to cry out with 
Nicodemus, " How can these things be ? " 

I mean, my lord, the forming of Christ within us: our being 
formed anew of a divine seed of our second Adam, even as our 
gross bodies were formed in the womb from a corruptible seed of 
the old Adam. I mean the clothing of our spirits with the heavenly 
substantiality of the spiritual body and blood of the heavenly Jesus 
himself; for, as the apostle says, "There is a spiritual body, as 
there is a carnal body." I mean a body the same as that in which 
the believing thief entered paradise with his Lord on the day of 
the crucifixion. " I am the resurrection and the life," saith Jesus : 
" whoso believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live ; 
and he who liveth and believeth in me shall never die." Death 
shall become a new and divine birth unto him. And the great 

z 



338 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

apostle says, " There are celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial ; but 
the glory of the celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is 
another." And again he says, " For we know that if our earthly 
house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, 
an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens." 

These are great things indeed, Mr. Meekly, and full of hope, as 
well as incitements to divine ambition. 

But why, my lord, should a new birth from Jesus Christ be 
thought wonderful ? Is there any thing more wonderful in it than 
in the forming and unfolding of the whole stupendous mechanism 
of the body of our old man from a scarce visible speck of entity ? Is 
there any thing more wonderful in it than in the growth and 
unfolding of any common vegetable from some latent principle or 
invisible speck in the seed, which not all the optics and glasses of 
a Galileo should be able to discover? Were not these the known 
facts of every day and hour, incredulity would have laughed the 
supposition to nought. But I think I have got about me something 
surprisingly analogous and apposite to the nature and manner of 
our new birth in Jesus. 

Mr. Meekly then put his hand in his pocket and took out a lump 
of matter, in form like a long and huge maggot, evidently without 
motion, apparently without life, and hard and incrusted all about 
to the feeling. 

What have you got there, my friend? said the earl. An old 
worm, my lord, that at this instant is pregnant with the birth of a 
new creature. Impossible ! cried the earl ; the thing is absolutely 
dead ! The body of the old worm is dead, indeed, my lord ; but 
there is certainly a principle of a new life within it, that will soon 
manifest itself in the birth of a very beautiful and wonderfully 
glorious creature. And this you will find if you leave it for a few 
days, where it may get the fostering warmth of the sun through 
one of your windows. Have you ever seen the fly they call the 
dragon-fly, my lord ? Yes ; and have admired the elegance of its 
shape, the mechanism of its double wings, and the lustre of its 
irradiations. 

This mass, my lord, of apparently insensible matter is now actually 
pregnant with one of the same species. The parent, through whose 
death it is to attain life, was no other, as you see, than a vile 
and grovelling maggot ; but the new creature that is to be born 
from it will be of a quite different nature and tendency. It will 
loathe the food and occupation of its foul progenitor ; it will soar 
sublime over carnal and earthly things ; it will drink the dews of 
heaven, and feed on the consummate nectar and fragrance of flowers. 

This, indeed, Mr. Meekly, rejoined the earl, is to make the 
invisible things of God visible, even to the naked eye, by the things 
that are seen. 

While my lord and his friend were thus deeply in discourse, 
Mr. John, the house-steward, came in and told his master that one 
waited in the hall with a letter for him. 

A letter ! cried the earl ; what can I have to say, John, to any 
letter, or any of the writers thereof? But something is due to 
humanity, and it shall be paid ; desire him to step in. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 339 

Hereupon a stranger entered, whose figure instantly caught the 
eyes and attention of the earl and his companion in an astonished 
captivity. The youth was dressed in a mourning frock; and his 
dark brown locks, tied behind with a black riband, flowed carelessly 
between his shoulders, while some of the front-straying curls, as 
in sport, alternately shaded and discovered a part of his lovely 
countenance. He bowed, he moved attraction; and, gracefully 
advancing toward my lord, he again bowed, laid a letter before him 
on the table, and then silently retired backward a few steps. 

They viewed him they gazed on him as it had been the sudden 
vision of an angel of light. Mr. Meekly was not able to utter a 
word ; neither had my lord the power to lay a finger on the paper 
that was directed to him, till Mr. Meekly at last, giving a great 
stroke on the table, cried suddenly out I would lay a thousand 
pounds of it ! it is he ! it is he ! my heart tells me he can be no 
other but your Harry Clinton ! 

Here Harry sprung forward, and, casting himself precipitately at 
the feet of the earl, he clasped his knees with an eager reverence, 
crying My father, my honoured, my dear, my dear father! and 
broke into tears. 

My lord, all in a tremor, attempted to raise him to his arms, and 
Harry, perceiving this, rose and threw himself into the bosom of his 
father. But the earl gently and fondly put him off a little, and 
gazing intently on a countenance that appeared to him lovely above 
all that was lovely in the circle of creation, he gathered new strength, 
and catching Harry to his breast, he exclaimed in a transport " Let 
me die ! let me die ! since I have seen thy face, my son." 

Thus my lord, in the recent acquisition of such a son, forgot all 
his losses, and cast the whole weight of his late calamities behind 
him. His eyes could not be tired with seeing him, neither his ear 
with hearing the sweetness of his voice ; and he continued to hold, 
to gaze at him, to caress him, unmindful of aught else unmindful 
even of his friend Meekly, who sat enraptured beside him. 

Will you leave me again, my child ? cried out the earl ; do you 
intend to go from me again, my Harry? You must not you shall 
not leave me not for an hour no, not for a minute ; a second loss 
of my son would quickly bring my grey hairs with sorrow to the 
grave. Never, never, my lord, will I leave you! tenderly cried 
Harry ; never for a moment will I forsake you again, my father ! 
I come purposely to watch over, to comfort, to tend you while 
I have life with all imaginable tenderness, affection, and duty. 

But where, hastily asked the earl where is the murderer who 
stabbed my peace? where is that old thief that robber who 
rent my child from me ? Ah, my lord ! cried Harry, he is very 
far from meriting such opprobrious epithets ; he is a summary of 
all that is excellent all that is amiable in nature. He respects 
and loves you too above the world, and all that is in it deserving 
of love. O, had you lately seen his grief for your losses the 
floods of tears he shed for for for Here H arry could no more ; 
but, on the recollection of his mother and brother, burst into tears. 

But tell me, my dear, continued the earl tell me who and what 
he is whom you commend so highly ? 

z2 



340 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

Even the son of your own mother, my lord ; my much-loved, my 
revered, my most honoured uncle. 

Impossible, my child! That old despicable man, my brother! 
No, no, my Harry, he must have deceived you ! My brother was all 
that was amiable upon earth " the fairest among ten thousand" 
the straightest cedar in the forest ! 

And such he is at this day, my lord. But, alas, alas ! he has been 
broken by the batteries of many afflictions ; a man wholly made 
up of sorrows, and acquainted with killing griefs ! You wanted 
me not when he took me, my father ; you had other and richer 
treasures comforts that were infinitely more worthy your regard ; 
but, little and despicable as I was, he had nothing but me. I 
became his only comfort the only treasure in which he delighted. 
Yet, as soon as he heard that you wanted consolation, he chose 
rather to be without it himself, and so he restores me to you, if 
I may be any little matter of comfort to you, my father. 

And where is this dear uncle this precious brother my Harry? 
Is he come with you ? Shall I be so blessed to take him in with 
my eye to take him in with my arms to petition to obtain his 
pardon to press him to my bosom to my heart to my soul? 
Where is he where is this precious brother my Harry? 

He is not come with me, my lord ; he feared, as he said, that 
you would not forgive him the carrying off your Ganymede ; but 
he is desirous of attending you on the first intimation. 

Then you must write to him for that purpose to-morrow, my 
son ; and despatch your invitation by some of our swiftest horses. 
The influence of his darling will, unquestionably, be greater than 
that of an offending and unnatural brother. Is this letter from 
him, Harry ? It is, my lord. Then I will not peruse it till I get 
by myself. It probably contains reproaches but too well merited ; 
or possibly matters of consolation too tender for me to bear. But, 
Mr. Meekly, my dearest Meekly, ten thousand pardons! Harry, 
take to your arms the man in the world, next to your uncle, mo.st 
deserving of your reverence most deserving of your heart ! 

Here Mr. Meekly kissed and embraced our hero with all the 
tenderness of a father, and the ardour of an old friend. 

Mr. Meekly, cried Harry, looking earnestly and fondly at him, do 
I not remember something of that face, Mr. Meekly ? Are you not 
the gentleman for whom I long since conceived such an attachment 
to whom my heart cleaved, as I may say, from my infancy ? 

I am, my heavenly creature, answered Meekly ; I am the man 
indeed whose soul was knit to yours, like the soul of Jonathan to 
David, the first moment I beheld you ; and who saw in you then 
all those noble, generous, and divinely humane propensities that I 
see arrived to their maturity at this happy day. 

While Mr. Meekly was thus rejoicing, Harry happened to turn 
his head aside, and, spying the lively portraits of my lady and Lord 
Eichard, he started he rose; and, gazing on them a minute, he 
went softly to the window, and, taking out his handkerchief, kept 
his back to the company, while he vented his emotions in a silent 
passion of tears. His father and Mr. Meekly perceived what he 
was about, but they did not disturb him. He brought fresh to 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 341 

their remembrance all the passages of late affliction, and they 
silently joined a flow of grief to his. But their tears were the tears 
of sympathizing humanity, or rather tears of delight on observing 
the sweet sensibilities of their darling. 

In the mean time, Mr. Frank, who attended on Harry, had whis- 
peringly given the mourning domestics an intimation concerning 
the person of the stranger who had arrived. Some of them well 
remembered him ; and all of them had heard of him, and conceived 
a very kindly impression of our Harry. They first expressed their 
mutual joy by kisses, embraces, and silent shakes of the hand ; but 
in a little space their congratulations became more loud and tumul- 
tuous, and the voice of exultation was heard through all the lower 
house. 

Harry hereupon felt himself secretly hurt, and turning to his 
father his yet tearful countenance My lord, says he, I beseech you 
to suppress this unseasonable sound of joy among your servants, in 
a house that ought so justly to be the house of mourning. My love, 
mildly and kindly answered the earl, I cannot wholly refuse to my 
poor and afflicted people some share of that comfort which I my- 
self feel on the return of my Harry. They are all my old and true 
servants, my child ; this is no other than an expression of their 
love to you and to me ; and I request you to receive them affec- 
tionately for my sake. 

Here the earl rung a bell and desired that all his domestics 
should come in. 

They accordingly entered. Harry perfectly recollected Mr. John 
the steward, Mr. Samuel the butler, and old Mrs. Mary the cook. 
He called them by their names, reminded them of old times, and 
took them in his arms with much affection. He then turned to the 
other servants. He took each of them by the hand in turns, and 
spoke to them with such a natural ease and lowliness, as though he 
himself desired, in his father's house, to become also " as one of his 
hired servants." Hereupon, gathering all about him, they catched 
and kissed his hand by force : and then, kneeling around, they pro- 
miscuously petitioned for blessings on his head ; and, rising, retired 
in a pleasing passion of sobs and tears ; while the enraptured earl 
beheld all, with a mixture of such blissful sensations as he had 
never felt before. 

It now began to grow late ; and, after a short repast of some 
small matters, my lord proposed their retiring to bed. But, my 
friend, said he to Harry, you must content yourself with being my 
prisoner for the present ; you must lie in my chamber ; I will not 
trust my lamb from my side, for fear of its going once more astray. 
Ah, my lord ! cried Harry, there is no fear of that ; my heart is 
wholly your property, and you have thereby a sure hold of all that 
I am. 

The next morning Harry impatiently rose before the servants 
were stirring ; and unlocking the great door, and closing it softly 
after him, he went out exulting on his premeditated expedition. 
He reconnoitred and recollected the quondam scenes of his child- 
hood ; and, flying like a bird over the hedges and other obstacles, 
he made the shortest way to his still precious mammy's. 



342 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

When he approached the place of his infant endearments, he met 
his foster-father going forth to his field, with a solemn and melan- 
choly air, on his usual occupations. Harry instantly remembered 
the features, once so delightful, and springing to him, and catching 
at him, he kissed and clasped him repeatedly, and cried aloud My 
dear daddy Dobson ! how glad am 1 to see you once again ! How 
is my nurse, my dear nurse ? how is little Tommy, and little Kachel, 
and all our dear family ? 

The old man then respectfully withdrawing a space I don't 
know you, my sweet master, said he ; I never saw you before. In- 
deed, but you did ; many and many a time and oft, cried Harry, 
you carried me in your arms, almost the livelong day, and pressed 
and hushed me to sleep at night in your bosom. Don't you re- 
member your little Harry? don't you remember my two dogs? 
don't you remember my cock ? 

! exclaimed the good old man, I now believe that you are my 
child, the dearest child that ever was born ! But I never hoped to 
see him such a thing as you are ; I never thought to see such a 
glorious creature upon earth ! 

Here old Dobson returned Harry's caresses with a twofold force, 
and, blubbering all aloud, had like to have smothered him with the 
intenseness of his embraces. 

Bring me, bring me, cried Harry, to the sight of my dearest 
nurse ! I am all impatient to behold her. 

Not so fast ! said Gaffer Dobson I love my old loving Kate ; and 
should she find you out of a sudden, she would certainly die of joy. 
But I will bring you to her as a stranger, and so you may bring 
matters about. And indeed I fear that my own head is likely to 
be crazed by this business ; for I do not find that I am the same 
man that I was a while agone. I shall grow too proud, I doubt, 
and look down upon all my better neighbours. 

Goodman Dobson then conducted Harry to their ancient habita- 
tion. Nurse Dobson was just up, and preparing to comb the heads 
of her children, when they entered. 

Kate, says he, I have brought to you a young stranger, who says 
he can give you some account of your little Harry : who says he is 
still alive, notwithstanding all your frights, and will shortly pay a 
visit to some parts of this country ; and who knows then but that 
we, among others, may happen to set our eyes upon him, and that, 
I think, would be a great blessing, my Kate ! 

no, no, no ! exclaimed nurse, without deigning to cast her eyes 
on the stranger he is dead, he is gone from me these many years ! I 
once hoped to have his infant on my knee, and in my bosom ; but that 
hope is quite gone. Never, never, shall I behold my darling again ! 

Harry had seated himself just opposite to nurse ; when, looking 
up, she started, and stared eagerly in his face Don't impose upon 
me, William, says she. Tell me, tell me, at once ; mayhap this 
is my child ! Ah, against the world, the dimple in that smile is the 
dimple of my Harry ! 

Here Harry sprung up, and at one leap caught his rising nurse in 
his arms, crying Nurse, my dearest nurse, do I live to be pressed 
once more to your dear bosom ? 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 343 

But the poor woman breathed short, and could not get out a 
word. Twenty times she put him from her, and catched him to her 
again, gazing at him by intervals with a frantic affection. At 
length she cast herself back on the bench that was behind her, and, 
clapping her hands together, she gave a great shout, and burst into 
an hysterical passion of tears ; while Harry seated himself beside 
her, and, gently drawing her head to him, placed it fondly on his 
bosom, and mixed his tears with hers. 

This gush came very seasonably for our loving nurse's relief. 
She soon recovered her breath and her senses ; and, seeing some 
drops on her Harry's cheeks, she drew them in with her lips, crying 
Precious pearls be these ! I would not exchange one of them for 
the brightest diamond in the mines. 

Nurse, says Harry I stole away to come and see you while my 
father was asleep, or else I should not have had leave to stir from 
him a foot. But you both must promise to come and dine with me ; 
we will have a table by ourselves. And do you, my dear nurse, 
step to our house, and if my father should miss me, tell him I am 
gone into the town, and will be back with him before breakfast. 

Harry then stepped to the village, and, remembering Gaffer 
Truck's house, he went familiarly in, and inquired of the good 
woman how all the family was. Pray, how is my honest old Bar- 
tholomew? says he ; and how is your pretty daughter, Molly? and, 
above all, what is become of my old friend, Tom? The poor 
woman, all in amazement, cried A pretty Tom he is, forsooth, to 
be friend to such a sweet young gentleman as you are. But the 
truth is, that our Tom is at prentice to a barber at next door. 
Well, says Harry, when Gaffer Truck comes home, tell him that his 
old acquaintance, Harry Clinton, called to see him. 

Tom had just finished an operation on a neighbour as our hero 
entered. How are you, Tom ? said he, carelessly. Tom gaped, and 
stared, and gaped ; but answered not a word. Will you give me a 
cast of your office, Tom ? Ah ! that I will, master, as soon as you 
get a beard. Why, Tom, you are grown a huge hulking fellow 
since I saw you last ; will you step to yonder green,, and wrestle 
one fall with me ? No, no, master, I would not hurt you ; methinks 
I could throw a dozen of such fair-weather gentleman as you are, 
master. 

Harry instantly seized Tom by the breast with one hand, and by 
the shoulder with the other ; when Tom, feeling the hardness and 
hurt of his gripe, immediately exerted his powers, and grappled with 
his adversary. But Harry, giving him a slight foot, laid him on the 
broad of his back in the middle of his own floor ; but kept him 
with both hands from being hurt against the ground. 

I believe, said Tom, rising, you must certainly be the devil ; and 
come, as they say, to fling poor sinners in the shape of an angel of 
light. Ah Tom, Tom ! cried Harry, this is not the first struggle 
that you and I have had. Do you remember the bag of nuts, and 
poor blind Tommy ? have you forgot your old friend, little Harry 
Clinton? 

Blessed mercy ! exclaimed Tom, can you be my young lord, my 
heart's dear young master? I am indeed, answered Harry, your 



344 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

old acquaintance, my dear Tom ; your loving friend, Harry Clinton. 
And so saying, he took Tom about the neck, and kissed him very 
cordially. 

Tom, says Harry, I want you to take a walk with me : Tom in- 
stantly assented, and out they went. 

As they walked along, Harry began to grow sad. Tom, said he, 
do you know where my dear brother Dicky was buried? Yes, 
sir, said Tom, a great way off, in yonder churchyard below the 
town's-end. Do you know where the sexton lives, Tom? In a 
little white house, sir, just joining the yard. 

As soon as they arrived, Tom called out the sexton, and Harry, 

Eutting a guinea into his hand, ordered him directly to unlock the 
imily-vault. 

The man looked astonished, but obeyed in silence ; and Harry, as 
he entered, desired the sexton and Tom to wait at a distance, and 
promised to be with them by and by. 

He put to the door after him, just leaving light enough to dis- 
tinguish the recent deposits of the dead. 

O ! said he, as he advanced, thou true house of mourning, thou 
silent end of all men, how sad art thou to sense ! how sad to me 
above all, who bearest in thy dark bosom such precious and beloved 
relics ! 

Then casting himself on the coffins of my lady and Lord Richard, 
as they lay side by side, and clasping his arms about them as far 
as he could reach: O, he cried, my mother, my brother! my 
dearest brother, my dearest mother ! you are gone, you are gone 
from me, and you never knew the love that your son and brother 
had for you ! Ah, how did I flatter myself ! what happiness did I 
not propose, in attending, serving, and pleasing you; in doing 
thousands of tender, kindly, and endearing offices about you ! But 
you are snatched from me, my mother! you are snatched from 
me, my brother ! all my prospects are defeated and cut away for 
ever ! You will no more return to me, but I shall go to you ; and 

that I were laid with you this minute in this still and peace- 
ful mansion, where hopes and fears cease, and all are humble 
together ! 

Mean while Mr. Meekly had gone abroad on his morning's walk. 
He met nurse on her way to the mansion-house, and accosting her 
in a kind of triumph My good nurse, says he, we have blessed 
tidings for you ; your Harry, your hero, is come to the country. 

1 know it, sir, I know it, answered nurse ; it is but a little while 
ago that my babe left my bosom. 

Mr. Meekly then proceeded in order to join his young friend, 
inquiring of all he met which way Lord Harry went, till at last he 
was directed to the churchyard. There he found Tom and the 
sexton, who, on further question, silently pointed to the door of the 
family vault, that hung on the jar. 

Mr. Meekly felt himself affected, and withdrew to a greater 
distance, but still keeping his tearful eye on the sad mansion that 
now held the living with the dead. 

At length Harry came forth, drying his cheeks with his hand- 
kerchief. He assumed a constrained air of cheerfulness ; and, 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 346 

joining Tom and the sexton, observed that a great crowd was 
gathering in the town. 

Who are those, Tom? said he. I suppose, answered Tom, your 
honour's tenants and old acquaintances, who are getting together 
to welcome you to the country. If that is the case, Tom, we must 
go and salute them, and you shall introduce me, and tell me who 
is who ; for, though my heart is heavy laden, it must not give a 
discharge in full to gratitude and humanity. 

Mr. Meekly, perceiving that Harry was on his return, kept 
onward, aloof from him, but with an eye on his motions. 

By this time the crowd had sorted themselves ; the principals of 
the families into one group, the young men into another, and the 
fair maidens into another ; and, as Harry approached, they all set 
up a joint shout of triumph. 

Please your honour, says Tom, this is my father, and this is 
Gaffer Gubbins, and this Goodman Demster, and this Farmer 
Felster, and so on. 

Harry, with the lowliness of a washer of feet, would have kissed 
and embraced them all in turns; but, pressing about him, they 
seized a hand on either side, and eagerly kissed them, and also the 
skirts of his clothes all round. 

God bless your sweet face ! cried Goodman Demster ; who sees 
it in a morning can't fail, I think, of prospering the livelong day. 

When he came, in succession, to the companions of his infancy, 
as he kissed and shook hands with each in turn, some reminded 
him of his having beat them at boxing, others at wrestling, and all 
of his having played with them at prison-bars, leap-frog, shout 
the gate, and so forth. 

Mean while the girls panted, gazed at him, and longed to get 
him to themselves. Sir, says Tom, here is your old acquaintance, 
my sister, Molly ; there is not a lad in the town whom she is not 
able to toss, except your honour. Molly looked full of health as 
Hebe, and rosy as the May, and Harry caught her about the neck, 
and kissed her very cordially. Do you remember me, Molly ? O, 
answered Molly, I shall never forget, since your honour's lordship 
and I used to wrestle every day behind our house. 

The rest of the girls now pressed for their share of Harry, and 
it was with difficulty that he divided himself with any satisfactory 
equality among them, as they all kissed him so close, and seemed 
so loth to part. 

At length Harry's watch reminded him that it was time to 
attend his father, and as he parted they shouted after him Long 
life, and health, and honours to our townsman, our own boy, our 
own dear, sweet child ! 

In the mean time Mr. Meekly had returned home, with his heart 
full of tidings, to the earl. When Harry arrived breakfast was on 
table, and he perceived that his father had been in tears ; but no 
notice was taken of the affair at the charnel-house on either part. 

When breakfast was over, Harry called in John. Mr. John, 
says he, can you tell me how many families there are in this village 
of yours? Twenty-five families exactly, my lord. Then Harry 
turned to his father and said If your lordship will be pleased to 



346 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

lend me five hundred guineas for the present, I will pay you very 
honestly the hour that my uncle comes to the country. Why, 
sirrah ! cried the earl pleasantly, what right has your uncle to pay 
your debts, especially to such a great amount as you speak of? 
O, my lord! answered Harry, I have already squandered away 
above fifty thousand pounds of his money ; and this is but a trifle, 
which I am sure I may very safely add to the rest. 

Here the earl looked truly astonished. Fifty thousand pounds ! 
he exclaimed,^ Impossible, Harry! Why, you had neither such 
ponds nor lakes as mine in London, wherein you might make ducks 
and drakes of them. How in the world could you contrive it? 
Where did you dispose of them ? 

In hospitals and in prisons, my father, answered Harry. In 
streets and highways, among the wretched and indigent, supplying 
eyes to the blind, and limbs to the lame, and cheerfulness to the 
sorrowful and broken of heart ; for such were my uncle's orders. 

Let me go, let me go from this place, my lord ! cried Meekly ; 
this boy will absolutely kill me if I stay any longer. He over- 
powers, he suffocates me with the weight of his sentiments. 

Well, Harry, said the earl, go to my desk ; here is the key of 
the drawer on the left hand, and I make you a present of the key 
and the contents ; perhaps you may find there nearly as much as 
will answer your present exigencies. 

Harry went, and, opening the drawer, was astonished to see 
it quite full of gold. However, he took no more than just the sum 
proposed ; and, returning to his father, said What shall I do, 
my lord, with that vast heap of money? Why, you extravagant 
rogue, replied the earl, there is not as much in it as will pay the 
debt you have contracted with one man! 0, cried Harry, I am 
quite easy upon that score ! I will never affront my uncle by the 
offer of a penny. And don't you think, said the earl, that we have 
got poor among us in the country as well as you have in the city, 
Harry? I believe you may have got some, my lord; but then 
I am much more difficult than you may think, in the objects on 
whom I would choose to confer charity. I look upon the money 
amassed by the wealthy, to have been already extracted from the 
earnings of the poor; the poor farmer, the poor craftsman, the 
hard-handed peasant, and the day labourer, whose seven children 
perhaps subsist on the milk of a couple of cows. Wherefore, the 
objects on whom we bestow these gatherings ought at least to be 
something poorer, and more worthy of compassion than those from 
whom the money was exacted. So saying, he stepped out. 

Amazing boy ! cried Mr. Meekly ; how new, and yet how just 
was that observation ! I am, cried the earl, as it were in a kind 
of delicious dream, and can scarce yet believe myself so blessed as 
to be the father of such a child ! 

In the mean time Harry had called John aside. Mr. John, says 
he, here are five hundred guineas. Be pleased to step and distribute 
them by twenty guineas to each of the families in the village. 
I would save you the trouble, and give them myself, but that for 
the present my heart turns with disgust from their thanks and 
their honours. Tell them, that this is a token hi memory of my 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 347 

dear brother, to keep them in mind of him. Tell them further, 
that I will have no carousals, no rejoicing, on account of my 
arrival ; and that it would please me infinitely better, if my return 
would bring their late losses to their remembrance, and set them 
all in tears and lamentations. 

My lord now proposed a saunter in the park, in order to procure 
an appetite for dinner. Accordingly the gate was ordered to be 
unlocked, and they entered on a gravel walk, that was walled in 
on the left hand, and paled in on the right, along the verge of five 
canals, that fell successively in cascades, the one into the other. 

As they talked and walked along, they met with a six-barred 
gate that directly thwarted their passage; and my lord reached 
his hand through the rails for the key, that the keeper had left in 
the lock on the inside, but he could not get at it. We are all at a 
full stop now, said he, unless Harry could make a shift to climb 
over the gate : but no, do not, my dear ; your foot might happen 
to slip between the rails, and hurt you. I will obey your lordship, 
answered Harry ; I will not venture a foot upon one of them. So 
saying, he catched at the upmost bar with his left hand, and 
throwing himself slightly over, opened the gate for his companions. 
The earl and Mr. Meekly stood mute in utter astonishment. At 
length the earl cried Child, you must surely be of more than mortal 
mould, or else you have a familiar spirit that conveys you through 
the air. Harry smiled, but was silent. 

On their return, John called his master aside, and told him of 
his due distribution of Harry's bounty to the villagers. But my 
lord, says he, when I went down I found them all very busily 
employed in preparing bonfires and illuminations in honour of my 
young lord. This, however, I was obliged to countermand by his 
special order ; and it has greatly mortified all your poor people. 
Well, well, said the earl, it cannot be helped for the present ; we 
must not dare to offend our Harry at any rate; and so those 
matters of rejoicing may rest in reserve till the arrival of my 
brother. 

Soon afterwards our hero's fosterers came, decked out in their 
best attire ; and Harry ordered a side-table to be covered for him 
and them, but my lord insisted on their dining all together. 

Harry placed himself very lovingly between them at table, that 
he might help them, and prevail upon their bashfulness to eat. 

When the repast was nearly over, nurse inquired after the little 
beggar-boy, whose absence she imagined had caused the elopement 
of her darling. He is come to great fortune, answered Harry ; he 
has found his father and mother, and is heir to a large estate. 
Harry then told the manner in which Ned had been discovered, 
and they were all highly pleased and affected by the relation. 

But, says Harry, what has become of my sister Nelly, on whose 
milk I was suckled? and what has become of my little brother 
Tommy, who was but two years younger than myself? They are 
both dead, my precious; but God has been pleased to give me 
others in their room. Well, nurse, I find we must all die, and, 
some time or other, that will be a great grief to one of us, which- 
ever of us shall happen to outlive the other. I am satisfied to die 



348 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

once, said nurse, but never let me hear again of your dying, my 
angel : I can't suffer the thought, she cried, and burst forth into 
tears I could not bear, I could not bear to die a thousand deaths 
in the death of my Harry ! 

But, said Harry, in order to divert her passion, you have not yet 
inquired after the man with the beard. the old rogue ! exclaimed 
nurse, I can't think of him with patience. Ay, but you must know 
that that same old rogue is my own darling uncle, an own and only 
dear brother to my own dear father here. If that is the case, 
said nurse, I don't wonder he should so greatly yearn after you ; 
and indeed I would rather wonder if all the world did not yearn 
and long after you, my love ! 

And now, nurse, to show you how much you are obliged to this 
same darling uncle, he has ordered me to make you a present of 
five hundred pounds, in payment, as he says, of the grief he 
has cost you. And take no heed for your children, I will take 
that care upon myself; for this same dear uncle has made me 
a gift of the lands, and house, and plate, and furniture, that he 
has in this town, and so you see I am well able to provide for 
you all. 

Here my lord cast an eye of tender jealousy upon Harry. 

I perceive, my son, said he, that your uncle is your only trust, 
the only dependence that you choose to have upon earth. Harry, 
with a glance of his eye, instantly caught the meaning of the eye 
of his father, and throwing himself at his feet O pardon, my 
lord ! he cried ; pray, pardon the overflowings of a grateful and 
simple heart! My uncle is my property; but I am yours, my 
father, to be disposed of in life and in death, at your pleasure. 
I do trust, I do depend upon you, my father ; and you have already 
overpowered me with the weight of your affections. 

My lord's eyes then glistened, and raising his son, and taking 
him fondly to his bosom I believe I have been wrong, my love, 
said he, and hereafter I shall always think so, rather than think 
any thing amiss in my Harry. But tell me, my dear, and tell me 
sincerely; you speak of your uncle as one of the richest and 
greatest men upon earth as a prince as an emperor enabled to 
give away fortunes and provinces at pleasure. 

And he is, my lord, cried Harry he is greater than any prince 
or emperor upon earth. To speak only of his temporal wealth 
or power the most inconsiderable part of his value he can do, 
as I may say, what he pleases in England. The ministry are at his 
beck they profess themselves his servants ; and even his majesty 
acknowledges himself deeply his debtor, and owes him, I daresay, 
half a million. 

And yet this is the man, exclaimed the earl (turning an eye of 
penitence on Mr. Meekly) this is the man, as I told you, my friend, 
on whom I looked down with such provoking contempt whom I 
treated with such unpardonable insolence and ignominy ! 

My lord then inquired concerning the personal adventures of our 
hero in London, the account of which would have been more 
entertaining, had not Harry suppressed throughout his narration 
whatever he apprehended might tend to his own honour. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 



349 



As soon as the fosterers had taken their leave, my lord proposed 
to his remaining guests a walk in the gardens, and after a few 
turns they sat down in a rural arbour, that was interwoven all 
about with jessamine and honeysuckle. 

Mr. Meekly, said the earl, I have often longed to hear the 
particulars of your life ; and how you came to live by faith, and 
not by sight, and to hold your conversation in heaven, as you do 
at this day. 

I can soon obey your lordship, answered Meekly ; for my story 
is very short and very simple, and no way adorned with uncommon 
incidents. 

My mother died a few hours after I was born. My father did not 
survive her two years ; and I fell to the care of my only kinsman 
an uncle by my father's side. 

My uncle was an old bachelor, and though he was of a cold 
temper, and had no tenderness for any one, he yet spared no cost 
in my education. He sent me to Eton school, and from thence 
to Cambridge, where I remained till I took my degrees. I then 
went to London, bought a sword and sword-knot, and commenced 
fine gentleman. 

Though my head had been duly stored by my tutors in the 
rudiments of our religion, my heart had not yet felt any of its 
precepts, and I conceived that to go regularly to church, receive 
the sacrament, confess myself a miserable sinner, and avoid gross 
vices, was the sum of Christianity. I therefore entered without 
scruple into all the fashionable pleasures and vanities of the age ; 
and I held that to pardon an affront would have been one of the 
deadly sins in a gentleman Christian. 

One day, at St. James's coffee-house, Colonel Standard and 
another gentleman engaged at backgammon for five hundred 
guineas ; and the stake was so considerable, and both parties 
celebrated for their skill in the game, we all crowded about them 
to see the issue. 

I happened to be next behind the colonel's chair, and others 
pressed behind me, eagerly bending and looking over my shoulders. 
At length he began to fret as the game was drawing to a close, 
and going against him. Pray, gentlemen, he would cry, don't 
bear upon me so ; for heaven's sake keep off you will make me 
lose the game ! Hereupon I did my utmost to bear back from 
him, but the company pressed me forward in spite of all I could 
do ; till the colonel, giving an unhappily decisive cast, turned about 
in fury, and spat directly in my face. 

Indignation gave me sudden and unusual strength, and, casting 
all off who had borne upon me, I instantly drew my sword, and 
ran the colonel through the body. The company cried out that all 
was fair, and, opening a window for me, they urged me to escape. 
Accordingly I got off, rode post to Dover, and there embarked 
for France. 

The colonel, God be praised ! did not die of his wound. He lay 
under the hands of the surgeons for above seven months, then 
recovered, and went to join his regiment in Flanders. 

Of this my uncle sent me advice, telling me at the same time 



350 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

that I might return with safety. Yes, thought I, with safety to my 
life, but with death to my honour ! I have taken revenge, indeed, 
but not satisfaction; the colonel must be compelled to make me 
personal reparation for the affront which he dared to put upon me. 
His recovery has again dashed the spittle into my face ; and I will 
pursue him through the world till it is wiped from the observation 
and remembrance of all men. 

With this deadly determination I went post from Paris to 
Flanders, and traced the colonel from place to place, till I found 
him in a village on the road to Amsterdam. 

I believe, sir, said I bluntly, you may not remember me, for our 
acquaintance was sudden, and of very short duration. I am the 
man in whose face you spit publicly at St. James's coffee-house. 
Then, sir, said he, I am scarce yet recovered of the cause which 
you gave me to bear you always in mind ; but pray, what may your 
commands be with me for the present ? I am come to demand a 
remedy at your hands for the wound which you gave my honour, 
and which otherwise must remain for ever incurable. Ah ! he 
cried, no man ever exacted so severe a satisfaction as you have 
already taken ; what, then, may be the nature of the further repa- 
ration that you are pleased to require ? Either to ask my pardon, 
or fight me within this hour. 

This is very hard upon me, indeed, replied the colonel; the 
honour of my commission will not allow me to beg pardon of any 
man, at least in order to avoid a combat ; so, sir, if you insist upon 
it, I must obey your summons, though very reluctantly, I confess. 
Then, sir, said I, meet me in half an hour, with your pistols and 
sword, behind yonder hill. 

The colonel was punctual to the appointment. We both grasped 
a pistol at the distance of twenty paces, and advancing step by 
step, cried Fire ! Fire ! Each seemed determined to make sure 
of his adversary, till, coming within arm's length, I fired directly 
in his face, but the ball passed through his hat, and only grazed 
the skin of his left temple. 

The colonel then took his pistol into his left hand, and reaching 
out his right to me, with a smile of great complacence I think, 
sir, said he, I may now ask your pardon with honour; and to 
convince you that I did not come to engage you in malice, be 
pleased to examine my arms, you will not find so much as a grain 
of powder in the one or the other. 

Ah, colonel ! I then exclaimed, I acknowledge you my conqueror 
both in honour and humanity. Had I been so unhappy as to 
kill you, and find your arms unloaded, I should certainly have 
done you justice by shooting myself through the head. But why 
did I pursue you from kingdom to kingdom? why was I unappeased 
by all the blood that I shed ? Was it from any malignity of heart 
toward you ? By no means. But while I lamented the misery 
I had already occasioned you, I was impelled to finish your 
destruction by a barbarian world, or rather, by the bloody pre- 
scribers of custom, whose censure I dreaded worse than death, or 
even futurity. Courage, colonel, incites soldiers to fight for their 
country ; but it is cowardice alone that drives duellists together. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 351 

For three affectionate days I remained with my late enemy, 
but now warm friend. He then was obliged to return to quarters ; 
and we parted with a regret much exceeding the hostility with 
which we had met. 

On the departure of the colonel I went to Amsterdam, from 
whence I drew upon my uncle to the amount of 700. For I re- 
solved, before my return, to take a tour through the seven provinces, 
though I had gone for a very different purpose. 

During nine months I resided, or journeyed from place to place, 
among that people. Holland is, unquestionably, the wealthiest, 
the busiest, and most populous state upon earth. Not a hand is 
unemployed, not a foot of ground unoccupied; and, for a long 
time, I ascribed their extraordinary prosperity to an industry 
and ingenuity peculiar to them alone. But, on further observation, 
I discovered the true source as well of their industry as their 
opulence, and am persuaded that any nation bordering on the ocean 
might derive the like prosperity from the same spring. 

Not, my lord, that I think opulence a real benefit to a people, 
for " man's life consisteth not in the abundance of his possessions." 
But I look upon industry, the natural parent of opulence, to be as 
well a blessing as a duty to man, from the time that he was 
appointed to "earn his bread in the sweat of his brow." Many 
mental virtues also, as well as temporal benefits, follow in the 
train of industry; it makes men healthful, brave, honest, social, 
and pacific. He who labours hard to acquire a property, will 
struggle hard to preserve it, and exercise will make him active, 
robust, and able for the purpose. As the man of industry hath, 
in himself, a living fund of competence for his own occasions, he 
will be the less tempted to plunder or prey upon others; and 
the poignant sense and apprehension of being deprived of a 
property so justly acquired, will give him the nicer and stronger 
sense of such an injury to others. Industry further incites to com- 
merce and good neighbourhood, in order to dispose of mutual 
redundancies for the supply of mutual wants. And lastly, it 
delighteth in peace, that its time and its labours may not be inter- 
rupted, nor the fruits thereof endangered, by rapine and invasion ; 
and all this may be said of nations as well as of men. 

Your observations, said the earl, are perfectly just ; the works of 
industry are, unquestionably, the works of peace, and tend to open 
the avenues wherein the virtues may walk. But how to incite 
men or nations to industry, that is the question. The finer arts, 
we see, may be encouraged and promoted by national bounties, as 
now in France ; but there is no inciting the bulk of the people to 
industry in like manner; that would be as though the public 
should grant a bounty to itself. Nations certainly differ from 
nations as man differs from man ; some are by nature industrious 
and ingenious, such as China and Holland it is their propensity, 
their talent ; while others, like Ireland, are naturally lazy and 
listless, and therefore remain in well-merited indigence. <>> 

You have greatly mistaken this point indeed, my lord. China 
and Holland are industrious and ingenious, because, whether it 
were through good hap or good policy, they hit upon the only 



352 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

method whereby industry and ingenuity could be duly promoted. 
Whereas Great Britain and Ireland are totally ignorant of the said 
method to this day, though both of them highly capable of having 
it put in execution. 

You surprise me, Mr. Meekly, said the earl ; a method to make 
men ingenious a method to make them industrious! how can 
that be? 

Experience has proved it to be even so, my lord ; for where a 
method may be found for encouraging and promoting ingenuity 
and industry, that method will, infallibly, make people become both 
ingenious and industrious. No man will work, my lord, without 
some hire, or wages, or return for his labour ; neither will any who 
are in want refuse to work, when assured of a due reward for 
so doing. 

When the good householder walked out to the market-place, and 
found labourers loitering there when it was now toward evening, 
he asked them, " Why stand ye here all the day idle ? " And when 
they answered, "Because no man hath hired or given us employ- 
ment," he took this for a sufficient apology; he had compassion 
upon them, and he supplied them with the divinest of all kinds of 
charity, the means of earning their own bread. 

Now, throughout China and Holland, no person is in want, 
because all are hired, all employed, the young and the old, the 
lame and the blind ; and all find a ready sale, Avithout anxiety or 
loss of time, without travel or delay, for products of their industry. 
Throughout Great Britain, on the contrary, nineteen in twenty are 
in real want ; and in Ireland, as I am told, forty-nine in fifty are 
nearly in a state of beggary, merely for want of being employed 
for want of encouragement to labour. 

Permit me, then, to explain to your lordship, how some men and 
some nations come to be encouraged to industry, and others to be 
discouraged, or hi a manner prohibited, from it. 

Different men are endowed with different talents and powers, 
insufficient in many respects, though superfluous in others, to their 
own occasions. Different countries are also endowed with different 
productions, superfluous in many respects to the natives, though 
necessary or desirable for the well-being of foreigners. 

Now, these alternate qualities of deficience and abundance, at 
once invite and impel all men, and all countries, to claim and to 
impart that reciprocal assistance which is denominated commerce. 
Each gives what he can spare, each receives what he wants ; the 
exchange is to the mutual advantage of all parties. And, could a 
method be found out for encouraging manufacturers to persevere 
in their industry, and improve in their arts, by a ready conveyance 
and sale of all their redundancies, neither want nor superfluity 
could find place upon earth. 

All this is quite clear and self-evident, Mr. Meekly ; but how to 
procure this ready sale is the question. 

Your Iqrdship must allow that the way to procure it would be 
to bring barterers and commuters, buyers and sellers, all who 
mutually want and mutually abound, together. For this is the end 
and purpose of every market upon earth. 



TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 353 

Now, in Great Britain and Ireland, and in all continents or inland 
countries, the several deserts, mountains, marshes, and other 
obstacles, with the difficulty, danger, and toil of travel, and the 
great expense of land carriage, have utterly precluded all com- 
merce and communication to any considerable extent. Insomuch 
that it would be easier and cheaper to convey a commodity of any 
burden to either of the Indies, than from many parts of Great 
Britain and Ireland to others, by land. 

While God appears to separate the several nations of the earth 
from each other, by the intervention of seas, lakes, and rivers, he 
hath actually and intimately united them thereby. 

Water serves to the art and navigation of man, as air serves to 
the wings of the feathered species. It is the easy and speedy 
medium, the ready conduit and conveyance, whereby all redun- 
dancies are carried, and all wants supplied. It makes man, as it 
were, a denizen of every country on the globe. It shortens every 
distance, and ties the remotest regions together. It carries and 
communicates the knowledge, the virtues, manufactures, and arts 
of each climate to all. It gives new springs and motives to 
industry, action, and invention. It gives a general importance 
to the meanest manufacturer. It gives to each man an interest in 
whatever is done upon earth, the productions of every region, and 
the tribute of every nation. 

Now, China and Holland are the only countries upon earth who 
have considerably availed themselves of this capital benefit of water 
carriage, or water commerce ; and therefore they are, incomparably, 
the most populous and most prosperous of all countries in the 
world. 

China, as your lordship knows, extends from under the Tropic of 
Cancer to about thirteen hundred miles north, and thereby contains 
within itself all the variety of climate, and degrees of heat and 
cold, that are requisite for the sundry productions upon earth. 
Inspired by some forecast or sagacity, not imparted to the rest 
of mankind, they cut and quartered this vast continent by as many 
navigable canals as answer to the ducts and veins in the human 
body for the dispensation of life and nourishment. These canals 
serve as links or chords to the grand community of the Chinese ; 
they bind region to region, house to house, and man to man, and 
hold the whole as one system or family together. This great king- 
dom is thereby become as one city, and the canals as so many 
streets, through which plenty is diffused by commerce to every 
part. If any art or useful invention commences or receives im- 
provement in any place, it is immediately conveyed to every place 
for imitation and promotion. No portion of this wide continent 
lies waste or uncultivated, because the canals are as so many 
markets brought to every man's door, and, by the perpetual 
demand of whatever is saleable, incite the natives to exert them- 
selves in providing all the redundancies they possibly can, that 
they may derive wealth to themselves by supplying the respective 
wants of others. Thus, throughout the expanded dominion of 
China, nothing is wasted, nothing lost, nothing superfluous, nothing 
wanting. All are employed, active, industrious, ingenious, and 

A a 



354 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

thriving. Their canals are intimately to them what seas are 
diffusively to the rest of the globe. They are thereby become as 
a world within themselves, sufficient to their own happiness and 
occasions. They never change their manners or policy. They 
never enterprise war against others. And China is affirmed at this 
day to contain one hundred and twenty millions of prospering 
inhabitants. 

The Dutch also, about a hundred and forty years ago, followed 
the example of the Chinese. Their country is now become as one 
great and extended metropolis to the universe ; and through their 
canals, as though paved and spacious high-ways, the world resorts 
with all its wealth. So encouraged and so incited, neither the 
lame, nor the blind, nor the maimed, sit unemployed. Every child 
is taught its trade from the moment it can apply its little hands to 
a regular motion, and they bring to the parents vast sums, in lieu 
of an infinite variety of toys and trifles that are dispersed among 
the idle of the other children of men. For, barterers and com- 
muters, buyers and sellers, manufacturers and merchants, like 
Pyramus and Thisbe, want nothing but the removal of envious 
obstacles to meet and to multiply a similar progeny. 

From what has been premised, my lord, it is most evident that 
industry is the parent of the wealth of this world. That no man's 
industry is sufficient to his own occasions. That the mutual 
assistance denominated commerce is, therefore, necessary to the 
well-being of all people. That the reciprocal advantage of this 
commerce consists in supplying mutual wants with mutual redun- 
dancies. That this commerce, however, cannot be carried on 
without a medium for the conveyance of such supplies. That such 
a medium by land, even where it is practicable, is tedious, toilsome, 
expensive, extremely discouraging, and cannot be pushed to any 
considerable extent or effect. That God, however, hath opened 
for the purpose an easy, speedy, and universal medium of seas, lakes, 
and rivers, part of which he hath left unnavigable, that man might 
finish by art what nature had prepared, and contribute in some 
degree to his own advantages. That, accordingly, China and 
Holland (and France of late) have pursued the path so divinely 
appointed, and that power, wealth, and prosperity have flowed in 
upon them, in proportion as they have opened the medium of 
water-carriage for their reception. And that causes which have 
produced their concomitant effects, without variation, from the 
earliest ages to the present period, must be presumed to produce 
the like effects through all countries and ages to the end of time. 

I protest, Mr. Meekly, exclaimed the earl, you have pushed this 
matter into mathematical demonstration. What a happy what a 
glorious prospect now opens to my view ! How easily, how speedily, 
how profitably, might this method be put in execution throughout 
the earth ! There is no deficiency of rivers or collateral streams for 
the purpose. The sinking into the earth would give vent to new 
springs, and extract plenty of water in all places for an inland 
navigation ; and half the number of hands that perish through war 
and want, might be peacefully and plentifully employed in ac- 
complishing this weal of mankind. Famine and depredation would 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 355 

then cease. Nation would no longer rise up against nation, nor 
man against man. The earth, by culture, would soon become 
capable of sustaining tenfold the number of its present inhabitants. 
We should no more be tempted to push each other from existence. 
We should find ourselves mutually interested in preserving and 
multiplying the lives of all from whose labours we were to derive 
such advantages. All would be plenty, all peace and benevolence 
throughout the globe. The number of inhabitants, instead of being 
a burden, would then become the riches of every climate. All 
hands would be set to work, when thus assured of a purchaser for 
every effect of labour. The buzz of wheels, reels, and looms ; the 
sound of hammers, files, and forges ; with the shouts of vintage and 
the songs of harvest, would be heard in all lands! I am quite 
astonished that a work, so full of benefit and blessing to the 
universe of man, is not already commenced, advanced, and complete. 

How comes this to pass, Mr. Meekly? have you yet mentioned 
this matter to any of our great ones ? 

I have, my lord, to several. They confessed themselves convinced 
of the utility of the scheme ; and, could each of them be assured 
of engrossing to himself the most considerable part of the profits 
that would thereby accrue to the public, the work would instantly 
be begun, and would shortly be perfected. For, such is the nature 
of unregenerate man, that he grudges to others any portion of those 
goods which he so eagerly craves and grapples after for himself. 
He would hedge in the air, and make a property of the light. 
In proportion as he sees his neighbours in comparative want, he 
exults in the accumulation of imaginary wealth. But should he 
deem them, in a measure, more prosperous than himself, he sighs 
at his inmost soul, and grows wretched and repining. 

I protest, cried the earl, were I young, I would to-morrow 
morning, at my own cost, set about this great work of national, 
or rather of universal, beneficence. But my Harry here has youth 
enough, with an abundance of benevolence also for the purpose ; 
and I recommend it to him as the greatest of charities, a charity 
to Great Britain, a charity to mankind. What would you think, 
my lord, said Harry, of my expending your whole drawer of gold 
upon this business ? Great as it is, it would be but a small matter 
toward the value of purchasing peace upon earth, and the sons 
of peace upon earth will be likeliest to be the sons of love in 
heaven. So that we cannot lay out our money to better advantage 
in any purchase for the benefit of the brothers of our own frailty. 

Alas, my love ! rejoined Mr. Meekly, though you were master 
of half the wealth of the people of England, and were willing to 
employ the whole for their emolument in this way, the people 
themselves would oppose you in every step you should take. Some 
would be too proud to accept a benefit from you. Others would 
tell you that no man should dare to violate their property with 
either spade or pickaxe; and others would indict you even for 
treading on their grounds. Nothing less than the act of the whole 
legislature, to whom the people have committed their confluent 
powers, can avail for an undertaking of such national import. 

Then, my dear Mr. Meekly, be pleased to let me have in writing 

Au2 



356 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

what you have already set forth on this head ; and if I live to 
come to the lower house of parliament, I will bend all my powers 
to this capital charity. And, if no other oratory will avail for 
the purpose, I will bribe the members with a hundred thousand 
pounds, and corrupt them, if possible, into one act of patriotism.* 
But, Mr. Meekly, I interrupt you. Pray, proceed in your narrative. 

On my return to Amsterdam, I grew affected one evening 
in a manner I had never before experienced. I did not feel myself 
any way sick or in pain, and yet I wished to exchange my sensa- 
tions for any other species of malady. I was wholly pervaded by 
a gloomy despondence. I looked abroad for comfort, but it was 
nowhere to be found; every object gave disgust to my discon- 
tented imagination. I secretly inquired of my soul, if riches, 
honours, dignities, if the empire of the world would restore her 
to joy ? but she turned from them, and said All these things are 
strangers and aliens to my peace. Alas ! said T, tell me then where 
your peace may be found ? I know not, she replied ; but I feel 
that I am wretched. 

For three clays I continued under this oppression of spirit ; and 
on the third night an increasing horror of deep and heavy darkness 
fell upon me. All hope died within me, and misery seemed to 
open a gulf of ever-deepening destruction in my soul. I lay all 
night bathed in drops of unutterable anguish. I wished and 
struggled to arise and change my situation; but I felt that my 
mind was its own place, and its own hell, from whence there was 
no removal, no possible escape. 

I now concluded that, somehow, I must have sinned beyond the 
measure of all sinners, since my damnation was deeper than that 
of any other. I therefore turned toward God and wished to repent ; 
but, as I did not feel conviction for the sins of which I accused 
myself, no place for repentance was found in my soul. 

Tremendous author ! I cried, I find that thou canst sink and slay 
at pleasure ; but canst thou not also raise up and make alive ? If 
all things have their existence in thee, O God ! is it not near and 
easy unto thee to impart to us some sensation of thine own exist- 
ence also? some sensation of thine own peace, the sense that it 
is thou alone who canst be our sustainer? Save me, Jesus, save 
me from the hell of mine own nature! Save me, thou Son of 
David ! save me from myself ! 

While I thus prayed in an agony, my whole frame was suddenly 
overpowered, and sunk, as I suppose, into a state of insensibility, 
till the following day was far advanced. At length I perceived 
that I still existed. 

I dreamed that I found myself in a deep and noisome dungeon, 

It is observable that, within ten years subsequent to the period of the above promise, 
the inland navigation of England commenced. Since which time, the river Isis has 
been made navigable from Oxford to Cricklade in Wiltshire, and to Abingdon in 
Berkshire. The river Avon in Warwickshire, from Stratford to the Severn. The Avon 
from Bath to Bristol. The Medway, from Maidstone in Kent to Tunbridge. The Lug 
in Herefordshire, to the Wey. The Lea, from Ware to the Thames. The river Kennet 
in Berkshire, to the Thames at Reading, containing twenty locks in seventeen miles. 
The river Aire in Yorkshire containing sixteen locks, whose tolls are now valued at about 
10,0(10 yearly. Beside the Stroud, the Nen, and the Wey, with many others now in 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 357 

without a single ray that might even suffice to show me the horrors 
of my situation. I attempted to rise and grope about, but per- 
ceived that I was tied and fastened down to earth by a number 
and variety of bands and fetters. 

At length a sudden light appeared, and diffused itself throughout 
the darkness of my mansion ; when, looking up, I observed that 
the keeper of my prison had entered, the doors being yet locked. 
His head, as I thought, was bound about with a tiara, from whence 
the glory arose that shone around me. In the coronet, instead 
of gems, were inserted a number of thorns, whose points streamed 
with incessant and insufferable brightness; and on the golden 
circlet was engraved in all languages, Jesus of Nazareth, King 
of the Jews. 

Immediately my shackles loosened and fell away of themselves, 
and I wished to cast my whole existence under the feet of my 
Lord, but was so overcome with ecstasy that I could not rise ; 
when, looking upon me with a smile of ineffable graciousness, he 
approached and took me by the hand, and at the contact I sprung 
up a great height in my bed, and awoke to sensations of inde- 
scribable blessedness. 

You are come, then, my Lord, my salvation ! you are come, my 
Master! I cried; and I will cling inseparably to you. Never, O 
never more will I suffer you to depart ! Ah, I have felt, severely felt, 
what it is to be without you ! for in your absence, though but for 
a moment, lies the essence of hell and misery; but in your pre- 
sence, my beloved, in your presence is peace unspeakable, and 
joy for evermore ! 

From that day my nature became, as it were, wholly inverted. 
All the honours and wordly respects for which I formerly risked 
my life, were now my aversion ; and I turned from carnal in- 
dulgence and sensuality with loathing. 

Nothing could now affront, nothing could now offend me. As 
I totally despised myself, so I wished, after the process of my 
divine Master, to be despised and rejected of men. This made 
all others, the very meanest of human creatures, respectable unto 
me. Even in reprobates methought I discerned some unerased 
traces of the image and superscription of my God, and I bowed 
down before it. 

If any attempted to injure or defraud me of my property, I 
yielded it without variance, and thereby I found myself cordially 
enriched. 

I grew weary of my own will and of my own liberty, and I 
earnestly prayed my Lord that he would rid me of them, and be 
instead thereof a controlling principle within me, ever influencing 
and directing me according to his own pleasure. Turn me, Jesus, 
Master! turn me! I crie -I, from all the evil propensities of my 
own evil nature ; though thou shouldst turn me, as thou didst 
Sennacherib, with thy ruling rein on my neck, thy bridle in my 
mouth, and thy hook in my nose ! Take my heart and affections 
captive, and into thine own divine guidance ! Compel me into all 
the ways and all the works of thy commandments, till thy yoke 
shall become easy, and thy burden light and delightsome; till I 



358 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

shall move, as down a descent, wherever thy goodness would guide 
me ; till I shall feelingly find and know that all thy ways are 
ways of pleasantness, and all thy paths the paths of peace ! 

This, my Lord, may look somewhat like boasting ; but it boast- 
eth of nought excepting Christ crucified, or rather arisen in me, 
whereby all worldly matters are crucified unto me. 

Within about a fortnight after my conversion I received a letter 
from a friend in London, informing me that my old uncle had 
secretly married a young creature who was lately delivered of 
a son ; that he now openly acknowledged her for his wife ; and 
that this, as he feared, did not bode me any good. 

At another time these tidings would have greatly alarmed me ; 
but I was now equally resigned and ; ndifferent to all events. 

In a few days after, as I was stepping out of my lodgings, I 
was arrested, in the name and at the suit of my uncle, for ,700, 
the precise sum for which I had drawn upon him about nine 
months before. All the consequences of this caption immediately 
occurred to me. I perceived that my uncle intended to deprive 
me of my patrimony in favour of his new family ; and, as I had 
no means for opposing his machinations save what lay in his own 
hands, I concluded that a jail was to be my portion for life. 
Wherefore I lifted up my heart, and said within myself To 
prison and to death give me cheerfully to follow thee, thou who 
in death art the life and resurrection ! 

My spirit had no sooner uttered this short ejaculation, than I 
felt such a weight of peace descending upon me, that my heart 
leaped within me at the prospect of suffering, and I would not 
have exchanged my prison for a throne. 

While I quietly walked with the officers toward the place of 
my durance, they came to a great tavern, where they entered, 
and proposed to regale themselves at my expense. 

Mean time a Dutch merchant, of great eminence, happened to 
be with his lady in the principal room, and, hearing a bustle in 
the house, he inquired the cause, and sent for the chief bailiff. 

Soon after I was conducted into their presence. They both 
rose as I entered, and the gentleman approaching took me fa- 
miliarly by the hand and said in Dutch Mr. Meekly, I hear 
you are in distress, and that is sufficient to recommend you to 
my services; but your appearance exacts something more from 
my inclinations. Pray, let me know wherein and how far it may be 
requisite for you to command me. 

I muttered somewhat, as I suppose, inarticulately toward an 
answer ; for I protest, my lord, I was so struck, so awed, so con- 
founded by his presence, that I was lost for the time to the con- 
sideration of my own affairs. Mean while he placed me at table, 
just opposite to the heavenly vision of his bride, and then went and 
resumed his seat beside her ; while I, gazing in silence and utmost 
wonder, recollected those lines of Milton, where, speaking of Adam 
and Eve, he calls them 

"The loveliest pair 

That ever since in love's embraces met : 
Adam, the goodliest man of men since born 
His sons : the faireat of her daughters, Eve." 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 359 

The gentleman perceived my astonishment, and, graciously smil- 
ing, again asked me what sum was requisite to extricate me from 
my present difficulty ? Ah, sir ! said I, it is a sum that far exceeds 
all human bounty ; and, indeed, I would not accept the obligation 
from any man unless I were assured of being shortly in a capacity 
to reimburse him, of which I see no likelihood, I think no pos- 
sibility. 

Here I told him, in a few words, how my father had left me an 
infant at the disposal of my uncle, who had now put me under 
arrest for 700, which, some time since, he had freely remitted to 
me, as in my own right. 

I see, said the gentleman, your uncle is a villain, and means, by 
casting you into prison in a strange and distant place, to deprive 
you of the power of bringing him to account. But he must be 
detected ; it is a justice which you owe to the public as well as 
yourself. And as the amount of the pretended debt is not sufficient 
for that purpose, here is an order on the bank in town for double 
the sum. For this you must give me your note of hand. Be 
pleased to reimburse me when it is your convenience. If that 
should never happen, be under no concern; for I hold myself 
already repaid with usury, in the opportunity of serving an injured 
and a worthy man. 

O sir ! I cried ; I cannot, indeed I cannot I will not accept it 
on any account. I am patient, nay, I am pleased with the lot 
that is appointed me. Shall I, in an instant, break the yoke, and 
cast the burden which my gracious Master but this instant has 
laid upon me ? No, sir ! I submit myself to it with thankfulness ; 
I take this cross to my bosom, and press it to my heart. 

O Meekly ! said he, you are a very misdeeming Christian, if you 
think yourself entitled either to assume or retain your proper 
crosses at will. There is too much of self-righteousness in such a 
zeal, Meekly. Humility would rather bid the will of our Master 
to be done ; and he offers you enfranchisement by my hand. Do, 
my dear sir, cried the angel beside him do let me petition, let me 
persuade you to accept this little instance of our good-will to so 
good a creature. Though my lord here has not been able to 
prevail, a lady has superior claims, and I must not be refused. 

Quite sunk, quite overwhelmed, I dropped involuntarily on my 
knees before them. Blessed pair ! I exclaimed, blessed and beau- 
teous beyond expression ; if angels are like you, what happiness 
must be in heaven ! I could no more, my words were choked by 
my rising emotions. 

My benefactor then rose, and, coming tenderly towards me, he 
took me warmly in his arms. Mr. Meekly, says he, do not oppress 
me, I pray you, by this excess of acknowledgment. I am but a 
worthless instrument in the hands of your beloved ; for from him, 
and him alone, is every good gift, and even the will of the giver. 
O Mr. Meekly ! added the lady, her eyes glittering through water, 
we thank you, we cordially thank you, Mr. Meekly ; you have occa- 
sioned us much pleasure this day, I assure you ; and the means of 
our happiness should be delightful in our eyes. 

My patron then rung a bell, and ordered his principal gentleman 



360 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

into his presence ; when, putting the order into his hand 
Here, says he, take this, with the bailiff, directly to the bank; 
there pay him his demand of 700 and fees ; and bring me a 
hundred pounds in cash, and the remainder in bills on London. 
Then, calling for pen and ink, he drew the following short note 
" I owe you fourteen hundred pounds ; " to which I signed 
"Charles Meekly." 

On the return of the messenger, I was put in possession of the 
cash and bills, and a dinner of little elegances was served up. 

After a short repast, the decanters and glasses being placed, and 
the attendants dismissed, my two patrons gave a loose to social joy, 
and invited me to be a partaker in their festivity. Never was I, 
nor ever shall I again, be witness to such flights of fancy, such a 
spontaneous fluency of heart-springing glee. With what pleasure 
did erudition cast off its formal garb ; how delightfully did wisdom 
assume the semblance, and at times the very phrase of childhood ! 
They laughed, they rallied me, themselves, and the world. Their 
merriment was as the breaking forth and exuberance of overflow- 
ing innocence and virtue. Conceive to yourself, my lord, a large 
room surrounded with benches, whereon are seated the principal 
philosophers, literati, lawyers, statesmen, chief captains, and chief 
conquerors in all ages ; then think you behold two sportively 
observant children in the midst, looking and laughing at the insig- 
nificance of the several sages; taking off and holding up the 
solemnity and self-importance of each profession in caricature, and 
setting the whole world, with all its wisdom, its toils and boasted 
acquirements, its solicitudes, applications, and achievements, at 
nought. 

The gentleman indeed pretended and only pretended to defend 
the sophists, the valiant, and the renowned of his sex, but he evi- 
dently exulted in his own defeat ; while the lady, with a drollery 
amazingly voluble, ran through the schools of philosophy, the 
systems of human policy, and histories of heroism, unpluming the 
crested, bringing the lofty low, and depreciating and reducing all 
magnitude to miniature. And all this she did with an archness of 
such pleasant meaning with such looks, eyes, and attitudes of 
bewitching transition, as would have infused fascination into old age 
and ugliness ; what then must it have done when accompanied by 
a beauty that scarce ever was equalled, that could not be exceeded ? 
Did the Sarah of the patriarch Abraham resemble her, I wonder 
not that nations should have been enamoured of her at the age of 
fourscore. 

At length the enraptured husband, no longer able to contain, 
bent toward her with looks of soul-darting delight, and restraining 
his arms that would have crushed her to his bosom O my Louisa ! 
he cried, you are too much, too pearly, too precious a treasure for 
me ! But, giving him a sweetly petulant pat on the cheek Away 
you rogue ! she cried, I'll none of your mockeries ! 

What can expression add further to this divinely pre-eminent of 
human creatures? Whatever was her present glance, aspect, or 
posture, you would have wished to fix her in it, that you might 
gaze and admire for ever ; but when she varied the enchantment ot 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 361 

her action and attitude, you forgot the former attractions, and she 
became, as it were, a newness of ever-rising delight ! 

Alas, how transient, how momentary, was the bliss I then 
enjoyed! A chariot and six pied horses drove up to the door, 
attended by a retinue of ten or twelve men, all armed, gallantly 
mounted, and in rich apparel. 

My dear Meekly, mournfully said my benefactor, I am sorry that 
we are destined to different departments. I lodge to-night at a 
villa belonging to one of my correspondents, and to-morrow we set 
out to visit some of the German courts. Fare, fare-you-well, 
Meekly, for a short season at least ! 

I would have cast myself at his feet. It was an emotion, a pro- 
pensity, which I could not resist ; but he prevented me, by kissing 
and casting his arms affectionately about me. The lady then 
turned to me, and with a smile of heart-captivating graciousness 
God be with you! God be with you, my good Mr. Meekly! she 
cried ; perhaps we may meet ere long in your own England. 1 
answered not; but bending on one knee, I caught her hand, 
pressed it fervently to my lips, and permitted her to depart. 

Alas, they did depart! I saw them for the last time. They 
mounted their carriage, and, being seated, they bent forward, and 
bowing to me with a fixed regard, off they drove, and tore away 
with them, as I thought, the best part of my soul. 

I followed them with straining eyes. When out of sight me- 
thought I held them still in view, and I blessed and kissed, in 
imagination, the very ground over which they went. At length I 
awoke from my delirium, and with slow and heavy steps turned 
back into the house. 

I had not yet, through shame, so much as inquired the name of 
my benefactor. I therefore called to my host, in order to inform 
myself of all that I could learn concerning him ; as also to make out 
a bill for it had not been called for and I pleased myself with 
the thought of discharging a reckoning that my friends had for- 
gotten. When I questioned my host on this head, he put his hands 
to his sides, and broke into a violent fit of laughter No, no ! master, 
said he, there's nothing for any one to pay in this house, I 
assure you. Mynheer never troubles himself about those matters ; 
his major-domo pays all ; ay, and for many a guest too that happens 
to be in the same inn with his master. 

Why, pray, said I, is he a lord ? A lord? quotha ; not so little as 
that comes to neither. No, sir ; he is a prince the very prince of 
our merchants ; and our merchants are princes above all lords. 
And, pray, how do they style or call him ? He has many names and 
titles. When our traders speak of him, they call him Mynheer 
Van Glunthong ; but others style him my lord of merchants, and 
others my lord the brother-man, and my lord the friend of the poor. 

The remainder of my story is very short, and still more insipni- 
ficiint. I soon set out for Fn.dand, in order to file a bill against my 
uncle, and compel him to discover what patrimony my falhor had 
left me. But God was please 1. in the moan space, to cut ofi all de- 
bate ; his wife and child had died of an epidemic distemper, an t he 
did not survive them above a fortnight. He left me a penitential 



362 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

letter, with a small will enclosed, whereby I became entitled to 
three hundred a year in right of my father, and an additional four 
hundred in right of my uncle, with a sum of near three thousand 
pounds in ready money. 

If I know my own heart, the only cause of rejoicing that I felt 
on that occasion was, that it put it in my power to discharge my 
pecuniary obligations to my late generous preserver. I immediately 
wrote and transmitted bills to Holland for the purpose ; but the 
bills were returned, and I could hear no tidings concerning the 
residence of my patron. I then put out his 1400 on the best 
securities that I could procure. It is now close upon five-and- 
thirty years since I saw him ; and in that time the principal, with 
interest upon interest, yearly turned into capital, has amounted to 
nearly 5000, one penny of which I never touch, but hold the 
whole as sacred. 

Mean time, it has cost me hundreds upon hundreds in cor- 
respondences, advertisements, and even in special messengers to 
several parts of Europe, to discover where this greatest, this most 
eminent of men could have concealed himself; but, alas! my 
search proved as fruitless as that of the miser in hunting after the 
pearl of mighty price. 

During those five-and-thirty years, the image of the persons of 
those my two gracious patrons never left my memory were ever 
at my heart. Ah ! I would say to myself, they are dead they are 
dead ; or, rapt, perhaps, like Elijah, alive into heaven ; flesh and 
blood refined as theirs might easily pass from its little impurities, 
through the fire of the love of God to the place of its bliss. And 
again, it was my daily and ardent petition that, if their mortal 
was not swallowed up of immortality, I might once set my eyes 
upon them before I died. 

Here Mr. Meekly ended. I thank you, my dear friend, said the 
earl, for your history ; it has entertained me most pleasingly, and 
I have also been highly edified by some passages in it. But, with 
respect to the glimpse that you had of your two wonderful friends, 
I think it must have been a vision, or merely a matter of imagina- 
tion ; for I never saw in nature, nor read in fiction, of any thing 
comparable to the excellences that you have described in that 
exalted pair. If it was a vision, my lord it must have been one 
of blessed angels indeed ; but I hope you will allow that the bene- 
fits which they conferred were no way visionary. O Mr. Meekly ! 
said Harry, with a sigh, the picture that you have drawn of this 
dear lady has almost given me a distaste to all the rest of her sex. 
Ah! might I meet hereafter some daughter some descendant 
some distant likeness of her how happy should I think myself! 
May heaven succeed your ominous wish, my dearest child ! cried 
Meekly. It is just, perhaps prophetic, that it should be so. For 
never did I see so perfect a resemblance between any two creatures, 
as between the consort of that bewitching woman and yourself it 
struck me the other night the moment you entered the room ; 
and I thought that I beheld my very benefactor newly arisen, like 



a young phoenix, from the ashes of old age. 
Near a fortnight now elapsed without a 



any news or notice from 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 



363 



Mr. Clinton, or from the messenger who was sent despatch for 
him. Harry daily advanced in the favour and familiarity of his 
father ; and Mr. Meekly continued with them in a most pleasing 
society. 

On a fine morning, as they were walking together toward the 
village This is the first time, my Harry, said the earl with a sigh, 
that I have ventured to turn my face this way since the death of 
my wife, and the interment of your dear brother. O my lord ! cried 
Harry, I would gladly exchange my lot in life for the meanest 
of yonder cottagers, who earns his daily bread by the labour of 
his hands, provided I might thereby restore them both to your 
bosom. Not so, not so, my son ! fervently replied the earl ; I would 
not lose my Harry, though I were thereby to resuscitate all that 
are dead in England. I have no cause, no manner of right to 
complain; I am still happy wonderfully happy too happy in 
the possession of such a child ! 

Just then a great shouting and uproar was heard in the village. 
The huge mastiff belonging to Peregrine Pelt, the tanner, had run 
mad, and came foaming up the road, pursued by thirty of the 
townsmen, armed with staves, spits, and pitchforks. The dog 
rushed on at such a rate that there was no possibility for our 
company to escape him ; and Harry, observing that he made directly 
toward his father, threw himself full in his way. Instantly the 
envenomed monster sprung up and cast himself open mouth upon 
our hero ; but Harry, with a wonderful presence of mind, having 
wrapped his left arm in the skirt of his coat, dashed it into the 
frothing jaws of the terrible animal ; when, giving a trip at the 
same time to his hinder legs, he threw him flat on the ground, 
and springing up into the air, he descended upon him with all 
the force of his heels, and dashed his bowels to pieces; where- 
upon the creature uttered a faint howl, sprawled a while, and 
expired. 

The earl and Mr. Meekly stood yet a while, pale, astonished, 
and unassured; and my lord, looking about in a panic, cried 
Where is the dog? what's become of the mad dog? In the 
mean time the villagers came on in full pursuit, crying out The 
mad dog ! the mad dog ! take care of the mad dog ! But when 
they all arrived and beheld their huge enemy looking formidable 
even in death, never was amazement equal to theirs. They stared 
at the earl, Meekly, and Harry, in turns, and seeing no weapon in 
any of their hands God! cried Goodman Demster, God has 
been wonderfully gracious in your deliverance, my lord ; for nothing 
less than a thunderbolt could so suddenly have stricken this 
monster dead. I protest, said the earl, I was so much alarmed 
that I know not how it happened ; I remember nothing further 
than that my dear child here thrust himself between his father 
and danger. But I beheld, said Meekly, when with one stroke of 
his arm he dashed the creature to the ground, and then instantly 
crushed him to death with his feet. Not I, Mr. Meekly, modestly 
replied Harry ; God gave me strength for the season in defence 
of my father. But are you not bit are you not hurt, my child? 
cried the earl, coming up tremblingly to his son. Not touched 



364 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

indeed, my lord. Glory for that in the highest ! exultingly cried 
the earl. 

I knew, exclaimed Tom Truck, with a shout and look of triumph, 
I knew it could be no other but my brave and noble young master 
who did the feat. On my life, cried Farmer Felster, he is able 
with his naked arm, like another young David, to save his lambs 
from the jaws of the lion and the paws of the bear. 

Though these praises served only to put our hero to confusion, 
they went trickling, like balm of Gilead, to the heart of his father. 
Pelt, said the earl, let it be your task to flay and tan me the hide 
of your own dog. I will have his skin stuffed with incense, and 
his nails of solid gold; and he shall hang up in my hall from 
generation to generation, to commemorate the piety and prowess 
of my son! Mean while, my good friends, I invite you all, with 
your families, kinsfolk, and neighbours, to come and feast with me 
this day. Sorrow hath endured her night ; but joy cometh with 
my child, and ariseth on us as a new morning ! 

In the afternoon all the townsfolk and neighbours, with their 
wives and children, convened to the great house, having their 
cattle and themselves heavy laden with fagots for a magnificent 
illumination. The whole court was spread with tables, and the 
tables with victuals and liquors ; besides two hogsheads of October 
that stood apart. 

The earl, in the joy of his own escape, and the recent prowess 
of his young hero, went forth with a cheerful countenance, and 
graciously welcomed all his guests ; whereat they wished health 
and long life to his lordship and their young lord, and, giving a 
joint huzza, sat down to their banquet. From whence, after a 
night far spent in carousal, their great fire being out, and their 
great hogsheads exhausted, they peacefully helped each other to 
their respective homes ; regretting, however, that they had not 
been honoured with the presence of their young master among 
them ; for Harry had besought his father to dispense with him yet 
a while from partaking in any part or scene of festivity, especially 
when appointed in his own honour; and Mr. Meekly highly 
approved and applauded his motion. 

On the eve of the following day, Mr. Meekly rode abroad on a 
charitable visit to a dying man in the neighbourhood; and my 
lord was fondly toying and patting the cheek of his darling, as 
they stood at the hall door, when Harry spied a mourning coach 
turning up the lower end of the great avenue, and instantly 
cried out There's my uncle, my lord ! my uncle ! my dearest 
uncle ! and off he shot like lightning. The coach drove but 
slowly ; Harry was up with it in a twinkling, and, vaulting in at 
the window, was in an instant in the bosom of his best friend 
and patron. 

In the mean time the earl had retired into the house in great 
agitation. He feared and was jealous of the manner in which his 
brother would meet him; and this gave him equal doubt and 
hesitation respecting the manner in which he ought to receive his 
brother. Mr. Clinton, on the other hand, was not wholly without 
some similar emotions ; so that, when Harry introduced his uncle 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 365 

into the parlour, no two noble personages could salute each other 
with a more distant respect. 

The earl, however, on casting a glance upon the face of his 
brother, felt a tide of returning affection, and, lifting up his hands 
and eyes, exclaimed It is he! it is he! my Harry! my Harry 
Clinton ! my dear, my long lost, my long sought brother ! then 
hastened forward in a gush of passion, and caught him in his eager 
arms ; when Mr. Clinton, alternately folding the earl to his bosom, 
cried I am content, O my God ! give me now to depart in peace, 
since at last I find and feel that I have indeed a brother ! 

Our hero, observing the violence of their emotion, interposed 
with a gentle care, and, supporting them to seats, placed them 
tenderly by each other. 

For a while they both sat silent, with a handkerchief at their 
eyes, till the earl turned, and plaintively said You do not forgive 
me. Harry Clinton! you never will, you never can forgive me, my 
brother ! Whereupon Mr. Clinton caught up the earl's hand to his 
lips, and, pressing it with a fervent respect, cried My brother 
and my lord ! my brother and my lord ! 

O then, said the earl, you do forgive me, I find ; but never can 
T, never will I forgive myself! My faults toward you, my noblest 
brother, for these many long years, have been ever before me; 
my neglects, my pride and insolence, my contemptuous treatment 
of one so highly my superior of my Harry, the only boast and 
glory of our house ! 

Mean while our hero stood aloof, with his head averted, weeping 
and sobbing with evident agitation, till Mr. Clinton cried No more, 
my brother ! no more, I beseech you ! It is already too much ; 
I cannot bear my present excess of grateful affection for you ; it 
struggles to rush forth, but utterance is not given. Beside, we 
shall break the heart of our dear child there ; his nature is too 
tender to support such a scene as this. 

Harry then smilingly turned his face toward his parents, all 
shining through tears, as the sun in a shower; and advancing, 
and kneeling before them as they sat, he took the hands of each 
alternately, and pressed them in silence to his lips. 

In about an hour after, while their affections were still at the 
highest, but their spirits somewhat composed, Mr. Meekly returned. 
The earl immediately rose, and, advancing, took him by the hand 
with a cordial familiarity. Mr. Meekly, says he, I shall now have 
the pleasure of introducing you to that inestimable brother, of whom 
you have heard me speak so often. Brother, this is Mr. Meekly, 
my best and worthiest friend ! 

Mr. Clinton rose and advanced; and Meekly approached with 
an abased reverence, not venturing to look up, but saluted him as 
he would have saluted an angel of light. 

Meekly ! Meekly ! cried Mr. Clinton ; I have surely heard that 
name before ! Pray, Mr. Meekly, were you ever abroad ? have you 
travelled, sir ? Were you ever in Holland, Mr. Meekly ? 

Here Meekly started, as awaked by the sound of a voice whose 
recollected tunings went thrilling to his heart ; and lifting up his 
eyes, and beholding the traces of features once so lovely, and 



366 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

ever deeply endeared to his memory, he started, and, staggering 
back some steps, he sunk down on a chair behind him almost in 
a fainting fit. 

The earl, greatly alarmed, went up, and taking him by the 
hand What is the matter, my friend ? says he. Are you taken 
suddenly ill ? are you not well, my Meekly ? 

O, my lord! he pantingly cried, there he is as sure as I 
live my patron my benefactor the wondrous man that I 
told you of; there he stands in his own precious person before 
us! 

Mr. Clinton then approached, and, taking a seat beside him, 
leaned toward him with a melting complacence. Mr. Meekly, 
said he, I expected ere this to have embraced you in heaven; 
but I rejoice to meet you even on earth, for I have ever retained 
a very affectionate impression of you; and I more especially rejoice 
to meet you in the present society. 

But then but then you come alone you come alone, my lord 
and master ! Alas ! you wipe your eye. O, then, it must be so ! 
and here he broke into a passionate gush of tears. 

My lord and our hero, hereupon recollecting the engaging cir- 
cumstances of a character of whose description they had been so 
lately enamoured, could not refuse their tribute to the memory 
of that admirable lady, to whose person they now found themselves 
endearingly attached by affinity. 

At length Mr. Clinton, distressed to the last degree for the 
distress in which he saw the forlorn Meekly, sweetly turned from 
his own affliction to the consoling of that friend whom he found 
so deeply afflicted for him. 

Mr. Meekly, said he, let us not weep for the living, but rather 
for the dead; for those who are yet in the vale of mortality. 
Shall we mourn the condition of angels? shall we lament that 
a weight of glory is fallen on those whom we loved ? No ; let us 
rather rejoice in the prospect of being speedily partakers ! 

When supper was over, Harry laid hold of the first interval 
of converse to inquire after his friends in town, more especially 
Mr. Clement, his Arabella, and their little Dicky. They are come, 
said Mr. Clinton, to sudden and great affluence. Old Clement is 
thoroughly reconciled to his son, and is cloatingly fond of Arabella 
and her child. I am glad of it with all my heart, cried Harry, 
clapping his hands ; but pray, how did this matter come about, 
sir ? By an event, my dear, in which the arm of Providence was 
signally visible. Old Clement's supposed wife was detected, and 
is dead, as is also her paramour, the villain who betrayed, and 
lately also attempted to murder, your Hammel. His history is 
wonderful ; but it is long, and too horrid to relate. 

What an astonishing distance there is, exclaimed the earl, 
between the characters and dispositions of man and man! And 
how does my brother, my revered Harry Clinton, rise supreme 
above all his species, in every excellence, in every virtue, scarce 
less than divine ! 

Oh, my lord! I am persuaded, said Mr. Clinton, that could it 
please God at this instant to withdraw from me the influence of 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 



367 



his holy and happy Spirit, I should become altogether as evil as 
the worst, as vile as the vilest. 

I cannot think so, my brother, replied the earl : you would still 
continue a rational and free creature. There is certainly a dis- 
tinction in the nature of things ! There is the beautiful and de- 
formed, the amiable and detestable ; your judgment would approve 
the one and reject the other ; and your freedom of agency would 
act conformable to your election. 

Ah, my lord ! cried Mr. Clinton, what things, what beauty, what 
amiableness, what freedom is this that you speak of? Have you 
found out another universe, or another deity beside HIM in whom 
our life subsists? Are there any things in nature save the things 
of our God? Or what beauty or amiableness can they possibly 
exhibit, save what they derive from him ; save some quality or 
impregnation, some manifestation or impression, of his own beauty 
or amiableness? 

To make this matter clear, let us go somewhat deeper; quite 
back, if you please, my lord, to the very birth of things. 

Throughout nature, we find that God can impart to his creatures 
a being, an identity, a fire of life, an intelligence or sagacity, a 
consciousness, a force or action, a will and a freedom, distinct from 
himself, and distinct from each other : and this is the utmost extent 
of creaturely nature, whether respecting the powers that are in 
hell or in heaven ; whether respecting the highest seraphims that 
are in bliss, or the lowest fallen spirits in perdition. 

Now all these powers or high prerogatives, although distinct 
from God, are infinitely far from being independent of him ; for he 
will not, he cannot, depart from his supremacy, nor that universality 
of essence, by and in which alone all essences subsist. 

He can, indeed, impart the fore-mentioned powers to any limited 
degree that he pleases ; but then, in their highest degree of fire, 
life, or sagacity, force, action, or freedom, you will perceive, on 
the slightest reflection, that there is nothing of the beautiful or 
amiable that you spoke of; but that they are equally applicable, 
and may be equally exercised to evil or good purposes, according 
to the nature or disposition of the agent. 

I have already specified the many great and wonderful powers 
that God can impart to his creatures distinctly, though not in- 
dependently, from himself. But there is one power, one quality 
which God cannot make creaturely; which with all his omnipo- 
tence he cannot possibly impart, in any kind of distinction or 
separability, from himself, and this quality is called Goodness. 

And now, my dear lord, in order to convince you of this most 
capital and most important of all truths, a truth upon which time, 
eternity, and the universe all turn, as on their axis, it may be 
necessary to inquire what Goodness is. 

There is no species of allowed or conceivable virtue that is not 
reducible under the standard of their great leader, and all-gene- 
rating parent, called Love. Good-will is the eternal blesser of all 
to whom it is beneficent, and also generates its own blessing in 
the very act of its love. 

Here lies the great and impassable gulf between God and his 



368 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

productions, between the creature arid the Creator. The will ot 
God is an eternal fire of love toward his creatures, and goes forth 
in blessings upon them as wide and universal as his own existence. 
L>ut the will of the creature is confined and limited, like its essence. 
While it is distinct from, or uninformed by the will of God, it 
cannot possibly act beyond or out of itself; it cannot possibly 
feel for any thing except itself ; it cannot wish any welfare except 
its own welfare, and this it endeavours to compass by the exertion 
of all its powers. 

From this distinct, selfish, and craving will of the creature, 
springs every possible evil, whether natural or moral. From 
the preference of its own identity to that of others, ariseth pride ; 
from the eagerness of its grasping at all advantages to itself, 
ariseth the envy of any imaginary advantage to another. Pride, 
covetousness, and envy beget hatred, wrath, and contention, with 
every species and degree of malevolence and malignity ; and the 
disappointment of these passions produces rancour and misery; 
and all together they constitute the whole nature and kingdom 
of hell itself in the soul. 

But when God is pleased to inform the will of the creature 
with any measure of his own benign and benevolent will, he steals 
it sweetly forth in affection to others ; he speaks peace to the 
storm of rending passions ; and a new and delightful dawning 
arises on the spirit. And thus, on the grand and final consumma- 
tion, when every will shall be subdued to the will of good to all, 
our Jesus will take in hand the resigned cordage of our hearts; 
he will tune them, with so many instruments, to the song of his 
own sentiments, and will touch them with the finger of his own 
divine feelings. Then shall the wisdom, the might, and the good- 
ness of our God, become the wisdom, might, and goodness of all 
his intelligent creatures ; the happiness of each shall multiply and 
overflow in the wishes and participation of the happiness of all ; 
the universe shall begin to sound with the song of congratulation ; 
and all voices shall break forth in an eternal hallelujah of praise, 
transcending praise and glory, transcending glory to God and 
the Lamb ! 

Purblind reason here will say, even the goodness of God himself 
in the human heart will say If our God is all love, if he is a 
will to all rectitude and happiness in his creatures, why did he 
suffer any evil to begin in nature and creature? Could evil have 
arisen contrary to the will of Omnipotence, if Omnipotence had 
willed that it should not arise ? 

Ah, my friends! no evil ever did, nor ever can approach the 
will of God ; neither can he will or effect any species of evil in 
nature or creature; but he can allow a temporary evil in the 
creature, as a travail towards its birth into the more eminent 
degree of that goodness and happiness which God effects. God 
cannot effect or take delight in the sufferings of the most abandoned 
reprobate that ever blasphemed his name ; but he can will that 
the sinner should be reclaimed to happiness, even by suffering, 
when there are no other means in nature whereby he may be 
reclaimed. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 369 

Could creatures, without the experience of any lapse or evil, 
have been made duly sensible of the darkness and dependence 
of their creaturely nature, and of the distance and distinction 
between themselves and their God; could they have known the 
nature and extent of his attributes, with infinity of his love ; could 
they have known the dreadful consequences of falling off from 
him, without seeing any example, or experiencing any consequences 
of such a fall ; could they have otherwise felt and found that every 
act of creaturely will, and every attempt at creaturely power, 
was a forsaking of that eternal wisdom and strength in which they 
stood ; could all intelligent creatures have been continued in that 
lowliness, that resignation, that gratitude of burning affection 
which the slain will of the mortified sinner feels when called up 
into the grace and enjoyment of his God ; could those endearing 
relations have subsisted in creation, which have since newly risen 
between God and his lapsed creatures wholly subsequent thereto 
those relations, I say, of redemption, of regeneration, of a power 
of conversion, that extracts good out of evil, of a love that no 
apostasy can quench, that no offences can conquer if these 
eternal benefits could have been introduced, without their ground 
or foundation in the admission of evil, no lapse or falling off would 
ever have been. 

Here Mr. Clinton paused, and his auditors continued in a kind 
of respectful musing, as attentive to what he might further offer. 
At length the earl exclaimed Never, never more, my brother, 
will I debate or question with you, further than asking your advice 
or opinion, to which I shall instantly and implicity submit, as I 
would to that of the highest seraph in heaven. Our dear Meekly 
here, and I, had some former converse on a few of these deep 
subjects, and I received much satisfaction and instruction from 
him ; but he was not quite so explicit and convincing as you 
have been. 

Ah, my lord ! cried Meekly, were I as intimate with the fountain 
of all knowledge as your precious brother is, you would not then 
have opposed me in the conversation we last held on those heads. 

On the following day, at breakfast, Mr. Meekly took out his 
pocket-book, and produced bank and stock-bills to the amount of 
something upward of five thousand pounds. He then presented 
them to Mr. Clinton, and said Here, sir, is a little matter toward 
repayment of the loan I had from you in Holland. I bless I bless 
my God that he has enabled me thus far to approve myself an 
honest man ; but, above all, I bless him for giving me once more a 
sight of the gracious countenance of my patron. 

But for you I had miserably perished in a dungeon ; to you, sir, 
I owe my liberty, to you I owe my life, to you I owe the recovery 
of the inheritance of my fathers. With respect to such obligations, 
I am indeed a beggared insolvent. But my heart is pleased with 
the thought, that the connection between us, of creditor on your 
part and of debtor on mine, should remain on record to all eternity. 

Here the worthy Meekly became oppressed under sensations of 
grateful recollection; and, putting his handkerchief to his eyes, 
he sobbed out his passion. 

Bb 



370 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

In the mean time, Mr. Clinton held the bills in his hand, and 
carelessly casting his eye over them, perceived the amount. As 
soon as he saw that his friend's emotion had partly subsided, You 
have, Mr. Meekly, says he you have been quite a gospel steward, 
and have returned me my own with most unlooked-for usury ; and 
I heartily pray God, in recompense of your integrity, to give you 
the principality of many cities in the coming kingdom of his Son. 
But what shall I do with this money, my dear Meekly ? My wealth 
already overflows ; it is my only trouble, my only encumbrance. It 
claims my attention, indeed, as it is a trust for which I know I am 
strictly accountable ; but I heartily wish that Providence would 
reclaim the whole to himself, and leave me as one of his mendi- 
cants, who daily wait on the hand that supplieth all who seek his 
kingdom with necessary things; for my Harry has enough, and 
more than enough now, in the abundance of his noble father. You 
must therefore keep these bills to yourself, my worthy friend; 
retain, or give, or dispose of them, even as it shall please you ; 
whether as your property or as my property, it matters not 
sixpence ; but take them back, you must take them back indeed, 
my Meekly. And so saying, he shoved them over from him, on 
the table. 

Ah, my most honoured sir! exclaimed the repining Meekly; 
surely you would not serve me so. My soul is but just eased of a 
load that lay heavy on it for many, many years. Be not then so 
severe as to replace the burden upon me. It would break my 
very heart should you persist in refusing this little instance of 
acknowledgment from one of your warmest lovers. 

Here Harry found himself affected and distressed for the parties ; 
and, in order to relieve them, took the decision of the matter upon 
himself. 

Gentlemen, says he, I will, with your good pleasure, put a very 
quick end to this dispute ; and I offer myself to you, as your joint 
trustee, to be your almoner and disposer of these bills. 

As I was lately on my rambles through some villages near 
London, the jingle of a number of infant-voices struck my ear ; and 
turning, and looking in at the ground floor of a long cottage, 
I perceived about thirty little girls neatly dressed in an uniform, 
and all very busily and variously employed in hackling, carding, 
knitting, or spinning, or in sowing at their sampler, or in learning 
their letters, and so forth. 

The adjoining house contained about an equal number of boys, 
most of whom were occupied in learning the rudiments of the 
several handicrafts; while the rest were busied in cultivating a 
back field, intended as a garden for these two young seminaries. 

I was so pleased with what I saw, that I gave the masters and 
mistresses some small matter ; and I resolved within myself, if ever 
I should be able, to gather together a little family of my own for 
the like purposes. 

Now, gentlemen, here comes Mr. Meekly's money, quite in season 
for saving just so much of my own. But hang it, since I am grown 
suddenly rich, I think I will be generous for once in my life, and 
add as much more out of my proper stock. I shall also make so 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 



371 



free as to draw on my uncle there for the like sura ; and these, 
totted together, will make a pretty beginning 1 of my little project. 

As to my poor father here, he has nothing to spare, for he has 
already lavished all his wealth on his naughty boy. 

My lord and the company laughed heartily at Harry's little 
pleasantry. But harkee, honest friend, added the earl, you must 
not think to expose me by leaving me out of your scheme ; can't 
you lend me as much, Harry, as will answer my quota? Yes, my 
lord, said Harry, upon proper securities I think I may venture. 
You are a rogue, and a darling, and my treasure, and my honour, 
and my ornament, cried the earl, turning and bending fondly 
toward him. While Harry's eyes began to swim with pleasure, 
and, casting himself into his father's bosom, he there hid the tears 
of his swelling delight; while Mr. Clinton and Mr. Meekly sat 
silently wrapped in the enjoyment of the touching scene. 

After dinner, the earl said Tell me, my ever amiable Harry 
Clinton, where in the world could you hide yourself from my 
inquiries these twenty years past? I have got some scattered 
sketches of your history from Mr. Meekly, and my son here, and 
have been burning to learn the whole, but dreaded to ask you that 
favour, lest the recollection of some passages should give you 
distress. I refuse no pain to do you a pleasure, my brother. 

Here the Honourable Mr. Clinton began his story as formerly 
recited, and that night sent his auditors weeping to bed. 

On the following morning, when he came to that part of his 
narrative where Lady Maitland broke away, he proceeded as 
followeth : 

Having travelled through several parts of France and Italy, 
I took Germany in my tour. I stayed some time at Spa, where 
I drank the waters, and within the year arrived in perfect health 
at Rotterdam. 

On a visit to Mr. De Wit, at his villa near the city, he told me, 
over our bottle, that he had at that time in his house, and in his 
guardianship, one of the most extraordinary women in the universe. 
Though she is now, says he, advancing toward the decline of life, 
she is by far the most finished female I ever beheld, while all she 
says and all she does give a grace to her person that is quite 
indescribable. She hath a youth too, her son, with her, who is 
nearly as great a rarity as herself ; and were it not that his com- 
plexion is sallow, and that he is something short of a leg and blind 
of one eye, he would positively be the most lovely of all the human 
species. 

You put me in mind, said I laughing, of the Baratarian wench 
who was commended to governor Sancho as the most accomplished 
beauty within a league ; with this exception only, that one eye was 
blind, and that the other ran with brimstone and vermilion. But 
pray who are these wonders? 

That, said he, I either cannot or must not declare. They are 
evidently people of the first fashion ; and must have some uncom- 
mon reasons for their present conduct, as they live quite retired, 
and admit of no company. 

I protest, said I, you have raised my curiosity in earnest : is 



372 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

there no managing so as to procure me a short tete-a-tete with 
them? I wish there was, says he, for I long to know how far 
your sentiments agree with mine in this matter. Yesterday the 
lady told me that she intended to go and reside some time in 
England, and that I would oblige her by getting a person duly 
qualified to initiate her and her son in the language of the country. 
And now, if such a fine gentleman could condescend to undress 
himself, you might come to-morrow as a person who wanted hire, 
and I might introduce you to an interview by way of treating, 
provided you are upon honour not to reveal any thing concerning 
them or their place of abode. 

The next morning I waited on Mr. De Wit under the appearance 
of a reduced gentleman, a character that excites a mixture of 
contempt and compassion. 

The lady received and spoke to me with that dignified com- 
placence which awes while it engages, and while it attracts, forbids 
an irreverent familiarity. She was indeed every thing that my 
friend had boasted of her ; for though her person was all majesty, 
her manner was all grace. Will you answer for the discretion of 
this young man, Mr. De Wit? I will, madam, said he. I bowed 
to them both. 

On turning, I perceived that her son eyed me with much atten- 
tion, and I, on my part, surveyed him with the utmost astonishment. 
He laboured, indeed, apparently under all the disadvantages that 
my friend described ; but enchantment lurked in his accents and in 
the dimpling of his lips ; and when he smiled, heaven itself was 
infused through the fine roundings of his olive-coloured coun- 
tenance. 

In short, I felt such a sudden attachment to these extraordinary 
personages, that I resolved to keep on the deception, at least 
for a few days, and accordingly engaged with them at a stated 
salaiy. 

I entered on my province. My young pupil especially began to 
improve apace ; and, as I was particularly cautious in observing 
the distant respect that suited my station, I grew into great favour 
both with mother and son. 

How long, Mr. De Wit would say, do you propose to carry on 
this farce ? Till I can prevail upon them, I answered, to accom- 
pany me to England ; for I feel my affection so tied to them, that 
I cannot think of parting. 

On a day as I sat with my pupil in his apartment, he happened 
to let his book fall ; and as I stooped to take it up, the picture of 
my Matilda, that was richly enamelled, and set with brilliants to a 
great value, suddenly looses from its riband, and dropped through 
the bosom of my shirt upon the floor. 

I stood concerned and greatly abashed by this accident ; but my 
pupil, still more alarmed, started up, and, catching at it, gazed 
upon it intensely. Ha, my friend ! said he, I doubt you are an 
impostor. The proprietor of this jewel would never set himself out 
to hire without some sinister design. Who, sir, and what are you ? 

I own, said I, my sweet fellow, that I am not what I seem. 
I am of noble descent, and of riches sufficient to purchase a 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 373 

principality. And what then could induce you to impose upon 
us as you have done? Curiosity at first, and then the strong 
inclination which I took both to you and your mother at our first 
interview; neither did I propose to reveal myself till we should 
reach my native country, where all sorts of honours and affluence 
attend you. Tell me then, said he, whose picture is this, a very 
lovely one, indeed ? Is this the face, sir, of your mistress or your 
wife? (looking very inquisitively at me.) Ah! said I, she was 
once mistress of thousands of hearts; nobles waited before her 
drawing-room, and dukes near her toilet. She was once also my 
wife ; but the dear saint is now eternally blessed in a more suitable 
Bridegroom. 

Will you indulge me, sir, said he, with the story of your loves ; 
it may atone in a great measure for your late deception, which, 
however well meant, was very alarming. 

Here I related to him the short pathetic history that I told you 
of my Matilda, with which he was so affected, arid in such agitation, 
that I was quite affrighted for him, and stopped several times ; but 
he insisted on my proceeding. 

Ah ! said he, when I concluded, should I ever be comforted in 
the manner that you and your Matty were, how blessed I shall 
think myself ! I have, said I, a little cousin in England, and perhaps 
the loveliest child in the world, and if you will marry her, when you 
both come to proper years, I will settle ten million of French 
money upon you. Mean time, I beseech you to say nothing to 
your mamma of what has passed. I will not, said he, unless I see 
a discretionary necessity for it. 

That night I went to the city to settle the affairs of my house- 
hold. On my return next morning, I met Mr. De Wit at the gate 
of his court. 

Ah, my friend ! said he, our amiable guests are departed. Gone ! 
I cried. Gone ! which way? where to, I pray you? That also is 
a secret, said he, which I am not permitted to tell you. Late in 
the evening there arrived a retinue of about twenty servants, 
strongly armed and mounted, with a flying chaise and six horses, 
and a packet of letters. The lady did not go to bed, but ordered 
all things to be in readiness for their departure against the rising 
of the moon. When they were near setting out, and going to bid 
me adieu Have you no commands, madam, said I, for the good 
young man, your tutor ? Not a penny, says she ; I cannot afford to 
pay wages equivalent to servants of his quality. How, madam, 
said I, is my friend then detected? But it was a very innocent 
and friendly fraud, I assure you ; I should not have imposed him 
upon your ladyship, did I not know you to be safer in his honour- 
able hands than those of any other. I then gave them an account 
of your family, your vast fortune, nor was I quite silent as 
to your merits, my dear Harry ; and I added, that I was sensible 
you would be deeply afflicted at the departure of persons to 
whom you were so strongly attached. There is no help for 
it, replied the lady ; we have reasons of the utmost import for 
not disclosing ourselves to him. Tell him, however, that we 
esteem him highly, affect him tenderly, shall think of him, shall 



374 TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

pray for him, and, lastly, that you saw us drop a grateful tear to 
his remembrance. 

As I could extort no further intelligence from my friend Mr. De 
Wit, I parted in a half kind of chagrin, and prepared to pursue my 
fugitives, though I knew not what road to take, nor where to turn 
me for the purpose. At all adventures, however, I set out on the 
way to France ; as they appeared to be of that country, as well by 
the elegance of their manners as by their fluency in the language. 

I was attended by eleven of as brave and faithful fellows as ever 
thrust themselves between their master and danger. 

On the fifth or sixth day, as we got on the borders of French 
Flanders, in an open and desolate way, with a forest far on the 
left, a man rode toward us on the spur, and, approaching, cried 
out Help, gentlemen, for heaven's sake ! Help to rescue my dear 
ladies, who are plundered and carried away by the banditti! 
They have already killed twenty of my companions, and I alone am 
left to cry out for relief. I bid him lead, and we followed. 

In a few minutes we came where we saw a great number of the 
dead and dying covering the sand and thin herbage ; but our leader 
cried out Stop not here, my noble friends! Yonder they are! 
yonder they are ! They have but just taken away all our horses, 
luggage, and coach, and are now at the plunder. I am weak 
through loss of blood, but will help you the best I may. 

Here he spurred again toward the enemy, but his horse would 
not answer his courage. I then looked about to observe if any 
advantage could be taken for I perceived that the ruffians were 
still very numerous about thirty who had survived the late com- 
bat ; but seeing that the country was quite open, and that we had 
nothing but resolution and our God to help us, I commended myself 
to Him in so good a cause, and, putting my horse to speed, I rode 
full at the foe, confident of being well and gallantly seconded. 

When the banditti perceived us, they instantly quitted the 
plunder, and, gathering into a group, they prepared their carabines, 
and discharged them full at us as we drew near. 

As I happened to be foremost, I received the greatest damage. 
One of their balls gave me this mark in my neck ; another passed 
through the flesh of my left shoulder ; and another through my 
hat, and left this scar in my head. 

But when we came in upon them, as the Komans say, cominus 
ewe, hand to hand, had they doubled their numbers they would 
have been as nothing to us. My faithful Irishman levelled half a 
score of them with his own hand, and in less than three minutes 
we had no opponent in the field. I then rode up to the coach, and 
perceived two ladies hi it, pale as death, and sunk senseless to 
the bottom. 

Immediately I ordered James, my surgeon's mate, to take a little 
blood from them, and, on their recovery, to follow me, with all my 
people, and all the horses, baggage, &c., to the nearest inn. Then, 
feeling my wounds begin to smart, I took my surgeon with me, and 
galloped away. 

In about a league we came to a large house of entertainment, 
and finding myself sick and qualmish, through the great effusion of 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY, 



375 



blood, I had my wounds directly dressed, and, taking a draught of 
wine whey, got into a warm bed. 

After a night of uneasy slumbers, the curtain of my bed was 
gently drawn aside, and awaking, I heard a voice say, in soft music 
Ah, my dear mamma, it is he ! it is he himself ! 

On lifting my feeble eyes, I perceived a vision at my side of a 
female appearance, but more wonderful and more lovely than any 
thing I had ever conceived of the inhabitants in bliss. Her eyes 
swam in glory, and her whole form seemed a condensing, or sub- 
stantiation,, of harmony and light. 

While I gazed in silent astonishment, I heard another voice say 
Don't you know us, my son, my dear Mr. Clinton ? Don't you 
remember your pupils? Don't you remember your blind, lame, 
and tawny Lewis ? He is now turned into that passable girl there, 
whose honour and whose life you yesterday preserved, at the great 
peril of your own. 

Here, seizing her hand, I pressed it to my lips and cried Am I 
then so blessed, my honoured madam, as to have done some service 
to the two dearest objects of my heart's fixed affections? Soft, 
says she ; none of these transports : your surgeon tells us that 
repose is necessary for you. Mean time, we will go and prepare 
the best regimen that the place can afford for your nourishment, 
and after that I will send a despatch to my lord, and let him know 
how far, how very deeply, he and we, and all his house, are in- 
debted to you. 

For that day, and the following week, as my fever grew some- 
thing high, I saw no more of the daughter ; and the mother stayed 
no longer than to administer something to me, or barely to inquire 
how I was. At length I got a cool, and began to recover, when 
the former vision descended upon my ravished senses ; the vision 
of that Louisa, the sight of whom never failed to bring cheer to the 
eyes, and delight to the hearts, of all beholders. 

They sat down by my side, and my lady, taking my hand and 
looking tenderly at me "What would you think, said she, smiling, 
ot my Louy for a wife ? Ah, madam ! I exclaimed, she would be 
too much of bliss, too precious, too glorious, too overpowering for 
the heart and senses of any mortal ! Don't tell me, cries my lady ; 
in my eyes, my Harry, you are full as amiable for a husband as 
she can be for a wife. Beside, you have earned her, my son ; she 
is your own dear purchase by a service of infinite value, and at 
the price of your precious blood. She has told me the story of 
your first love, and the recollection of it never fails to bring tears 
from my eyes. But I must, hereafter, hear the whole from your 
own mouth, with all your other adventures ; the smallest incident 
will be very interesting to me, I assure you. O my dear, my 
sweet fellow! you are to a hair the very man I wish for my 
Louisa the brave, the tender, gentle, and generous heart ; just the 
thing I would have wished for myself when I was at the age of my 
Louy. 

But, my dearest, my honoured madam, loved and honoured next 
to heaven, you have not yet told me how your Louisa is inclined. 
"Whereupon the bewitching creature, archly smiling and blushing, 



376 TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

and reaching forth a polished hand of living alabaster Here, she 
cried, I present you with this trifle in token that I do not hate 
you very much. 

Mr. Clinton, said my lady, I have sent off my favourite servant 
Gerard with my despatches to my lord. He is the only one that 
remains of all my retinue. Your surgeon has dressed his wound, 
and pronounced it so slight as not to incommode him in his journey. 
I chose him more particularly for the carrier of my purposes as he 
was the witness of your valour as he can testify to my lord with 
what intrepidity you rushed foremost into the thick of the assassins, 
and with what unexampled bravery you defeated, in a short time, 
a body of four or five times your number. These things, I trust, 
will have their due weight ; for, though my lord is of a lofty and 
inflexible nature, he is yet alive to the feelings of honour and jus- 
tice, so that our affairs have a hopeful and auspicious aspect. But 
you are a little flushed, my child; we will not encroach further 
upon you till to-morrow. 

During the three following weeks, though confined to my bed, I 
was permitted to sit up, and my wounds, though not skinned, were 
healing apace. What happiness did I enjoy during that ecstatic 
interval! The maternal and filial angels scarce ever left my 
side. One morning, when I just awoke from a terrifying dream, 
they both entered with peace, and comfort, and healing in their 
countenances. 

What is the matter, my Harry ? said my lady ; your face does 
not seem composed to that fortitude and complacence which is 
seated in your heart. Ah, madam ! I cried, I have been all night 
tormented with the most alarming and horrible visions I ever 
had in my life. Three times I dreamed successively that my 
Louisa and I were walking hand in hand through the fields of 
Elysium, or on the banks of Meander, or in the gardens of 
Alcinous, gazing and drinking in large draughts of love from each 
other; when at one time a huge and tremendous dragon, at 
another a sudden earthquake, and at another an impetuous 
hurricane came, and caught and severed us far asunder. 

But my visions, my honest friend, said the heavenly smiling 
Louisa, have been of a very different nature. I dreamed that, 
while we were standing on the bank of a frightful precipice toge- 
ther, your Matilda descended, all celestial, and a thousand times 
more lovely than she appears in the lovely portrait that you carry 
about you. At first I feared that she came to reclaim you to 
herself; but instead of that she smiled upon me, and began to 
caress me, and taking my right hand she put it into yours. Then, 
ascending in her brightness, she hovered a while on high, and cast- 
ing down upon me a look of fixed love, she gave me a beck with 
her hand, as it were to follow, and was immediately lost in glory. 

O, my dear children ! cried the marchioness (for such she was), 
might I but once see you united, how I should lift my head ! or, 
rather, how satisfied I should be to lay it down in peace, having 
nothing further to care for on this side of eternity ! 

That night I slept sounder than usual, and did not awake till 
the day was something advanced. On opening the curtain I saw 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 877 

J-.t.mes seated in a moody posture by the side of my bed. How are 
the ladies, James ? said I. Gone, sir. Gone, gone ! I cried out. 
Yes, sir, gone indeed ; but with very heavy hearts, and both of them 
drowned in tears. Here has been a large body of the gens-d'armes 
sent for them, so that there was no resisting. Poor Gerard went 
on his knees to his lady to beg permission to throw himself at your 
honoured feet, as he said, and to bid you adieu, but she would not 
allow him. Mean time she charged me with this watch and ring, 
and this letter for your honour. 

I catched at the letter, and tearing it open, read over and over, 
a thousand times, what will for ever be engraven in my memory 
and on my heart : 

" We leave you we leave you, most beloved of men, and we are 
miserable in so doing ; but alas ! we are not our own mistresses. 
My lord, for this time, has proved unjust and ungrateful ; and re- 
fuses your Louisa, as well to my prayers as to your infinite merits. 
He has affianced her, as it seems, to a prince of the blood, and his 
ambition has blinded him to all other considerations. Be not 
yet in despair, we shall exert our very utmost to get this injurious 
sentence reversed ; and, if your Louisa inherits my blood or spirit, 
not all the engines in France will ever compel her to give her hand 
to another. In the mean time, follow us not ; come not near us, 
we beseech you. Should you be discovered, you will inevitably 
be assassinated, and we also should perish in your loss, my son. 
We are distracted by our fears for you, and it is this fear that has 
prevented us from disclosing ourselves fully to you. Keep up 
your correspondence, however, with our friend De Wit, and 
through him you shall learn the first favourable turn that happens 
in our affairs. I leave you my ring, in token of your being 
the wedded of our heart; and Louisa leaves you her watch, to 
remind you of time past, and to look upon when at leisure, and 
think of 

" Your ELOISA DE . 

" Your LOUISA DE ." 

Yes, I cried, ye precious relics, ye delicious memorandums, to 
my lips, to my heart ! Be ye the companions of my solitude, the 
consolers of my affliction ! Sooner shall this arm be torn off, and 
time itself pass away, than one or the other shall be divided from 
my custody. 

Ah, how useless are admonitions to the impatience of a lover ! 
Fervent love can know no fears. I was no sooner able to sit 
my horse than I set off directly for Paris, with this precaution 
only, that my people were to call me by my mother's maiden name 
of Goodall. 

As we knew not the names or titles of those after whom we 
were in search, our eyes became our only inquisitors ; and we daily 
ranged the town, peering into every carriage of distinction for a 
sight of the mother or daughter; and even prying among the 
lackeys and liveries for the face of our friend Gerard. 

On a day, as my valiant Tirlah and I rode abroad, reconnoitring 



378 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

the suburbs, we heard a noise and shout of distress that issued 
from a distant farm-house ; and as we hastened up the tumult 
grew louder, and the cry of Help ! and Murder ! was several 
times repeated. 

We instantly knocked at the door, but were refused admittance, 
when Tirlah alighted, ran against it, and breaking through bars 
and all with his foot, threw the door off its hinges. 

On entering, we saw a man with four others about him, who were 
going to slit his nose, and to use him very barbarously. Stay your 
hands, I cried ; I will shoot the first man through the head who 
shall dare to proceed in this business. 

Why, sir, said a young fellow, this man wanted to be gracious 
with my pretty young wife ; I caught him in the very attempt ; 
and so I think it but fair and honest to spoil his beauty for such 
sport for time to come. Ay, but, said I, you might murder him, 
and I cannot suffer that. Come, my friend, no harm appears to be 
done as yet ; and, if he pays a handsome penance for the wicked- 
ness of his intention, I would advise you to pass matters over for 
the present. Say, how much do you demand? Five hundred 
louis-d'ors, said the fellow; if he pays that he shall be quit for 
this turn. 

Five hundred louis-d'ors ! I exclaimed ; why, all the clothes on 
his back are not worth the hundredth part of the sum. True, 
master, said the peasant, winking, but his pockets may happen to 
be richer than his clothes. Well, said I, if he secures you in half 
the sum I think you may be satisfied. Why, master, since you 
have said it, I will not go back. Whereupon the astonished 
prisoner was permitted to rise. 

What do you say, you very bad man? Are you willing to pay 
this fellow the sum I agreed for, in compensation of the injury 
you attempted to do him ? I am, sir, said he ; with many thanks 
for your mediation. Then, hastily putting his hand to his pocket, 
he took out a note on the Customs, which, with some small 
matter of cash, made up the money, and we departed the house 
together. 

As I was just going to mount, he came up and accosted me with 
elegance and dignity. Sir, said he, you have made me your debtor 
beyond expression, beyond the power of princes to pay. Be pleased, 
however, to accept the little I have about me; here are five 
thousand louis in this little note-book. Not a penny, sir, indeed ; 
I am by no means in want. You must not refuse, said he, some 
token of my acknowledgment ; here is a stone, valued at double 
the sum I offered you. Then, taking from a pocket the diamond 
button of his hat, he presented it to me. You must excuse me, 
sir, said I ; I can accept of no consideration for doing an act of 
humanity ; and I rejoice to have preserved a person of your dis- 
tinction and generosity. I then turned my horse, and, though he 
called after me, I rode away, being neither desirous of knowing 
or being known. 

My researches hitherto being altogether fruitless, 1 imagined I 
might, with better likelihood, meet my beloved in the public walks, 
public theatres, or rooms of distinguished resort. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 379 

One night, as I sat alone in a side-box at the opera, intently 
gazing and hungering around for some similitude of my Louisa, 
there entered one of the loveliest young fellows I ever beheld. 
He carelessly threw himself beside me, looked around, withdrew 
his eyes, and then looked at me with such a long and piercing 
inquisition as alarmed me, and gave me cause to think I was 
discovered. 

Though the French seldom hesitate, he seemed at once backward 
and desirous of accosting me. At length he entered upon converse 
touching the drama and the music, and spoke with judgment and 
elegance superior to the matter ; while I answered him with due 
complacence, but in a manner that partook of that regardlessness 
for trifles which then sat at my heart. 

Between the acts he turned, and cast his eye suddenly on me. 
Sir, says he, do you believe that there is such a thing as sympa- 
thy ? Occasionally, sir, I think it may have its effects ; though 
I cannot credit all the wonders that are reported of it. I am sorry 
for that, said he, as I ardently wish that your feelings were the 
same as mine at this instant. I never saw you before, sir ; I have 
no knowledge of you; and yet I declare that, were I to choose 
an advocate in love, a second in combat, or a friend in extremity, 
you you are the very man upon whom I would pitch. 

I answered not, but seized his hand and pressed it to my bosom. 
I conceive, sir, continued he, notwithstanding your fluency in the 
language, that you are not a native. My name is D'Aubigny ; I 
live at such a place, and if you will do me the pleasure of a 
single visit, all the honours, respects, and services that our house 
can confer, shall be yours without reserve. Sir, said I, I am of 
England ; my name is Goodall ; and, as soon as a certain affair 
allows me to admit of any acquaintance in Paris, you shall be the 
first elected of my arms and my heart. 

In a few nights after, as Tirlah and 1 were turning a corner of 
the Rue de St. Jacques, we saw three men with their backs to the 
wall, attacked by nearly three times their number. We did not 
hesitate a moment what part to take. At the first pass I ran one 
of the assassins through the body ; Tirlah levelled two more with 
his oaken staff, and the rest took to flight. 

Gentlemen, said one of the three, I thank you for this brave and 
seasonable assistance. Roche, run for a surgeon ; I am wounded, 
I doubt dangerously. Pierre, lend me your arm. Come, gentlemen, 
we have but a little way to my house. 

Though the night was too dark for examining features, I thought 
that the voice was not quite unknown to me. Within a few 
minutes we arrived at a palace that retired inward from the houses 
that were ranged on either hand. On pulling the hanger of a bell, 
the great door opened upon a sumptuous hall, which led to a parlour 
enlightened by a silver sconce that hung from the vaulting. 

As we entered, the master turned short upon me, and looking 
full in my face, and starting and lifting his hands in surprise 
Great ruler of events ! he cried; the very man I wished my brother 
and companion through life ! and this is the very man you have 
sent to my rescue. 



380 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

Just then the surgeon arrived, and I heard him hastily asking 
where the marquis was. On entering, he said I am sorry for 
your misfortune, my lord; but matters may be better than we 
apprehend : arid immediately he took out his case of instruments. 
One of the ruffians, said the marquis, before I was aware, came 
behind, and run me through the back. 

The surgeon then ripped open his lordship's waistcoat, and 
changed colour on seeing his shirt drenched in blood. But getting 
him quickly undressed, and having probed his wound, he struck his 
hands together, and cried Courage, my friends ! it is only a flesh 
business ; the weapon has passed clear of the ribs and vitals. 

As soon as the marquis's wound was dressed, and that we had 
got him to bed I fancy, sir, said I to the surgeon, I may have 
some small occasion for a cast of your office ; I feel a little smart 
in my sword-arm. 

On stripping, he found that a chance thrust had entered about 
half an inch into the muscle above my elbow, and had ripped up 
some of the skin. But he quickly applied the proper dressing, 
and I was preparing to take my leave, when the marquis cried 
out You must not think of parting, my dear friend; you are 
the master of the master here, and lord of this house, and of all 
that is in it. 

The surgeon then ordered his lordship to compose himself as 
soon as possible ; and, having wished him a good-night, I sent 
Tirlah to my lodgings to let my people know that I was well, and 
in friendly hands. I was then conducted by the domestics to a 
superb apartment, where a bed was prepared, and where a small 
supper of elegancies lay fuming on the sideboard. 

Having swallowed a few bits, with a glass or two of wine, I rose 
and sauntered through the room, musing on my Louisa, heavily 
sighing, and nearly despairing of being ever able to find her. 

Some time after I sat down, to undress and get to bed, when 
a number of the officers of justice silently entered my chamber, 
seized my sword that I had put off, and, coming whisperingly to me, 
commanded me to accompany them, without making any noise. 

I saw that it was madness to resist ; and, as I went with them, 
I observed that two of the family-liveries had joined themselves to 
the officers. It then instantly occurred that I was in the house of 
my rival; that the marquis was the very person to whom my 
Louisa had been destined ; that I was somehow discovered ; and 
they were conducting me to the Bastille, of which 1 had heard as 
many affrighting stories as are usually told of the Inquisition. 

Ah, traitor ! said I to myself, is it thus you serve the man who 
but now saved your life at the expense of his own blood ? Let no 
one hereafter trust to the bleating of the lamb, or the courting of 
the turtle ; the roaring of the lion, and the pounces of the vulture, 
may thus deceitfully lurk under the one and the other. 

After passing some streets, they took me to a large house, where 
dwelt one of their chief magistrates, being also a member of their 
parliament. Having knocked respectfully at the gate, and waited 
some time, at length we were admitted, and they took me to a kind 
of lobby, where we stayed, while one of the posse went to advise 



TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 381 

the justiciary of my attendance. At length he returned, and, 
accosting me in a tone of surly and discouraging authority Friend, 
says he, my lord is engaged, and not at leisure to night ; to-morrow, 
perhaps, he may hear what you have to plead in your own defence. 
So saying, he and his fellows thrust me into a waste room, and 
locked and chained the door upon me; and, laughing, bid me to 
warm or cool my heels at pleasure. 

Fool, fool that I was ! said I, to quit the side of my brave and 
faithful companions ; how quickly should we have discomfited this 
magistrate and all his host! But I must be a knight-adventurer 
forsooth, and draw my sword in defence of every scoundrel who 
goes the street. 

I then went and felt the windows, to try if I could force a 
passage for making my escape ; but finding that all were grated 
with strong and impassable bars of iron Oh! I cried, that this 
marquis, this ungrateful D'Aubigny, were now in his fullest 
strength, and opposed to me point to point, that I might reclaim 
from him in an instant the life I have given ! 

I then traversed the room with an inconsistent pace, now rashly 
resolving on furious events, and again more sedately deliberating 
on what I had to do, till, having ruminated thus for the remainder 
of the night, I at last became more at ease, and resigned myself 
to the dispensations of all-disposing Providence, though, I confess, 
with a gloomy and reluctant kind of content. 

When the day appeared, and was something advanced, I heard 
my door unlocking, and the chain taken away, and I concluded 
that they came to summon me to my trial. But, instead of the 
officers of justice, I saw near twenty men in the marquis's livery, 
who silently bowed down before me, and respectfully showed me 
with their hands the way out of my prison. I followed them also 
in silence, and, getting into the street, I wished to know if I was 
really free, and turned from them down the way that led to my 
lodgings ; whereupon they cast themselves before me, and in a 
supplicating posture besought me to go with them. 

Finding then that I was still their prisoner, I gave a longing 
look-out for my valiant fellows; but, as they did not appear, 
I suffered myself to be reconducted to the marquis's palace, and 
followed my obsequious commanders into the proud apartment 
to which they had led me the preceding night, and where, bowing 
to the ground, they all left me and retired. 

As I had been much fatigued in body and mind, I threw myself 
on the bed, leaving events to their issues, and fell into a kind of 
starting and intermitting slumber, when I heard a voice at my side 
shout out in once-loved accents Oh, my dearest mamma, it is he ! 
indeed it is he it is he himself! 

On this I awoke and roused myself, and lifting my languid eyes, 
and fixing them on the object that stood before me And are you 
then, I cried, are you also, Louisa, in the confederacy against me ? 
Say nothing, you are not the Louisa I once knew. I will arise, 
I will go forth ; not all your gates and bars and bolts shall hold 
me ; I will tear my body, and my soul too, if possible, from you 
for ever ! Go to your betrothed, to your beloved ! and leave me to 



382 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

perish ; it is a matter of no import. I am yet pleased that I saved 
your chosen, as it may one day serve to reproach you with the 
merits of the man whom he has so unworthily treated ! 

I could no more. A long silence on all sides ensued, save the 
language that was uttered by heavings and sobbings, when the 
marchioness, coming and casting herself on her knees by my bed 
You have reason, sir ! she exclaimed you have reason to reproach 
and to detest every branch of our ungrateful family for ever ! You 
saved myself, you saved my daughter ; and yet the father and the 
husband proved averse to your deservings, and turned your benefits 
into poison. You have now saved our son, the only one who can 
convey our name to posterity ; and yet, from the beginning, you 
have received nothing in return save wounds, pains, and sickness, 
losses, damages, and disappointments, and at this very day the most 
ignominious usage, where you merited endless thanks and ever- 
lasting renown. Blame my Louisa, then, and me ; but blame not 
my son, sir, for these unworthy events. He is shocked and dis- 
tracted by them ; he is quite innocent of them ; he respects and 
loves you more than ever Jonathan loved the son of Jesse ; but he 
will not, he dare not see you, till we have in some measure made 
his peace. 

How, madam ! I cried but no more of that posture ; it pains me 
past bearing. Is it a fact, can it be possible, that the Marquis 
d'Aubigny should be your son? Is he not of the blood-royal, the 
very rival whom your letter rendered so formidable to me? and 
was it not by his order that I was disgracefully confined in a 
dungeon all night ? 

No, no ! said my lady ; he would have suffered the rack first ! He 
is in despair, quite inconsolable on that account. Let us go, 
my dearest Harry ; let us go and carry comfort to him of whom 
you are the beloved. 

Ah, no, my mamma ! cried out Louisa ; let us put no constraint 
on Mr. Clinton, I pray you ! There has been enough of confine- 
ment ; we leave him now to his liberty ; let him go, even where 
and to whom he likes best. Once, indeed, we could have tied 
this all-conquering champion with the spinning of a silkworm; 
but now he tells us that neither gates, bars, nor bolts shall hold 
him to us. 

Here I threw myself precipitately at her feet Pardon, pardon, 
my Louisa ! I cried ; O pardon the misdeeming transports of your 
lover, and pardon the faults that love alone could commit! My 
enemies are foreign to me ; they and their injuries affect me not ; 
but you are regent within, my Louisa ! you sit throned in my 
heart, and the presumption of an offence from you makes strange 
uproar in my soul ! Well, says she, reaching her hand, and smiling 
through tears, since it is so, poor soul, here is the golden sceptre 
for you ; I think I must take you to mercy. 

I caught her hand, and impressed my very spirit on the wax ; 
and my lady, casting her arms about us, and kissing us both in 
turns, requested that we should go and carry some consolation 
to her dear, repining Lewis. 

As we entered his chamber the marchioness cried out Here he 



TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 383 

comes, my son ! we have brought your beloved to you ; yet not 
your Mr. Goodall, as you thought, but one who is at once both 
your good angel and our good angel, even our own Harry Clinton, 
the betrothed of our souls ! 

I took my seat on the side of the marquis's bed, and, looking 
fondly upon him, would have inquired of his health, but my 
speech for the time was overpowered by my affections. Then, 
taking my hand in his The power of this hand, says he, I have 
found to be great; but has your heart the power to pardon the 
insults and outrage you have received in the house of him who 
is so deeply your debtor? My lord, said I, I have already drank 
largely of Lethe on that head ; nothing but my diffidence of your 
regard can offend me. 

You know not, said my lady you know not yet, my dear Harry, 
how this provoking business came about. I will explain it in a 
few words : 

On our return to Paris, and on our remonstrances to my late lord, 
of the inestimable services you had rendered to his family, he 
inquired your character among the English ; and, notwithstanding 
the report of the nobility of your birth, and your yet nobler 
qualities, hearing also that you had acquired part of your fortune 
in trade, he conceived an utter contempt for you, and took an 
utter aversion to you. 

Some time after, as he took notice that Louisa and I wanted our 
watch and our ring, I dreaded his displeasure, and gave him 
room to think that the robbers had taken them from us in Flanders, 
and this report became current among our domestics. 

In the mean time, my lord became importunate with our Louisa 

respecting her marriage with the Prince of C , who was then 

with the army; and her prayers and tears hitherto had been 
the only artillery which she had used in her defence. 

But when the couriers brought word that the prince was on his 
return, my lord sent for Louisa, and gave her instant and absolute 
orders to prepare for her nuptials ; but she full as positively and 
peremptorily replied, that her soul was already wedded ; that she 
would never prostitute her body where her heart was an alien ; 
and that all the tortures of the Inquisition should not change her 
resolution. Her father thereupon rose to such ungovernable fury, 
that with one blow of his hand he struck her senseless to his feet ; 
but when he saw my lamb, my darling, all pale, and as dead before 
him, the tide of nature returned, and the conflict of his passions 
became so violent that an imposthume broke in his stomach, and 
falling, he was suffocated, and expired on the spot. 

Soon after the prince arrived. He had never seen my daughter ; 
but his ambition to possess a beauty, of whom the grand monarch 
himself was said to have been enamoured, had caused him to 
demand her in marriage: for that purpose he also did us the 
honour of a visit. Louisa refused to appear; and I told his 
highness, with the best grace I could, that she happened to be 
pre-engaged. In a few days after he met my son on the Tuileries, 
and accosted him to the same intent; but my son had been 
previously prejudiced in your favour, my Harry, and answered the 



384 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

prince with so cold or so haughty an air, that further words 
ensued, they both drew, and his highness was slightly wounded; 
but, as company interposed, the affair was hushed up, and, shortly 
after, the prince was killed in a nightly broil upon the Pont-Neuf. 
We then wrote to our friend, De Wit, to advertise you of these 
matters, and to hasten you hither : but you arrived, my child you 
arrived before there could be any expectation of an answer. 

Two days ago, as I observed that my lamb's spirits were some- 
thing dejected, I prevailed upon her to take an airing to our country 
villa. On our return this morning, we were struck half dead with 
the news that our Lewis was wounded, and dangerously ill in his 
bed. We flew into his room, and were still more alarmed to find 
him in a fury that is not to be imagined ; while Jacome, his old 
steward, was on his knees, all pale and quaking, at a distance before 
him. Villain! he cried, what have you done with my friend? 
What have you done with my champion ; the preserver of my 
life? Please your lordship, said he, trembling, I took him for a 
highwayman ; I saw my lady's ring and my young mistress's watch 
in his custody ; I will swear to the property before the parliament 
of Paris, and so I lodged him in prison till till 

Go, wretch ! cried my son, recall your information ; take all your 
fellows with you, and instantly bring me back my friend, or your 
ears shall be the forfeit ; but conduct him to his own chamber ; I 
cannot yet bear to see him, I cannot bear the reproach that his 
eye must cast upon me. 

All afflicted, and yet more astonished, my Louisa and I sat down 
by the side of my son, casting looks of surprise and inquiring doubt 
on each other. At length I said What is this that I hear of our 
ring and our watch ? Alas ! he is no highwayman who took them 
from us ; they were our own free gift, a mite in return for a million 
of services. But do you know any thing of the possessor ? I know, 
answered Lewis, that he is the loveliest of mankind, the preserver 
of my life, and that his name is Goodall. Ah ! screamed out Louisa, 
there we are lost again. This Goodall must certainly have mur- 
dered our precious Clinton, and possessed himself of our gifts ; he 
would never have parted with them while he had life. Oh, my 
sister! said my son, when you see my friend Goodall, you will 
think nothing of your Harry Clinton ! Why, why were you so 
hasty, so precipitate in your choice ? A robber, a murderer ! No ; 
had I a thousand lives, I would pawn them all for the probity that 
heaven has made apparent in the face of my preserver. 

It is with shame and great reluctance, my dearest brother, that 
at times I recite passages tending so much to my own praise ; 
and yet, did I omit them, I should do great injustice to the kind 
and amiable partiality of those who were so fondly my lovers and 
my beloved. 

But, madam, said I to the marchioness, did you not hint some- 
thing of his majesty's being enamoured of my Louisa ? Ah, such a 
rival would be a terrible business indeed, especially in a country 
of unlimited power ! 

There is no fear of that now, said my lady. The king has 
changed his fancy, from young mistresses and old counsellors, to 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 385 

young counsellors and old mistresses. But what I mentioned was 
once very serious and alarming. 

My Louisa was scarce turned of fourteen, when the Duchess 
de Choisseul requested her company to Marlay, where the court 
then was. The king fixed his eye on her, and inquired who she 
was ; but took no further notice at that time. Missing her, how- 
ever, at the next, and again at the following drawing-room, he 
asked the marquis what became of his fair daughter ; said he had 
a place in his eye for her ; and desired, in an accent of authority, 
that he would send her to court. 

The marquis instantly took the alarm. He was ever jealous 
of his honour, and singularly nice in matters of female reputation. 
He gave his majesty a sort of equivocal consent ; and, hurrying 
home, ordered me directly to prepare for carrying my daughter put 
of the French dominions. The night was employed in hastening 
and packing. We disguised our Louisa in the manner as you 
saw her metamorphosed at Kotterdam, and set off for Holland 
before day. The rest you know, my Clinton, as you were the prin- 
cipal mover in all our concerns. But tell me, my Lewis, can you 
conjecture on what account those assassins set upon you ? I declare, 
madam, said the marquis, I cannot ; perhaps they mistook me for 
another ; or, now I recollect, it might be owing to some familiar 
chat which I had the other night with a pretty opera-girl, who is 
said to be in the keeping of a very great man. But, madam, you 
forgot to tell my brother how my father was banished, on account 
of Louisa, to his paternal seat in Languedoc, on the borders of the 
Mediterranean. Very true, said the marchioness, and was not 
recalled till Madam Maintenon was taken into supreme favour. 

But I wonder what is become of our faithful Gerard ; I thought 
that he would have been the first to come, and to throw himself at 
the feet of his hero. Indeed, my Harry, he would have tired any, 
who love you less, with his praises, and perpetual talking of you and 
your exploits. O, here he comes ! Step in, Gerard. Is there any 
one in this company that you remember beside the family ? 

Gerard then advanced with a half-frantic aspect, and, kneeling 
and grappling at my hand, seemed desirous of devouring it. God 
be praised! he cried; God be praised, my noble, my glorious 
master, that I see you once again ! and above all, that I have the 
blessing of seeing you in a place where a throne of beaten gold 
should be raised to your honour. O, had I been here, all sorts 
of respects and worships, instead of indignities, should have been 
paid to your deservings! But I have provided for the hang-dog 
Jacome ; I have tied him neck and heels, and tumbled him into a 
dark vault. 

Ay, said I ; but my good friend, Gerard, I have not yet got my 
share of satisfaction upon him ; pray, show me where he is. I then 
followed Gerard to the place where the deplorable wretch was 
cast ; and, cutting all his cords, I led him back to the company, and 
warmly joined his petition for pardon and restoration. 

As soon as Jacome and Gerard were withdrawn Ah, my brother ! 
cried the marquis, what new name shall we find for a man of your 
new character ? Moreover, what shall we do for you ? You have 

c c 



386 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

quite overpowered us ; we sink, we drown under the sense of our 
obligations ! We have nothing worth your acceptance save this 
simple wench ; and what is she in comparison of what we owe you ? 
Ah ! I cried, she is that without whom all things are nothing ; 
she is the living treasure, the Kachel of Kachels ; seventy times 
seven years were too short a service for her ! I would not exchange 
this little pearly joint of this very little finger for all the gems that 
grow in the mines of India ; and so saying, I pressed the precious 
finger with my lips, while Louisa turned upon me an eye of such 
ineffable satisfaction and melting acknowledgment, as sunk upon 
my soul, and wrapped it in elysium. 

Ay but, my Harry, said the marquis, you ought not to prize your 
Louy as much as me ; she did not fall in love with you at first 
sight, as I did. How did you know that, honest friend? cried 
Louisa. Is there a necessity that our tongues as well as our 
blushes should be tell-tales? Are maidens to trumpet forth their 
thoughts, like you broad-fronted men, whose ornament is your bold- 
facedness? 

Thus happy, above all styled happy upon earth, we joyed and 
lived in each other, continuing a mutual commerce of delightful 
sensibilities and love for love. 

Alas ! our blissful junto was soon to be broken in upon. In a 
few days, one of the royal pages came and intimated to the mar- 
chioness that his majesty required her immediate presence at 
court; and we remained in a kind of fearful and fluctuating 
suspense till her return. 

As she entered, the consternation in her countenance instantly 
struck an alarm to all our hearts. O, my children ! my dear, my 
dear children ! we must part, she cried ; and that, too, speedily. 
Our hour of bliss is past ; our sunshine is over, and the clouds 
gather thick upon us, heavy laden with wretchedness. Alas ! my 
heart misgave me ever since that inauspicious encounter the other 
morning. As we came from our villa a great funeral met us (a bad 
omen as I have heard) ; our carriage stopped to let them pass, and 

the carriage of the Duke of Ne rs drove up beside us. As we 

remained within a few paces of each other, he gazed at Louisa 
with such enamoured intenseness as caused her to colour and turn 
aside. However, he accosted us not, nor inquired concerning us ; 
it seems our arms and livery were too sure an indication of our 
name and quality. In short, on my approaching the presence, the 
king affected to smile very graciously upon me, and said I have 
provided, madam, a noble and princely husband for your daughter ; 

it is the Duke of Ne rs. Ah! I cried, bending my knee in 

a supplicating posture, my daughter is already engaged, by bands 
of the most endearing and indissoluble obligations, to a man who 
has preserved the lives and honours of all our family ; to a man 
who, I trust, by his eminent courage and qualities, will become 
the brightest jewel in your majesty's crown. Madam, said he, 
severely, you must withdraw your election. I find I have ordered 
matters superior to your merits : but my will is the law here, 
and shall be obeyed. I rose dejectly, curtsied, and withdrew 
without reply. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 387 

Ah ! I exclaimed, on what summit does this rival hold his abode ? 
I will instantly go and scale it, and at once put an end to his life 
and his pretensions ! My lady then, throwing her arms about my 
neck, and pressing her lips to my cheek What romance, says she, 
is this, my Harry ? would you at once fight the duke and the king, 
and the whole army of France? No, my child, prudence reduces 
us to more salutary, however deplorable, measures. We must 
part, my Harry we must part this very night, and my Louisa 
must depart with you. My chaplain shall, this minute, unite you by 
ties that death alone can sunder. Alas ! my precious babes, 1 little 
expected that your nuptials should be celebrated by tears and 
wailings ! But better these than no nuptials. When you are once 
joined, I shall care little for myself. And, if we meet no more 
here, we may yet meet hereafter, as happily as the barbarians who 
tear us asunder. 

The chaplain was then summoned, and, having performed his 
office, no congratulations nor salutations ensued, save a kiss and a 
sigh of mine on the hand of my angel. The marquis then called 
me, and, drawing me down to him, he pressed me ardently to his 
bosom, cried O my Harry ! O my Harry ! burst into tears, and 
dismissed me. 

Mean while, all was in bustle and hurry throughout the palace. 
No festival was prepared, no bridal bed laid. Horses, arms, and car- 
riages, were all the cry ; and the marchioness, with an anguishing 
heart, but amazing resolution, issued her orders with a presence of 
mind that seemed serene in the midst of tempest. 

I then sent for my brave fellows, with orders to double their 
arms, and to double their ammunition. They came accordingly. 
It was now within three hours of day. All was despatched all in 
readiness ; the carriages were at the gate. Silence sat on every 
tongue, and a tear on every cheek. I threw myself at my mother's 
feet, I clasped, I clung to them ; she wept aloud over me, but 
neither of us uttered a word. When, rending myself away I took 
my sobbing Louisa under my arm, seated her gently in her chariot, 
placed myself to support her, and away we drove. 

When we got clear of the town, and were speeding on the way, 
my Louisa started and cried out O how fast how very fast they 
take me from you, my mamma ! Whither, whither do they carry 
me, perhaps never to return, never to meet again? I answered 
not, but kissed her head, and drew her gently to me, and she 
seemed more at ease. But, after a while, I felt her agitation at 
my bosom, and she exclaimed From my birth to this hour of woe, 
my blessed mamma, never was I from those dear arms of yours ! 
shall I ever, shall I ever again behold those eyes that used to look 
with such fondness upon me ? 

Here I could no longer contain, but taking her hands between 
mine, and weeping upon them, I said Will you then, my angel 
are you resolved upon breaking the heart of your Harry? 
no ! says she ; no ! not for worlds upon worlds would I break 
that dear and feeling heart, the heart of my heart, the heart of 
which I became enamoured. She then leaned her head fondly over, 
and in a while fell fast asleep ; while my arms gently encircled and 

o c2 



388 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

my soul hovered over her, as the wings of a turtle over her new- 
begotten. 

When she awoke, and found herself so endearingly situated, she 
gave me a look that overvalued the ransom of a monarch ; she 
kissed my hands in turns, she kissed the skirts of my garments. O, 
she cried, I will endeavour, I will do my best to be more composed ! 
I know I ought not to repine. I am too rich too happy. I 
ought to wish for nothing more, I ought to wish for no one more ; 
since my Harry is so near me, since I have him to myself. But 
but and here her lovely lips began again to work, and the drops 
that trembled in her living brilliants could hardly be restrained 
from breaking prison. Soon after the grief of her heart over- 
weighed her spirits, and she fell asleep into my arms, that opened 
of themselves to receive her. 

On setting up for the night, I rejoiced to find that my Louisa 
was something more easy ; and that her repose on the way had 
greatly deducted from the fatigue that I apprehended. 

At length we reached Calais, and immediately sent to the beach 
to engage a ship for wafting us over to the land of freedom and 
rights, but the wind was contrary. 

Mean while the day advanced toward evening, and my Louisa 
and I sat together in the arbour of a little pleasure garden that lay 
behind the house, when James came hastening to us and cried 
Hide yourself, madam, for heaven's sake hide yourself ! Here is the 
Duke de Ne rs, with a large party of the king's light horse. 

Poor Louisa started up and attempted to fly ; but she trembled 
and grew faint, and sunk down again on her seat. 

James, said I, stay and take care of your mistress ; then, turning 
with hasty steps to the house, I recommended my spirit in a short 
ejaculation, and entered, determined that the duke should accom- 
pany me in death. His highness was in the parlour. I advanced 
fiercely toward him. So, sir, says he, you have cost us a warm 
chase Heavens, what do I see! and so crying out, he threw 
himself back into an arm-chair, all panting, and his aspect 
working with distraction and disappointment. Cursed chance ! he 
again exclaimed; are you the man, Clinton? Ah! I must not 
hurt you, I ought not to injure you ; but what is then to be done ? 
Where have you put my Louisa ? But no matter ; let her not 
appear, let me not see her. I could not answer the conse- 
quence. I would be just if I could, Clinton. O love, O honour, 
how you do distract me! You refused my treasures and jewels, 
Clinton ; but then you have rent from me a gem more estimable 
than my dukedom. Help saints, help angels, help me to wrestle 
with myself! Honour, virtue, gratitude ! O, compel me to be just ! 
Tear, tear me away, while there's strength to depart! Adieu, 
Clinton ! you are recompensed ; should we happen to meet again, I 
may assail you without reproach. And so saying, he rose suddenly, 
and rushed out of the house. 

I then hastened to seek my love, but had scarce entered the 
garden when I saw James on his knees before her, endeavouring 
to oppose her way to the house. But she cried Away, villain, 
let me pass! They are murdering my lord, they are murdering 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 389 

my husband! I will go and perish with him. Then, breaking 
away from him, she shot along like a lapwing, till, seeing me 
advancing, she sprung upon my bosom, crying O my Harry! 

my Harry! are you safe, are you safe? and fainted away in 
my arms. 

The rest of my story, my lord, is no way material or entertain- 
ing. The serene of heartfelt happiness has little of adventure in 
it, and is only interesting to the possessors. 

Having settled my affairs in London, and carrying my Eden 
along with me, I passed into Holland to settle, and be quit of 
matters there also ; for the world that I wished was in my holding, 
and all tilings else appeared either nugatory or encumbering. 

It was there that I met our Meekly ; and, taking a pleasant 
tour through the skirts of Germany, we entered France, and, 
leaving Paris on the right hand, we reached the marquis's country 
seat, situate near twenty leagues beyond the metropolis. 

What a meeting ! what an interview ! My Louisa sunk into 
tears for half an hour on the bosom of her mother; and the 
marquis would put me from him and pull me to him again, all 
panting with transport, and insatiate of his caresses. It was 
too much of joy; it was pleasure too paining. The domestics 
would no longer be restrained from their share of the felicity ; they 
rushed in, and, as though we had been new descended divinities, 
they dropped on their knees ; they fell prostrate, and clung about 
us ; kissed our feet, our hands, our garments, and broke forth 
into cries as though it had been the house of mourning and 
lamentation. 

On retiring, they got my Louisa's Gerard to themselves. He 
now became a man of mighty importance among them. They 
crowded about him, and in a joint voice, but a distraction of ques- 
tions, inquired after our travels, our adventures, our good and 
evil occurrences, and all that concerned us. 

The marchioness then coming, and casting her honoured arms 
around me, and weeping upon me, cried aloud O Harry, my son, 
my son ! I delivered my daughter to you, even as Edna committed 
her Sarah, of special trust, to Tobias, and I see that you have 
entreated her very kindly, my son, my son ! 

As my Louisa now began to be apparently pregnant, I earnestly 
pressed my precious mother and brother to accompany us to 
England ; the place where law was regent ; where there was no 
apprehension of inquisitions or bastilles; and where the peasant 
was guarded, as with a bulwark of adamant, against every en- 
croachment of arbitrary power. They assented with joy ; and the 
marquis, going to his escritoir, brought forth bills to the amount 
of ten millions of livres, the produce of some concerns which he 
had disposed of for the purpose. Here, my brother, says he, if 

1 am not able to be grateful, if I am not able to be generous, I 
will at least be just ; here is the patrimony to which my lovely 
sister is entitled. But I said to the marquis, My Louisa can admit 
of no accession of value. Keep your goods to yourself. Remember 
how Esau said to Jacob, I have enough, enough, my brother; 
these things can add nothing to the abundance of my blessing^. 



390 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

But then, he cried, you must accept them as a token of our loves ; 
and so he constrained and impelled them upon me. 

Soon after we passed to London, where we continued some 
months, and where my Louisa was delivered of my little Eloisa, 
who was said to be the beautiful likeness of her father. 

We then retired to my seat near Stratford, on the fatal Avon, 
the chief of the landed possessions that Mr. Golding had bequeathed 
me, where we remained something upward of five years, happy, 
I think, above all that ever were happy upon earth ; for my 
Louisa was perpetual festivity to our sight and to our hearts ; her 
eyes beamed with living and sentimental glory ; her attitudes were 
<2T ice: her movements were music; and her smiles were fascination. 
Still varying, yet exhibiting the same delight; like the northern 
aurora, she shone in all directions ; and she sported as though she 
had gone to heaven from time to time, and borrowed all her plays 
from the kingdom of little children. 

But she needed not to go to heaven, since heaven was ever 
in her an I round about her, and that she could no more move 
from it than she could move from herself. She had been, from 
her earliest years, the beloved disciple of the celebrated Madam 
Guion ; and the world, with all its concerns, its riches and respects, 
had fallen off from her, as the cloak fell away from the burning 
chariot of Elijah. She looked at nothing but her Lord in all 
tiling ; she loved nothing but him in any thing ; and he was, in 
her heart, a pleasure passing sense, as well as a peace that passed 
understanding. 

Our friends now prevailed upon us to accompany them, in our 
turn, to France ; together with our prattling Eloisa, who was 
become the darling and inseparable companion of her grandmother 
and her uncle. We again took London in our way. I there re- 
newed, for a while, my old acquaintance with my fellows in trade, 
and they persuaded me to join them in a petition to his majesty 
for the restoration of some of the lapsed rights of their corporation, 
as your lordship may remember. 

From Calais we turned, and by long but pleasant journeys at 
length arrived at the marquis's paternal seat at Languedoc, that 
opened a delightful prospect on the Mediterranean. And here we 
continued upwards of five years more, even as Adam continued in 
paradise, compassed in by bliss from the rest of the world. 

During this happy period, I often pressed my dear marquis to 
marry ; but he would take me to his arms and say O my Harry! 
show me but the most distant resemblance of our Louisa, and I 
will marry, and be blessed, without delay. 

In the mean while my angel made me the joyful father of a 
little son, who was also said to be the happier resemblance of 
his happy father. Then, though I had long disregarded the 
world and all its concerns, as I saw a family increasing upon 
me, and also considered the poor as my appointed and special 
creditors, I resolved once more to return and settle my long- 
suspended accounts. 

As for the marchioness, she protested that she could not think 
of parting with her little Eloisa, and that she should not be able 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 391 

to survive her absence ten days. So my Louisa and I, and my 
little Bichard, who was named after you, my lord, set out by sea, 
and after a favourable voyage arrived in England ; comforted, 
however, with the promise that our friends would join us as soon 
as possible in Britain. 

Within the ten subsequent months we received the joyful tidings 
that our brother was married to the third daughter of the Duke 
of Alenijon that they were all in the highest triumph, and would 
speedily be with us in a joint jubilate on the banks of the Avon. 

Soon after, as my Louisa and I rode along the river, pleasing 
ourselves with the prospect of a speedy union with persons so 
dear to us, and talking and laughing away at the cares of the 
covetous, and the ambition of the high-minded, a fowler inadvert- 
ently fired a shot behind us, and my horse, bounding aloft, plunged 
with me into the current, from whence however I was taken, and 
unwillingly reserved to years of inexpressible misery of a misery 
that admitted not of a drop of consolation. 

Mean while my love had fallen, with a shriek, from her horse, 
and lay senseless on the sod. Some of my people flew back, and 
bringing a carriage conveyed us gently home, where my Louisa was 
undressed and put into a bed, from whence she never rose. Her 
fright had given such a shock to her blood and spirits as threw 
her into a violent fever. 

On the second day, while I sat with the physicians by her side, 
James put in his head and beckoned me forth. Ah, my dearest 
master ! says he, I pray God to give you the strength and patience 
of Job ; you have great need of them, for your calamities, like his, 
come all in a heap upon you. Here is a messenger despatched from 
France with very heavy tidings that my sweet young lady, your 
darling Eloisa, was cast away in a sloop, upon a party of pleasure, 
and that the good old marchioness did not outlive her five days. 
Then lifting my eyes to heaven Strip, strip me, my God! I cried 
to the skin to the bone : leave but my Louisa, and I will bless 
thy dispensations ! 

On the next day, my little Dickey was taken ill of a severe 
cold that he caught, through want of due attention during the 
sickness of his mother. As he was of a florid complexion, his 
disorder fell suddenly in an inflammation on his lungs, and in less 
than twenty-lour hours he went to join his little brothers and 
sisters in their eternity. Did I not feel these losses? Yes, yes, 
my friends, they wrung they rent my vitals; yet I still lifted 
my heart in an eager prayer, and repeatedly cried Take, take 
all even the last mite ; leave, leave me but my Louisa, and I will 
bless thee, O my Creator ! 

Alas! what could this avail? Can an insect arrest the motion 
whereby the round universe continues its course? On the fifth 
day I perceived that the eyes of my Louisa the lamps of my 
life began to lose their lustre. The breath that was the balm 
of all my cares and concerns, grew difficult and short. The roses 
of my summer died away on her cheek. All agonizing, I felt and 
participated her changes; and she expired while I dropped and 
lay senseless beside her. 



392 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

I knew not what our people did with her or me afterwards. 
For three weeks I lay in a kind of dosing but uneasy stupor ; 
neither do I recollect during that period when or whether I 
received any kind of sustenance. 

At length I awoke to the poignancy and bitterness of my 
situation. I did not awake to life, but rather to the blackest 
gloom of the regions of death; and yet it was from this depth 
and enfolding of death alone that my soul could find or would 
accept an alleviation of its anguish. 

earth ! I cried, where is thy centre ? How deeply am I sunk 
beneath it! how are the worms exalted over me! how much 
higher are the noxious reptiles that crawl upon earth ! I will not 
accuse thee, thou great Disposer. I have had my day the 
sweetest that ever was allotted to man ; but O, thy past blessings 
serve only to enhance my present miseries., and to render me the 
most accursed of all thy creatures ! 

1 then rose, and threw myself along the floor, and my faithful 
and valiant companions immediately gathered to me ; but finding 
that I would not be removed, they cast themselves around me. 

All light was shut out save the glimmering of a taper ; and for 
seven nights and seven days we dwelt in silence, except the solemn 
interruptions of smothered sobs and wailings. 

At length my spirit reproved me. What property, said I to 
myself, have these people in my sufferings, or why should I burden 
those who love me with my afflictions ? I then constrained myself, 
and went and took out a drawer. Here, my friends, I said, here is 
something that may help hereafter to dry up your tears. Divide 
these thousands among you ; neither these counters nor your ser- 
vices are now of further use. Fare ye well ! fare ye well ! my 
worthy and beloved brothers ! God will give you a more gracious 
master; but but such another mistress you never never will 
find ! I then took each of them to my arms, and kissed them 
in turns, and the house was instantly filled with heart-tearing 
lamentations. 

I now expected and wished to be left wholly alone ; but James 
and two domestics remained against my will. I then endeavoured 
to seem easy I even struggled to appear cheerful, that I might 
communicate the less of grief to the voluntary sharers in my 
misery. O world, world! I said to myself; thou once pleasant 
world, we have now bid a long and eternal adieu to each other! 
From thee I am cut asunder thou art annihilated to me and we 
mutually reject every kind of future commerce. 

Ah ! how much deeper was my death than that of those in the 
tomb "where the wicked cease from troubling, and where the 
weary are at rest ! " While I was dead to every relish of light 
and of life, I was wholly alive to all the gloom and horrors of 
the grave. The rays of the sun became an offence to my soul the 
verdure of the fields, the whole bloom of nature, was blasted and 
blasting to my sight ; and I wished to sink yet deeper, and to dig 
a lower bottom to myself of darkness and distress. 

I no longer regarded what the world thought of me, or what 
it did to me; and I left my hairs and my nails, even as those 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 



393 



of Nebuchadnezzar, to grow like eagles' feathers and birds' 
claws. 

My friend James, in the mean time, took a place for me in this 
town, in order to remove me from scenes that could only servo 
to perpetuate or aggravate my misery, by reminding me of the 
blessedness that I had once enjoyed. He was now become my 
controller. I was patient and passive to any thing to every 
thing ; and so he conducted me hither I neither knew nor cared 
how. 

In all this time, though I panted after a state of insensibility, 
even as a traveller in the burning desert thirsts after a cool and 
slaking stream, I never attempted to lay a violating hand on the 
work of my Creator. I did not even wish an alleviation of my 
misery, since my God had appointed that I should be so very 
miserable. 

At length my spirit rose from its blackness to a kind of calm 
twilight. I called for a Bible, and, since this world was incapable 
of a drop of consolation, I wished to know if the next had any 
in store. 

As I read, the whole of the letter and of the facts contained 
therein appeared as so many seals and veils that removed from 
before my eyes, and discovered depths under depths, and heavens 
above heavens, to my amazed apprehension. I had no vision, no 
revelation of these matters ; but the conviction was impressed as 
strongly on my soul as though an angel of God himself had re- 
vealed them to me. 

How this came to pass I know not. Homer gives to his heroes 
a sight into futurity, at the time that their spirits are breaking 
away from the shackles of flesh and blood : and it is not unlikely 
that the eye of the soul, when wholly turned from all carnal and 
earthly objects, can penetrate with the greater scope and clarity 
into concerns that are merely celestial and divine. 

I have now told you the whole of my dreary history, my friends, 
till I met with our Harry ; and the rest our Harry can tell. 

But Harry was in no manner of vein at present for entertaining, 
or receiving entertainment, from any one. His eyes were swelled 
with weeping, his spirits totally depressed, and getting up, as 
with the burden of fourscore years on his shoulders, he retired 
slowly and silently to his apartment. 

On an evening, after coffee, as the earl stood fondly fooling with 
his Harry, as one child with another, he turned to Mr. Clinton, 
and said How came it to pass, my brother, that Jesus suffered 
near four thousand years to elapse before he became incarnate for 
the salvation of the world, although it was by him alone that the 
world could be saved ? 

We may as well demand of God, said Mr. Clinton, why he suffered 
near four days of creation to elapse before he compacted yon 
glorious body of far-beaming light ; for this matter was barely 
a type, and the sun himself but a shadow of the Christ that was to 
come. But did the world want light before light became incor- 
porated in its illustrious circumscription? No, my lord. Jesus, 
who was from eternity the illumination of the dark immensity of 



394 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

nature ; Jesus, who alone is the living light of spirit, soul, and 
sentiment, the perpetual fountain of the streams of beauty and 
truth, he said Let there be light; and instantly, through the 
darkness of a ruined world, the internity of his ever-living light 
kindled up an externity of corporal irradiation, that has its effluence 
from him, and cannot be but by him. 

Now as a day is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as a 
day, in the sight of God, you see that the fourth day of creation, 
wherein the light of this outward world was compacted into the 
glorious body of the sun, precisely answers to the four thousandth 
year wherein Jesus, the light of eternity, was to become embodied 
and incarnate in Christ the son of righteousness. 

But as the world wanted not light before the sun opened his first 
morning in the east ; neither did it want the means of salvation 
before the blessed doctrine of Messiah was promulged upon earth ! 

All sorts of sectarians, all persons of selfish and little minds, 
would make a monopoly of the Saviour; they would shut him 
up into a conventicle, and say to their God" Thus far shalt thou 
go, and no farther." But he is not so to be confined. The spirit of 
our Jesus bloweth wide and where he listeth ; and he is at once both 
the purifier and redeemer, as well of all nations, as also of all nature. 

Accordingly we see that the Turks, who are wholly unblessed by 
true religion or liberty, who live the slaves of slaves, without a form 
of civil government, temporally subjected to the will of a tyrant, 
and spiritually to the worship of a sensual impostor, yet want not the 
feelings of our Jesus in their heart. 

Even the wild Indians, who never listened to the toll of a bell, 
nor ever were called into any court of civil judicature, these want 
not their attachments, their friendships, their family feelings, nor 
the sweet compunctions and emotions of the human heart, by Jesus 
forming it to divine. 

The truth is, that people live incomparably more by impulse and 
inclination than by reason and precept. Keason and precept are 
not always within our beck ; to have their due influence, they 
require frequent inculcation and frequent recollection ; but impulse 
and inclination are more than at hand; they are within us, and 
from the citadel rule the outworks of man at pleasure. 

When the apostle, speaking of Christ, affirms that " there is no 
other name under heaven whereby a man may be saved;" and 
again, when he affirms that '* those who had not received the law, 
are a law unto themselves ; " he intends one and the same thing. 
He intends that Christ, from the fall of man, is a principle of re- 
demption in the bosoms of all living ; that he is not an outward but 
an inward redeemer, working out our salvation by " the change of 
our depraved nature;" that in and from him alone arise all the 
sentiments and sensibilities that warm the heart with love, that 
expand it with honour, that wring it with compunction, or that 
heave it with the story of distant distress ; and that he alone can 
be qualified to be judge at the last day, who from the first day to 
the last was internally a co-operator and witness of all that ever 
passed within the bosoms of all men. 

Hence it is, that although the Christian countries have received 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 395 

the two tables of the laws of Christ, his external as well as internal 
revelation, each witnessing to the other that the God of our gospel 
is the God of our nature ; the nations, however, who are strangers 
to his name, yet acknowledge his influence, they do not indeed 
hear, but they feel the precepts of "that light which lighteth 
every man who cometh into the world." 

My dearest brother, said the earl, my conceptions are quite clear 
with respect to the omnipresence of Christ's divinity: but as his 
body is circumscribed by external features and lineaments, I can 
form no notion of its being in several places at once : how then 
will it be, I pray you, at and after the last day? Will he be 
present to, and approachable only, by a select number of his saints ; 
or will he go certain journeys and circuits through the heavens, 
blessing all in rotation with his beatific presence ? 

Is not the body of yonder sun circumscribed, my lord? Most 
certainly. It is now, said Mr. Clinton, at a distance of many 
millions of leagues from you ; and yet you see it as evidently, 
and feel its influence as powerfully, as if it were within your reach. 
Nay, it is more than within your reach, it is within your existence : 
it supplies comfort and life to your animal body and life ; and 
you could not survive an hour without its influence and operations. 

Now this is no other than the apt type and prefiguring promise 
of what Christ will be to his new-begotten in the resurrection, 
" when corruption shall be swallowed up of glory, and mortal of 
immortality." The same blessed body which, for the redemption 
of commiserated sinners, went through the shameful and bloody 
process of scourges, thorns, spittings, and buftetings ; which hung 
six agonizing hours on the cross ; which descended into the grave, 
and thence opened the way through death into life, and through 
time into eternity ; even this body shall then shine forth in ineffable 
beauty and beatitude, in essentially communicative grace and glory, 
through the height and through the depth, through the length 
and through the breadth, beaming wide beyond the universe, from 
infinity to infinity ! 

Father, Son, and Holy Spirit will then become co-embodied in 
this divine body ; they will be the repletion of it ; they will operate 
all things by it. To bring the Creator nearer to his creatures, the 
invisible Godhead will then become visible, the infinite circum- 
scribed, the unapproachable accessible, and the incomprehensible 
comprehended, within the humanity of our Christ. 

Then will his cross be exalted, for an ensign to the circling, 
bending, and worshipping universe; his wreath of thorns will 
kindle all nature with the dartings and castings forth of its cor- 
ruscations ; and the reed of mockery will become the sceptre of 
unlimited domination ! 

From his five wounds shall be poured forth incessant floods of 
glory and wide-diffusing blessedness upon all his redeemed : adoring 
worlds, in self-abjection, shall strive to sink beneath the abjection 
that became their salvation : these ever-apparent ensigns of so 
dearly purchased benefits, shall inevitably attract the wills of all 
creatures : they shall cause all hearts and affections to rush and 
cleave to him, as steel-dust rushes to adamant, and as spokes stick 



396 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

in the nave whereon they are centred. There shall be no lapse 
thenceforward, no falling away, for ever; but God in his Christ, 
and Christ in his redeemed, shall be a will and a wisdom, and an 
action and a mightiness, and a goodness and a graciousness, and a 
glory rising on glory, and a blessing rising on blessedness, through 
an ever-beginning to a never-ending eternity. 

O brother, brother, brother! exclaimed the earl I am enrap- 
tured, I am entranced ! I see it all, I feel it all. I am already, 
with all my corruptions, with all my transgressions, desirous of 
being crushed to nothing under the foot of my Kedeemer. But he 
comforts instead of crushing me. O that I were this night, this 
very moment, to be dissolved, and to be with my Christ ! 

That night the earl was quite happy, and pleasant and affec- 
tionate, even beyond his custom. He said and did every thing that 
could be endearing to his Harry, and to his friends. He caressed 
them at parting for bed. He smilingly shook hands with all the 
domestics that approached him ; and in the morning was found 
dead, without any notice or warning to the servants who attended 
and lay in the room. 

A sudden and grievous alarm was instantly given through the 
family, and quickly reached the town, and spread through the 
adjacent country. 

Harry fell upon his father's face, and wept upon him, and kissed 
him, and wept aloud, and kissed him again, crying My father ! O, 
my father ! 

And they laid his remains in a plated coffin, under escutcheons 
and a sable canopy of velvet ; and the house and the court was 
circled with mourners from all parts ; and they mourned for him 
fifty and nine days ; and on the sixtieth day he was deposited in the 
family tomb ; but Mr. Clinton would not permit Harry to attend 
the funeral of his father. 

Our hero was now the master of millions, approaching to the 
prime of youth, glowing with health, action, and vigour of beauty 
incomparable, beloved of all who knew him, and the attraction and 
admiration of every eye where he passed. Yet all these advantages, 
with all his higher accomplishments, became as matters of no value ; 
they sunk and sickened to his sense, while he felt a void in his 
bosom, eager after he knew not what, sighing he knew not why ; 
keen and craving in his desires, yet pining and languid in the want 
of possession. 

What is the matter, my love ? said Mr. Clinton. My dear brother 
died in a good old age. Such things should be expected ; we know 
that they must be ; and we ought not to grieve as persons who are 
without hope. 

True, sir, said Harry ; and yet it is a very melancholy thing for a 
poor man to reflect how very rich he was a very little while ago. 
I lately had a dear brother, a dear mother, and the dearest of fathers ; 
but where are they all now? I look round the world and see 
nothing but yourself therein; and should you, too should you, 
too here Harry could no more. His uncle also broke into tears 
at the thoughts of parting with his beloved Harry, though it were 
to join his Louisa. 



THE F&v6 OF QUALITY. 397 

My Harry, says he at last, we have yet two precious treasures 
left upon earth, if we did but know where to find them: it is 
your cousin, the Countess of Maitland ; and the brother of my 
Louisa, the Marquis d'Aubigny. Let us go in search of them, my 
son ! Next to my Louisa, they are the loveliest of all living. They 
abound in all human and divine affections, and will caress us with 
kindred and corresponding hearts. 

Soon after they set out for France, and, by a roundabout tour of 
short but pleasant journeys, arrived at Paris, where Mr. Clinton 
ordered his large retinue to his ancient inn ; and, taking only two 
footmen, he and Harry went in their post-chaise to the marquis's 



On the ringing of the bell, and the opening of the gate, a single 
domestic came forth. Mr. Clinton perceived that all was dark 
in the hall, and this instantly gave an alarm to his ever-ready 
feelings. 

He alighted, however, and stepping, with his Harry, up the flight 
of marble Where is your master ? says he ; where is my brother, 
the marquis? Heaven bless us! cried the fellow, are you my 
master's brother? I have heard a deal of and about your lordship, 
though I never was so happy as to see your face before. Ho ! he 
continued, and rung another bell, come all of you ! Attend the 
brother of your lord ! attend the present master and lord of your 
household ! 

Immediately the palace was in commotion, the parlour and hall 
were lighted up, and all seemed to have acquired a set of wings 
to their motions. 

Mr. Clinton looked with eagerness at each of the domestics, 
endeavouring to recollect the features of some old acquaintance ; 
but all the faces were strange to him. Pray tell me, my friends, 
says he, where is your master? where and how are he and his 
lady ? are they still in good health ? has he had any children by 
her? 

Please your honour, said an elderly man, my master's first lady 
died of childbirth, and her infant perished with her; but he is 
since married to one of the loveliest women in the world. He 
is gone, a year since, on an embassy into Africa ; his lady would not 
be left behind. We lately heard from them; they are both in 
health, and we expect that less than a month will bring them 
safe to us. Indeed, the sum of our prayers is for their happy 
and speedy return. 

What ! said Mr. Clinton, are there none of my old friends, not one 
of our ancient domestics, to be found? Please your lordship, 
Jacome, the whiteheaded steward, is still left; but, though in 
good health, he is very little more than half alive. Pray, go and 
tell him that an old friend of his is here, and would be very glad 
to see him; but don't do things suddenly, and be very tender 
and careful in bringing him to me. 

Old Jacome was wheeled in, wrinkled, pale, and paralytic ; and, 
all enfeebled as he sat reclining in an easy-chair, he seemed to 
recover life and new spirits as they brought him forward. Bring 
me to him! bring me to him! my eyes are wondrous dim. Bring me 



398 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

closer, that I may know if it is my very master indeed ! Bring me 
but once to know that it is his sweet pardoning face, and then 
let me die with all my sins upon me ! I care not. 

Mr. Clinton then took him very lovingly by the hand My good 
friend Jacome, says he, we are both growing old, I find ; I rejoice, 
however, to see you once more upon earth. ! cried the old 
man, a well-known and a sweet-tuned voice is that voice. It is 
you, then it is you yourself, my master! Alas! for all your 
losses since last we parted. I have got a salt rheum in my eyes 
of late, and I never thought of you but it began to come down. 

Here Jacome, sobbing aloud, provoked the joint tears of his 
attending fellow-servants, though they had never been partakers 
in the foregoing calamities further than by the ear, whence they 
were now recollected and carried home to their hearts. 

My lord, says Jacome at last, I am not the only one that remains 
of your old servants. Your Gerard, too, who (blessings on his 
hands) once tied me neck and heels Gerard, too, is forthcoming, 
and near at hand. Your honour's wonderful bounty made a 
gentleman of him at once, and he is now in a high way, with a 
wife and three children. A hundred and a hundred times have 
we washed your remembrance with our tears ; and indeed I think 
your honour ought not to send for him, lest he should suddenly 
die, or run distracted at your sight. 

In the mean time one of the lackeys had officiously gone and 
informed Gerard of the arrival of his patron. He came panting, 
and rushed forward, as it were, to cast himself at the feet of his 
lord ; but stopping suddenly, and drawing back some steps, he 
nailed his eyes, as it were, on the face of Mr. Clinton, and, 
spreading his hands, cried You live, then, my lord! you still 
live, my dearest master ! You survive all your deaths and suffer- 
ings, and the weight of ten mountains has not been able to crush 
you! O the times the times, my master, never more to return! 
Will there be such times in heaven, think you? Will there be 
such angels there as we once lived with upon earth ? 

Here he clapped his hands together, and set up such a shout of 
bitter lamentation as was enough to split the heart of every 
hearer, and in a manner to split the graves of the persons whom 
he deplored. 

As soon as Mr. Clinton and his two old friends had parted for 
the night Tell me, my dear sir, said Harry, are there different 
kinds of grief; or is it merely that grief affects us in different 
manners? 

When I wept for my dear father, my mother, and brother, my 
affliction was anguishing and altogether bitter, without any species 
of alleviating sensation to compensate my misery. But it was far 
otherwise with me to-night. When I grieved in the grief of your 
old and faithful domestics, I felt my heart breaking, but I was 
pleased that it should break ; I felt that it was my happiness so to 
grieve, and I could wish a return of the same sweet sensations. 

The reason is this, my love : When you lamented your parents, 
you lamented yourself in your private and personal losses ; your 
affliction was just, it was natural, it was laudable ; but still it wag 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 



399 



confined ; it participated but little of the emotion that is excited 
by the affliction of others ; and the anguish was the keener by 
being nearly limited to your own bosom, and your own concerns. 

But in the griefs of my old and loving servants this night, you 
became wholly expanded; you went beyond, you went out of 
yourself; you felt, without reflection, how delightful it is to go 
forth with your God, in his social, generous, noble, and divine 
sensibilities; and you delightfully felt, my Harry, that such a 
house of mourning is more joyous to your soul, than all the festivals 
that flesh and sense can open before you. 

And now, my child, I will finally and once for all lay open the 
very horrible and detestable nature of Self in your soul. 

Self appears to us as the whole of our existence ; as the sum- total 
of all in which we are interested or concerned. It is as a Narcis- 
sus, self-delighted, self-enamoured. It desires, it craves, and 
claims as its right, the loves, attachments, and respects of all 
mankind. But does it acquire them, my Harry ? O never, never ! 
Self never was beloved, never will be beloved, never was honour- 
able or respectable in the eye of any creature. And the characters 
of the patriot, the hero, the friend, and the lover, are only so far 
amiable, so far reverable, as they are supposed to have gone 
forth from the confines of self. 

As Mr. Clinton proposed to wait the return of the marquis, he 
employed the mean season in endeavours to amuse his darling, and 
to dispel the cloud of melancholy that continued to hang over him. 

For this purpose, he went with him to Versailles, and to the 
many other elegant environs of Paris. He also showed him the 
Tuileries and other public walks, where our hero became oppressed 
by his involuntary attraction of all eyes upon him. 

One night, happening to go to the play without the company of 
his guardian, as he came forth with the crowd a carriage was 
opened for him, which he took to be his own, and in he stepped, 
and away he was taken. 

In the mean time Mr. Clinton waited supper for him, and began 
to grow uneasy when the clock struck twelve. At last his carriage 
and servants returned, with tidings that they stayed for him above 
an hour at the theatre after the play was over ; and had ever since 
been in search of him, to no purpose. 

Though Mr. Clinton was by nature of an intrepid spirit, and was 
still more assured by his reliance on Providence, he yet found 
himself agitated in a very alarming manner. He therefore retired 
to his closet, and there, on his knees, fervently commended his 
Harry to the protection of his God. 

At length the clock struck three. Soon after the bell was heard 
from the hall ; and Harry entering, with a page in a rich livery, 
flew like lightning up-stairs, and cast himself into the bosom of his 
patron. 

My father, my father! he cried, I have been in sad panics for 
you. I knew the love that you bore to your good-for-nothing 
Harry. But indeed I could not help it. I could not get to you 
till this instant. I have been a prisoner, sir, and here is my dear 
deliverer. 



400 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

As soon as they were something composed, and all seated, Harry- 
proceeded to satisfy the impatience of his uncle. 

As I came out of the theatre, ruminating on a passage in one of 
Kacine's tragedies, I found a chariot in the spot where I had left 
my own, and, stepping heedlessly into it, I was soon set down, 
and, hastening through the great hall, flew up-stairs to salute you. 
But think how T was surprised, when I suddenly found myself in 
the most sumptuous chamber, perhaps, in the universe. It was 
wainscoted with mirrors of the most perfect polish, whose plates 
were artfully buttoned and buckled together by diamonds and other 
gems of a most dazzling lustre. 

All astonished, I recoiled, and was going to withdraw, when 
I was met by a lady who gracefully accosted me. Have you 
commands, sir, says she, for any one in this house? A thousand 
pardons, madam; I perceive my error. I really thought I was 
set down at my own lodgings. No great offence, sir ; but now that 
I look at you again, I think you ought to pay the forfeit of your 
intrusion, by giving me one hour of your company at least. You 
must excuse me, madam, my guardian would be under the most 
terrifying alarms for me. A fig for guardians ! she cried. You are 
now my prisoner ; and nothing less than my friend Lewis, with his 
army at his back, shall be able to take you out of my hands. 

So saying, she rung a bell, and immediately a folding-door of 
panelled looking-glass flew open, and showed us to another apart- 
ment; where a supper, composed of all the elegancies of the 
season, was served up as by magic, and lay fuming on the table. 

She then took me by the hand, and, having graciously seated 
me, placed herself opposite. A number of servants then vanished 
on the instant, leaving a dumb waiter of silver behind them. 

Sir, said she, we are not to have any further company. You alone 
were expected, you alone are desired ; all others are forbidden. 

In short, I have seen you often at the public walks and theatres. 
You did more than strike my fancy ; you laid hold on my heart. 
I inquired every thing about you. I know your rank, title, and 
fortune. I made use of this night's stratagem to decoy you to me ; 
and, though there are few women in Europe of equal opulence or 
dignity, I think I cannot much demean myself by an alliance with 
a sweet fellow whom I so ardently love. But come, our supper 
cools. 

I gazed at her with admiration. She was indeed the most 
finished beauty I ever beheld ; and I was inwardly flattered, and 
in a manner attached to her, by her partiality in my favour. 

After supper, and some futile and insignificant chat, she drew 
her chair nearer to me. What say you, my lord, says she fondly ; 
am I to live, or to perish? 

Ah, madam ! I cried, love is as a little bird ; if you cage it, it 
will beat itself to pieces against its prison. Not that I regard your 
late threats of confinement ; my own arm is at all times sufficient 
to deliver me from your thraldom; but, in truth, I am partly 
become a willing prisoner to you, and time may, possibly, reconcile 
me to your different customs. 

What customs, I pray you? Why, madam, the ladies in my 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 401 

country use no paint except the rouge of nature's blush, and the 
paleness of chastity. Love also, in England, is a kind of warfare 
between the sexes, just such as once happened between the Par- 
thians and old Kome : our ladies conquer by flying, and our men 
are vanquished while they pursue. 

Persons, sir, of a certain rank, said she, are dispensed with from 
conforming to little matters of decorum. However, if you will 
endeavour to adopt the manners of my country, I will do my 
best, on my part, to conform to those of yours. 

So saying, she drew her chair quite close; when, by an in- 
voluntary motion, I put mine further back. Don't be alarmed, 
my lord, says she ; women of my condition know always where 
to stop. Right, madam, said I; but possibly you might not be 
quite so successful in teaching me where to be stopped. 

Cold-constitutioned boy ! she cried (indignantly rising and colour- 
ing), your bed lies yonder; you may go to it, if you like, and 
ruminate till morning on the danger of slighting and insulting 
a princess. So saying, she swept haughtily out of the room, 
and locked me in. 

During an hour after she had withdrawn, while I walked about, 
considering what I had to apprehend from the threats of this 
extraordinary woman, I heard a great bustling in and about the 
palace ; but within another hour all was quiet and still again. 

I then conceived thoughts of attempting my escape. But again 
I held it beneath me to be caught in the manner ; and so I resolved 
to wait till morning, and then to force my passage through her 
guards in open day. 

In the mean time, I imagined that a panel in the wainscot 
stirred; and soon after it was removed, and my young friend 
here entered my chamber on tiptoe. He beckoned me to silence, 
and, taking me by the hand, he led me through the way by 
which he came. 

We then descended a narrow pair of back-stairs, and groping 
along a dark entry, he cautiously unbolted a door that opened 
into a garden : and, hurrying with me across, he unlocked another 
door that opened to the street, and out we got rejoicing ! 

Soon after, we met a party of the guards who were patrolling 
the streets ; and, putting a few pieces into their hand, I requested 
their safe convoy, and they conducted us home. 

My lords, said Pierre (for that was the page's name), it would 
be extremely dangerous for you to remain another day, or even 
till morning, in Paris. The princess is the most intimate friend 
of Madam Maintenon, and through her can do what she pleases 
with the king. During my residence with her, she grew tired 
of two handsome lovers in succession ; but they told no tales, 
and no one can yet tell what became of them. 

Mr. Clinton was quite of Pierre's opinion. He instantly sent 
for his people. All was hurry, pack, and despatch, and toward 
dawning they set out on a road that led to the Cantons. But, 
changing their course again for several successive mornings, they 
arrived at Calais by a long tour of near five weeks' travel. 

Mr. Clinton set up at his old inn, and after dinner the host 

D d 



402 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

entered to pay his compliments. Have you any news, landlord? 
Nothing at present, my lord; all is quiet again. But here has 
been a fearful bustle about three weeks ago. The king's army 
came down in pursuit of a young Englishman, who ran away 
with a lady of quality from Paris. For my share, continued he, 
looking earnestly at Harry, I fear that you pretty English lads 
will hardly leave us a lovely wench in the nation. Harry looked 
quite secure, being wholly innocent of any present design on the 
sex ; but poor little Pierre turned as pale as the table-cloth. 

I remember, continued our talkative host, that just such another 
affair happened when I was a boy and servant in this house. 
Here came a young Englishman, just such another sweet fellow 
as this before me ; and he brought with him an angel of a creature, 
the like of whom my eyes never did, nor never shall open upon till 
they close in death. After him came one of our great dukes, with 
a party of the king's army, and terrible things were expected. But 
they made it up in a manner I know not how, and my Lord Anglois 
carried off" his prize in triumph. Mr. Clinton stooped his head, 
and dropped a silent tear, but held no farther converse with our 
landlord on the subject. 

That evening a gale sprung up, and, going on board, they were 
safe anchored before morning in the bay of Dover. 

They then mutually embraced ; and Harry, catching his beloved 
deliverer to his bosom We are now upon English ground, says 
he ; welcome to my arms, my dear Pierre, no longer my page or 
servant, but my friend and my brother ! You cannot conceive what 
pain your officiousness has hitherto cost me ; but there must be 
no more of this. You shall hereafter be served and attended as 
I am ; nay, I myself will gladly serve you to the utmost of my 
power, and the extent of my fortune. 

Ah, my lord ! cried the lovely Pierre, if you deprive me of the 
pleasure of serving you, you deprive me of all the pleasure that 
the world can afford me. If you knew the delight I find in being 
always about you, in watching your thoughts and motions, in 
looking into your fine eyes, and there reading your desires before 
they rise to expression, you could not find in your heart to deprive 
me of such a blessing. Well then, said Harry, raising him fondly 
in his arms, our future contest shall be, which of us shall serve 
the other with most affection and sedulity. 

After dinner, the evening being calm and shiny, Harry took 
his Pierre with him along the shore that stretches under the 
stupendous cliffs of Dover. They had not walked far, when, 
getting out of the sight of people within the winding of a creek, 
a man advanced toward them, and, taking out a pistol, called to 
Harry, and ordered him to throw down his purse. Our hero did 
not regard his money ; but, thinking it an indignity to be robbed 
by one man, he put his hand to his sword. Hereupon the villain 
cocked and levelled his pistol ; and the faithful Pierre, observing 
that he was going to fire, instantly jumped in between his master 
and danger, and received the ball into his own bosom. 

Harry saw his darling drop, and flying all enraged at the robber, 
he ran him thrice through the body, and pinned him to the ground. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 



403 



Then, flying as swiftly back, he threw himself by the side of his 
dying Pierre, and, gently raising his languishing head, placed it 
fondly on his bosom. 

You are wounded, my friend dangerously wounded, I fear, says 
Harry. Yes, my lord, I am wounded just as I could wish ; and 
I would not exchange my present blessed death for the longest 
and happiest life that the world could bestow. But it is time to 
undeceive you, and reveal a secret which nothing but death should 
ever have extorted from me. I am not what I seem, my most 
beloved master! I am a foolish and fond girl, who at the first 
glance conceived a passion for you. My name is Maria de Lausanne. 
I am niece to that bad woman whom you justly rejected. But 
what did I propose by this disguise ? First, your ("leliverance, my 
lord, and that I effected. But did I further aspire to the honour 
of your hand ? Far from it far from it. I felt my own unworthi- 
ness ; I did not think you could be mated by any thing less than 
an angel. But then to see you to hear you to serve to touch 
to be near you to fix my eyes on you unheeded and, if possible, 
to win your attention by the little offices of my fondness this was 
my happiness the whole of the heaven that I proposed upon 
earth. I have had it I have enjoyed it, and I ought to die 
content. But, alas ! to part from you there is the pang of pangs ! 
O, if this day merits any thing by the offer of my own life for the 
preservation of my beloved, then cause my chaste clay to be kindly 
deposited in the tomb of your ancestors that when time shall 

come my dust may be neighboured to your precious dust 

and there sleep in peace beside you till we spring together 

from corruption to glory and immortality ! 

During these short sentences and difficult respirations, Harry 
could answer nothing. He was suffocated by his grief; but, 
putting his speechless lips to the fading lips of his Maria, he drew 
her latest breath into his own affectionate bosom, and angels in- 
stantly caught her spirit into the regions of purity, of love, and of 
faith unfailing! 

Harry then, plucking up strength from oppression, and courage 
from despair, pressed his lips to the pale and unfeeling lips of his 
lover, and cried Yes, my Maria, our dust shall be joined, and 
I feel that our spirits too shall shortly be wedded ! Then raising 
her in his arms, and pressing her to his bosom, he bore her to 
the town, while he poured upon her all the way the two fountains 
of his affection. 

When he got to the inn, and came to his uncle Here, sir, said 
he, I present you with a very precious little burthen a burthen 
that lies much heavier on my heart than it did in my arms. He 
then related to Mr. Ch'nton the whole of what had passed ; when, 
heavily sighing, and shedding a tear, Mr. Clinton cried Ah, my 
Harry, I would to heaven that your Maria had lived ! her beauty 
her services but above all the excess of her love, made her truly 
deserving of you. 

Harry ordered a carriage on purpose for himself and his beloved. 
She was deposited in a coffin hurried up for the occasion; and, 
notwithstanding all the remonstrances and entreaties of his parent, 

Dd2 



404 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

Harry proved a rebel for the first time, and would not be divided 
from his Maria till they reached London. 

There our Harry ordered a coffin of unalloyed and beaten silver 
to be prepared for her reception ; and, though near five days had 
passed since the departure of her spirit, her chaste flesh remained 
as pure and untainted as that of a lamb newly slain. 

While they were putting her into her solemn repository Ah, sir ! 
said Harry, I pretend not to compare with you ; your losses, I own, 
have been greater than mine. You are a man, like your divine 
Master, wholly made up of sorrows, and acquainted with killing 
griefs. But still you must allow that, for my little time, I have 
had a competent share. It matters not. I am reconciled to 
them. I begin to be pleased with them. And, indeed, joy is 
become my utter aversion while I think on this loved creature, 
who willingly bled and died for my sake. 

As Harry thought it his duty, so he thought it to be his delight, 
to weep and lament his Maria. But passions seldom are per- 
manent ; and time, though it may not wholly efface, daily wears 
away an insensible portion of the deepest impressions. 

Harry caused the coffin of his deliverer to be exalted on a cabinet 
in his bed-chamber, that it might be always in his sight. But the 
familiarity of affecting objects daily lessens their force . and Harry, 
week after week, began to contemplate the repository of the loved 
remains of his Maria with abating affliction. 

In the mean time, Mr. Clinton received a letter by the French 
mail, in answer to one which he had left for his brother-in-law at 
Paris. And this letter informed him, under the marquis's hand, 
that he had returned from his embassy to the court of Morocco, 
and that he and his lady would be shortly in England. And at 
the bottom he found written in a different character, " Will it be 
any satisfaction to see them accompanied by your once loved 
FANNY GOODALL?" 

We have found them, my Harry! he cried; we have found 
them, our long and far-sought friends ! the two treasures which 
our God had graciously laid in store for the comfort of us poor 
people who have lost all beside ! But don't let us do them the 
disgrace, my son, of meeting and receiving them with tears and 
dirges. Let me then prevail upon you to permit your faithful 
Pierre to be conducted by some of our people, with an honourable 
train of undertakers, to Enfield, and there to be treasured up in 
your family-vault, where I shall speedily join her, and whereunto 
even my Harry must finally adjourn. Harry wiped his eye, and 
said Be it as you please, my father ! 

Within the following fortnight, Harry, attended by his page, put 
on a footmanlike frock, and, gripping his quarter-staff of polished 
yew, took a walk toward the custom-house to inquire if any French 
vessels had lately arrived, in hope of tidings respecting the Marquis 
and the Countess of Maitland. 

As he approached the wharf, he observed a crowd all in motion, 
and shouting as in the midst of some affray. Immediately he 
hastened up, and, making way through the savage populace, per- 
ceived that they were insulting, beating, and dragging a number 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 



405 



of unhappy foreigners, without any apparent provocation, save that 
their garb, complexion, and language were different from their own, 
the very reason that should have induced them to have treated 
these abused strangers with courtesy and kindness. 

On the instant his humanity was at once melted by compas- 
sion and fired into rage ; while a lady, who stood with her woman 
on the stairs, cried out in accents of the bitterest distress One 
hundred, two hundred, five hundred pounds, to any one who will 
save my poor people ! 

In little more than twenty seconds, Harry laid near as many 
of the assailing mob maimed or sprawling on the area; and 
advancing on the crowded spectators with a threatful and agile 
whirl of his staff, they fell back in a hurry upon each other, and, 
dispersing, left our hero peaceable master of the field of battle. 

Then turning to the bruised and bleeding strangers, he raised 
some, and supporting others, conducted them all to the feet of 
their lady. 

While he approached, she eyed him over and over in mute and 
wondering astonishment. I think myself happy, madam, says he, 
in having done some small service to a lady of your fair and noble 
appearance ; of what country, may I presume ? Of England, sir, 
says she ; arid I am ready to present you with five hundred 
pounds, in recompense of the gallant, the miraculous rescue, you 
so seasonably brought to me and my people. 

No, madam ! said Harry smiling, my circumstances do not lay me 
under the smallest temptation of setting any instance of humanity 
to sale. But I shall not be easy till I see you and your attendants 
safe out of the reach of these London barbarians. 

He then called to some porters, and throwing them a parcel of 
silver, ordered them to bring all the coaches they could muster. 
And go you, says he to his page, go to the shipping, inquire after 
the friends that I told you of, and then follow me to the Whitecross 
tavern in Cheapside. 

The coaches came, and Harry assisted his porters in carrying, 
helping, and gently stowing the maimed and the wounded into 
some of them. He then handed in the lady ; and next, coming 
to a blackamoor boy, who had a coronet of diamonds inserted in 
his cap, he offered to lift him in. But the youth, bending one 
knee to the dust, and seizing on Harry's hand, eagerly and re- 
peatedly kissed it, crying out ill French Heavenly, heavenly 
creature ! and then, breaking into tears, he sprung into the coach, 
and sat down by the lady. 

Our hero then bestowed the four female attendants, with such 
luggage as was brought on shore, into the remaining coaches. Then 
grasping his quarter-staff, and ordering the porters to attend, he 
guarded and escorted all safe to the Whitecross. 

The first thing he then did was to order private apartments for 
the lady and her attendants. He next despatched the waiters for 
all the surgeons in the neighbourhood. He then locked the room 
where he saw the luggage safe lodged; ordered a sumptuous 
dinner to be prepared as soon as possible ; and, lastly, discharged 
the coaches and porter. who poured their parting blessings upon 



406 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

his head ; and all this he did with wonderful despatch, for Harry 
was now in the wide element of his beneficence, as a whale in 
the ocean. 

Three surgeons then came, and our hero, putting five guineas a 
piece into their hands, desired them to examine and dress their 
patients; and stayed till he heard the delightful tidings that 
none of them were incurable. He then sent up to the lady to 
desire permission to attend her. She rose and met him as he 
entered. Child of heaven ! said she, from which of the orders of 
angels have you descended? I have heard as well as seen what 
you have wonderfully done for us. Madam, said Harry, endeavour- 
ing to turn the discourse, I would not advise you to remove your 
people for some time : I have ordered beds and apartments for 
them in this house, where those that are tolerably well may assist 
the doctors to attend their sick fellows till all shall be restored. 
In the mean time, I have sent to m> Other's for his coach and 
chariot, to convey you and this young gentleman and your woman 
to our house, where you can want for no servants, since my father 
and I, and all, will be truly and tenderly your servants. We are 
your property, sir, said tha lady, dispose of us as you please. 

In a little time after dinner was served up, and Harry, happening 
to turn his head, perceived the black youth by stealth kissing 
the hat and pressing the gloves to his bosom that he had laid on 
the table. 

Whatever the darkness or deformity of any aspect or person 
may happen to be, if the sentimental beauty of soul shall burst 
through the cloud upon us, the dark becomes light, the deformed 
quite comely, and we begin to affect what was lately our aversion. 
Thus it was that Harry found himself suddenly and inevitably 
attached by the two recent proofs that this outlandish youth had 
given of his affection. 

Being all seated, Harry looked earnestly at the young Moor, and, 
turning to the lady, said I now perceive, madam, how ridiculous 
all sorts of prejudices are, and find that time and observation may 
change our opinions to the reverse of what they were. I once had 
an aversion to all sorts of blacks ; but I avow that there is some- 
thing so amiable in the face of this youth, and his eyes cast such 
a lustre over the darkness of his countenance, as is enough, as 
Shakespeare has it, to make us in love with night, and pay no 
more worship to the gaudy sun. 

The Moor hereat smiled celestial sweetness, and joy beamed from 
his eyes, and throughout his dimpling aspect. 

But who can you be, my sweet fellow ? said the lady ; who are 
the picture, the image, almost the thing itself, that I was so sadly 
in love with five-and-thirty years ago? Why, madam, said our 
hero, you could not have been born at that early day. Ah, you 
flatterer ! says she, I am turned of forty. But pray, madam, who 
was he that was so happy as to attract your infant affections ? His 
name was Harry Clinton. Why, madam, Harry Clinton is my 
name. Harry Clinton, Harry Clinton ! screamed out the lady, and 
started up from her chair. Yes, madam, I am son to the late Earl 
of Moreland ; and I almost dare to hope that you were once the 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 407 

enchanting Fanny Goodall. Yes, my lovely kinsman, I am indeed 
your Fanny Goodall ! 

Harry then sprung forward, and, seizing her hand, kept it 
dwelling on his lips. But, disengaging it, she opened her arms 
and clasped him to her bosom, and wept over him as a mother 
would over a long-lost son ; while the young Moor ran and danced 
about the room like a mad thing, clapping hands, and springing, 
like an antelope, almost to the ceiling. 

When they were something composed, the Moor caught the lady 
about the neck, and kissing her, cried Joy, joy, my dearest 
madam, the greatest of all joys ! Then, turning to our hero, he 
took each of his hands in turns, and pressed them to his lips ; 
while Harry, kissing his forehead, cried My brother, my brother ! 

When they were again set to dinner, the page entered. My 
lord, says he, I have been all along the quays and the shipping, 
but can learn no tidings of the Marquis D'Aubigny, nor of any 
French family save that of the Duchess Bouillon, who this morning 
came up the river with a numerous train. 

Well, says Harry, our happiness has been already quite sufficient 
to the day. To-morrow may crown our wishes with full success. 

No, my love ! said the lady, you cannot see the marquis for some 
time. The truth is, that you find in me, your Fanny Goodall, the 
Marchioness D'Aubigny and the Duchess de Bouillon. But these 
matters shall be explained more clearly when I am blessed with 
the sight of your precious uncle. 

News was now brought that the carriages were at the door; 
when, taking a hasty bit or two, they visited and left orders for the 
care of the sick and wounded, and then set out in a hurry for 
Pail-Mall. 

When they arrived, the duchess hastened in, inquiring for Mr. 
Clinton; and, when she came where he was, she cried out 
as she advanced, and as he rose to receive her Your Fanny, 
your Fanny Goodall, my cousin ! and, throwing herself into his 
arms, dwelt there for a minute. Then recoiling a while, she looked 
fondly at him, and cried Your sister also, my brother ; your sister 
D'Aubigny! the wife of the brother of your heavenly Louisa! 
Then, clasping him to her arms, she broke into tears ; and, again 
quitting him, sat down to quiet her emotions. 

Mr. Clinton, having seated himself affectionately beside her, 
said These are wondrous things that you tell me, my precious 
sister ! By what miracle have these blessings been brought about ? 

I am too much agitated at present, says she ; let me have a little 
coffee, and the matter shall be unravelled. 

As they were settling to the tea-table Give me leave, sir, said 
the duchess, to introduce my little black companion to your notice. 
He is a sweet fellow, I assure you, notwithstanding his complexion. 
He is child to our royal friend the Emperor of Morocco, who has 
intrusted him to our guardianship for his travel and education. 
However he might have come by his sable outside, his father, the 
great Abenamin, is the least of the tawny of any man I saw in 
Africa, and his mother is one of the fairest and finest women that 
ever opened a pair of living; diamonds to the light. But, my 



408 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

brother, I shall more particularly recommend him to your regard, 
by telling you that he is an exceedingly pious Christian. 

She then turned, and taking the little Abenamin by the hand, 
led him up and placed him before her brother ; when the youth, 
suddenly dropping on his knees, looked up to Mr. Clinton with 
eyes that spoke love and reverential awe, and besought his 
blessing. 

The old gentleman found himself surprisingly affected, and, lifting 
up his hands, cried God be gracious to you, my child, and make 
your soul as bright as your countenance is sable ! and may the Sun 
of Bighteousness shine with power upon you, and soon disperse 
or illumine every shade that is about you ! The prince embraced 
his legs, kissed his knees, and arose. 

Soon as the coffee was removed You may remember, my dearest 
cousin, said the duchess, in what a hurry I last parted from you. 
Mr. Fairface, with whom the bulk of my fortune was deposited, 
went off with above a hundred thousand pounds of my substance, 
beside four times that value intrusted to him by others. 

I traced him to Paris, and there he had the impudence to give 
me an interview ; but, at the same time, had the impudence also 
to bid me defiance. 

Immediately I commenced suit, and sent despatch to London for 
my papers and witnesses. 

On the opening of my cause in court, I was summoned by the 
title of Countess of Maitland, otherwise Frances Goodall. On 
hearing the name, a gentleman who was near me started, and 
turning and coming up Pray, madam, says he, are you any way 
related to the Honourable Harry Clinton, who once went by that 
name in this city? I am, sir, said I, almost the nearest relation 
that he has upon earth. He is, madam, my dearest friend and 
brother. Pray, speak to your advocates to postpone your suit 
for a few days, till I am informed of the nature and merits of your 
cause. 

This was accordingly done. He desired to know where I lodged, 
and in less than an hour his chariot was at my door. 

Except yourself, my cousin, the marquis had the most lovely and 
winning aspect and person that ever I beheld. I soon convinced 
him of the equity of my demand, and of the villany of my trustee, 
and made him perfect master of tho whole affair. But he still con- 
tinued to visit, and to stay with me a considerable part of every 
day, under colour of being better informed touching this and the 
other particular; the remaining time was spent in soliciting 
for me. 

At length a hearing came on; and, after a short trial, honest 
Fairface was cast in principal and double costs. He was instantly 
taken into custody, and put under confinement, till he discharged the 
whole amount of the judgment in my favour. No sooner was one 
suit over, wherein I was plaintiff, but another was commenced, 
wherein I happened to prove but a very weak defendant. The 
marquis now became solicitor for himself, but with such a sweet 
timidity as seemed to doubt and greatly dread the success of his 
cause. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 409 

I could not refuse my time to him who had devoted the whole of 
his time and assiduity to me. We spent whole days together. But 
O, what floods of tears did that time often cost both him and me, 
while he pathetically and feelingly related your history, from the 
place where you broke off to the death of your Louisa, and your 
precious infants ! 

I believe, my cousin, that, as grief is a greater softener, so it is 
a greater cementer, of hearts than any other passion. I gave the 
marquis, in my turn, my little story, and dwelt on every tender 
minuteness of my infant passion for you. Ah, said he, what a pity 
that a heart so susceptible of all divine and human feelings, should 
sit as a lonely turtle, without a suitable mate ! 

I took him for that mate, my cousin ; and in a husband I found 
the truest and teiiderest of lovers. I became pregnant, for the 
first time in my life, and was delivered of a sweet and promising 
little fellow, whom we left at nurse in our country-seat, while I 
attended my lord on his embassy to Morocco. 

But here I must stop, my brother; I am under the positive 
interdiction of an imperial thing called a husband, not to divulge 
a word further, till he sees you face to face. But I trust that he 
has blessed tidings for you, my brother ; he says that he otherwise 
would not have dared to present himself before you, after his loss 
of your Eloisa. 

Mr. Clinton smiled careless, as at the impossibility of any con- 
soling event upon earth. Again, smiling archly I protest, my 
sister, said he, you appear to me to grow younger for your years. 
I see no manner of alteration, save that you are something plumper, 
and not quite so slender as when we parted. But pray, when 
may we expect my brother ? In about two months ; at present he 
is engaged with the king, who is extremely fond of him, and lately 
created him a duke, on account of the services which he rendered 
the state in Africa. We received your kind letter, my dearest 
brother, at Paris, but wondered who the sweet fellow could be 
who was said to accompany you. 

In the mean time, our hero and the young prince were in close 
combination. Abenamin stepped about and about Harry, and 
toyed with him, and twisted the curls of his careless locks around 
his fingers. Then turning and looking fondly up in his face Ah, 
how fair, says he, does this black visage of mine show in those fine 
eyes of yours ! It is in truth, said Harry, so fair in my eyes, that 
I would not exchange it for fifteen of the fairest female faces 
in Britain. The prince then caught his hand, and pressed it to 
his bosom. But what shall I call you ? says he. You are a great 
lord in this country, and in my own country I am greater than 
a lord. But I hate the formality of titles between friends, and 
I will call you my Harry, provided you promise to call me your 
Abenamin. A bargain, says Harry ; let us seal it with a kiss ! 
No, no ! says the prince, we never kiss lips in Africa ; but I will 
kiss your head, and your hands, and your feet too, with pleasure. 
But tell me, Harry, what makes you so mighty clever a fellow ? 
will you teach me to be a clever fellow also ? Ay, that I will, says 
Harry, and to beat myself too, provided you promise not to hit me 



410 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

over hard. Abenamin laughed, and aimed a little fist as though 
he meant to overturn him. 

As soon as Harry's grief for his late Maria would allow him to 
associate, he had been to seek his old friend and tutor, Mr. Clement; 
but he found only a single domestic at home, who told him that 
the old gentleman had been some time dead, and that the family 
were lately gone to take possession of a new seat that they had 
purchased in the country. 

However, as Harry found himself quite happy in the present 
society, he sought no further acquaintance or amusement in London. 
In less than three weeks the retinue of the prince and the duchess 
were well restored ; and they all set out for Enfield, there to await 
the wished arrival of the duke. 

On the third day, while they stopped at a village to repair the 
fractured harness of an over-mettled horse, Harry took a walk with 
the prince along the road. In their way they came to a long 
and waste cottage, where they heard the confused clattering of 
junior voices. Harry stepped to the door, and looking in, per- 
ceived about forty or fifty boys ranged on benches of turf, while 
a man of a pale aspect sat on a decayed chair, instructing them in 
their lessons. 

Your servant, sir, says Harry. Pray, what language do you 
teach ? I can teach Latin and Greek, too, sir ; but the people of 
this country choose to confine themselves to the language of old 
England. If I am not too free, sir, pray, what is your name? 
Longfield, so please your honour. Longfield ! Longfield ! I have 
surely heard that name before. Pray, were you ever acquainted 
with a man called Hammel Clement? Hammel Clement, sir? 
Yes, sir ; and with a wife by whom he is greatly dignified. 

Your friend Clement, says Harry, is come to great fortune, and, 
I dare answer for him, would be nearly distracted with joy at 
your sight, and would gladly divide his substance with you ; but, 
if you please, you shall be no encumbrance upon his growing 
family. You shall instantly come with me ; and, as Pharaoh said 
to Jacob Regard not your stuff, for the good of all my lands 
lies before you, my Longfield ; and I rejoice more in acquiring 
such a heart as yours, than if I had acquired the possession of 
a province. 

Harry then called a few of the neighbours in, and giving them 
some guineas, to be changed and divided among the children, in 
order to enable them to see a new master, he and Abenamin took 
the threadbare Longfield on each side under the arm, and carried 
him away. 

When they came to the turn that led to the mansion-house, 
Harry perceived with much pleasure that the two school-houses, 
which he had put in hand before the death of his father, were 
now completed. They stood opposite to each other, with the road 
between them. Their fronts were of hewn stone, and a small 
cupola rose over each, with bells to summon the children to meals 
and to lesson. 

Here, Longfield, says our hero, is to be your province. You are 
to superintend these schools at a salary of three hundred a-year 



TEE FOOL OF QUALITY. 411 

and I will soon send you with proper means throughout the country, 
to muster me a hundred chosen children of each sex : for I yearn 
to be a father, Longfield, and to gather my family of little* ones 
under my eye and my wing. 

As soon as they alighted, Mr. Clinton and his Harry once more 
welcomed the duchess and her Abenamin to their home and their 
hearts, and the late house of mourning became a house of joy. 

Above all, Abenamin inspired mirth and good-humour throughout 
the family, and melancholy fled before him wherever he turned. 
He was daily inventive of new matters of entertainment. He 
danced African dances for them with wonderful action and grace, 
and he sung African songs that imitated and exceeded the wild 
and inarticulate warblings of the nightingale ; so that he became 
the darling and little idol of the whole household. 

Harry had sent for the town-tailor, and got Longfield fitted with 
three or four suits from his father's wardrobe. He then sent him 
on his commission, in company with Mr. Trustly, the agent, whom 
he ordered to show him the country, to introduce him to the 
several families of the peasantry, and to furnish him with whatever 
sums he should call for. 

In the mean time, our hero and Abenamin became inseparable. 
He made the prince a present of his little dressed jennett, and at 
times rode out with him, and taught him the manage. At other 
times they would run and wrestle, and play a hundred gambols 
through the walks and the gardens. 

Did you ever see the chase of the antelope, Harry? Not I, 
truly. You shall not be long so, says the prince. Go, gather 
me all the house man, woman, and child before the door here. 
You shall be the huntsman, and I will be the antelope ; and, if any 
of your people can catch me in a mile's running, they shall have 
my cap for a kerchief. 

Immediately the whole posse was summoned, to the amount 
of about sixty persons, male and female ; and Mr. Clinton and the 
duchess, hearing what they were about, came laughing to the door 
to see the diversion. 

Harry then gave his royal antelope about fifty yards law ; then 
cried Away! and instantly all heels and all voices were loosed 
after him. 

The prince then turned, and bounded over an ha-ha that was 
sunk on the right side of the avenue ; then clearing several other 
obstacles, whereby he threw out the greatest number of his pur- 
suers, he at length reached the fields, and shot away like an arrow. 

Our hero's huntsman headed about nine foreign and domestic 
footmen, who still held the chase, though at a distance, while 
Abenamin led them a round of above a mile. Then, turning short 
homeward, he came flying up the avenue, with only the huntsman 
and two followers puffing far behind. At length, reaching near the 
door, the prince threw himself precipitately into the arms of his 
friend, as it were for protection, crying Save me, my Harry! 
save your little antelope ! 

Mr. Clinton and the duchess then successively embraced the 
victor, and wished him joy. I protest, Harry, cried Mr. Clinton, I 



412 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

will bet a thousand pieces with you on the head of my Abenamin 
against your famous Polly Truck, 

That night, as our hero sat with the prince in his apartment 
Have you ever been in love, my Harry? says he. T confess, said 
Harry, that I have had my twitches and tendencies that way. 

He then related to him the tragedy of his faithful Maria, which 
cost the prince the drenching of a handkerchief in tears. 

Ah! exclaimed the prince, never never will I forgive your 
Maria her death ! Why was it not my lot, by some severer doom, 
to prove to you the superiority of my friendship and affection? 
What ! cried Harry, would you not leave me a single companion 
upon earth? When my Abenamin quits the world I shall also 
bid it adieu. 

When their grief was over, the prince took his friend by the 
hand and said I have a sister, my brother a sister twinned with 
me in the womb, and as fair as I am black. All Africa is pleased 
to hail her as the beauty of the universe ; but the truth is, that 
I think but poorly of her. The duke brought her with him to 
France ; and, should he bring her to England, beware of your heart, 
my Harry ! for, though I am prejudiced against her, she is the idol 
of all others, who bow down to her as before a little divinity. This 
has made her so excessively vain, that she holds herself of a different 
species from the rest of mankind, and thinks the homage of the 
world nothing less than her right. And now, my Harry, though 
I earnestly wish to be allied to you by a tie, nearer if possible 
than that of friendship, yet I would not wish my own happiness 
at the expense of your peace ; and so I give you timely warning 
against this dangerous and haughty girl. 

Our company had now been upward of six weeks at the mansion- 
house. Harry hitherto had never examined any part of the coun- 
try, or any part of his own estate, above a mile from the house ; 
wherefore leaving his friend Abenamin in bed, in the presumption 
of his being tired with his last day's fatigue he issued early 
forth, accompanied only by his huntsman and his agent's runner, 
who knew and was known every where. 

With their staffs in their hands, they crossed and quartered 
the country at pleasure, without let or obstacle. 

At length they came within prospect of a house sumptuously 
fronted, and of a happy situation. Harry stopped here with 
pleasure, comparing, as he approached, the acquirements of art 
with the advantages of nature : when a servant issued forth, and 
humbly besought him to walk in. Harry heard the voice of 
music. What is your master's name ? says he. Fielding, so please 
your honour, and we are this day celebrating the nuptials of his 
son, the young squire. 

The master of the family met our hero at the outward door. 
Harry recoiled at recognizing the face of the Mr. Fielding whom 
he had seen at Hampstead ; but, taking no notice, walked with 
him into the house. 

Breakfast soon after was ushered in; and Mrs. Fielding, and 
Ned, with his blooming and blushing bride, came to the table. 

Harry chuckled and rejoiced at heart, but still took no notice ; 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 



413 



when, after some cursory conversation, Ned looked at him with 
an eager disturbance, and cried Bless me! my heart tells me 
that there is something in that face which is not quite unknown 
to me. If I could think, after my many and late inquiries, that 
my patron was alive, bating the difference of years, I should verily 

believe that you were Your Harry Fenton! cried our hero, 

springing up ; your Harry Fenton, my dear Ned ! 

Harry then opened his arms to receive his friend, while Ned 
leaped and catched at him, as the grappling-iron of a corsair would 
catch at a ship from which a great prize was expected. 

All the family then, so highly as they had been obliged by our 
hero and his father, struggled who should be foremost in their 
acknowledgments and caresses. 

After dinner, Harry rose to take his leave ; but they all got 
in a group and opposed his passage, telling him he must be their 
prisoner for that night. I consent only on this condition, said 
Harry, that you all promise to dine with me to-morrow. Why, 
pray sir, where do you live? says Mr. Fielding. At Enfield, 
with the young Earl of Moreland, says Harry ; but he has a great 
friendship for me, and the house is as it were my own. 

Much company arrived in the evening, and the ball was opened 
and held till late. But our hero declined dancing, that his friend 
Ned might stand forth peerless in the eyes of his bride. 

Harry rose by the dawning, and footed it in an hour to Enfield. 
He flew tip-stairs to salute the family, but found no one save 
Mr. Clinton, from whom he received at once a warm blessing 
and embrace. 

Where is the duchess, sir, and my friend Abenamin? Gone, 
Harry, says his uncle, about breakfast-time yesterday. A courier 
arrived with the joyful tidings that my brother was on the road, 
and so my sister and the prince hastened to meet him. By this 
time I suppose they are all on their return. And now take care 
of yourself, my Harry. The duke brings with him the sister of our 
Abenamin, the fair princess Abenaide. The duchess tells me 
that a lovelier creature never beheld the light ; so that you must 
guard your heart with double bars against the power of this 
beauty. She is vain and disdainful, sir excessively vain, I am 
told ; so that her pride will prove an antidote against the poison 
of her charms. However, I will haste to meet and welcome your 
most noble brother. 

Harry was mounted on a haughty charger, that was bought when 
a colt in Mauritania ; he was white as new-fallen snow, save a 
black main and tail, and three large blood-like spots on the off- 
shoulder. He was so perfectly instructed and subdued to the 
manage, that he seemed to have no will save the will of his rider ; 
while Harry's least motion, like electricity, informed every joint 
and member. 

The princess came foremost in an open chariot drawn by four 
spotted Arabians, and the eye could scarce support the brightness 
of the wonderful beauty who sat within it. 

Harry bowed twice as he approached, but she scarce deigned a 
perceptible nod of acknowledgment to his salute. Our hero felt 



414 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

himself piqued. Proud beauty ! thought he, I thank you for your 
timely prevention of a passion that, perhaps, might have proved 
unhappy to me. He then passed forward with affected carelessness 
to salute the duke. 

When he came up, the coach stopped, and Harry, flying from his 
saddle, approached the window, while his steed stood trembling 
but motionless behind him. 

My lord, said Harry, seizing the duke's hand and respectfully 
kissing it, if you were sensible of the joy that my heart receives 
from your presence, I think it would make you nearly as happy as 
myself. My sweet fellow, said the duke, I have often heard of 
you at Paris, as also by the letters of my love here ; my longing at 
last is gratified, though my wonder is increased. 

But madam, says Harry, what have you done with my little 
playfellow ? what's become of my Abenamin ? O, cried the duchess, 
laughing, he is forthcoming, I warrant you; but what has so 
bewitched you to him ? I think you could not be fonder if he were 
a mistress. True, madam, answered Harry, sighing ; I never look 
to have a mistress that I shall love half as well ; but pray put me 
out of pain, and let me know where he is. Be pacified, said the 
smiling duke, he is not far off; and here is my hand and promise 
that you shall see him before night. 

Our hero then turned and vaulted on his horse : the coach now 
began to move, and Harry put his wand to the flank of his horse, 
who, turning his head to the carriage as of his own accord, moved 
sidelong toward Enfield with a proud but gentle prancing ; while 
the duke cried out Look, look ! O the boy, the graceful, lovely 
boy! 

While our hero attended the carriage of the duke, the princess 
and her train had got to the house and alighted, while Harry 
opened the coach-door, and handed out the noble pair, who alter- 
nately kissed and took him to their arms. Mr. Clinton then 
came forth and received them all with transport. But Harry, under 
some pretence, walked away ruminating, in order to avoid the 
disdainful regards of the young lady. 

In the mean time, our company, rejoicing and caressing each 
other all the way, had got slowly, though very lovingly, to the 
great mansion-parlour. The duke then respectfully taking the 
young lady by the hand Permit me, brother, says he, to re- 
commend to you my lovely ward, the fair Princess of Morocco. 
The lady then gently bent one knee toward the ground, while she 
received the cordial blessing and salute of the old gentleman. 

They then took their seats. When Mr. Clinton, while he looked 
more earnestly on the princess, grew suddenly affected, and called 
out for a glass of fair water and hartshorn. When he drank it, 
he found himself in a measure restored ; and lifting his hands, 
he cried I protest one would think that nature had copied this 
young and lovely creature from an image that has lain impressed 
upon my heart near these forty years. 

You are in the right, my brother ! exclaimed the duke ; it is even 
as you surmise. Allow me then, once more, to introduce to you 
the counterpart of our once adored Louisa ; to introduce to you my 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 415 

niece, and your own offspring, my brother even the daughter of 
your still living and ever precious Eloisa! The princess then 
sprung forward, and, dropping precipitately at the feet of her 
grandfather, she put her face between his knees, and seizing both 
hands, she bathed them with her tears, crying My father ! O my 
father! my dear, my dearest father! how inexpressibly blessed 
I think myself to be the offspring of such a father ! Mr. Clinton 
then raising her, and seating her fondly on his knee, and grasping 
her to his bosom I will not ask, he cried, how these miracles 
came about ; it is enough that I feel the attraction which pulls 
you into my heart. And so saying, their tears flowed and mingled 
in a happy emotion. 

Go, my angel, said Mr. Clinton, and take yonder seat, that 
I may view and delight my soul with your sight at leisure. My 
eyes begin at these years to see best at a distance. 

At length the soft voice of our Harry was heard in the hall ; 
and the duke, whispering his brother, requested him for a little 
time to take no notice of what had passed. 

Our hero then entered, bowing respectfully and gracefully, but 
carelessly, toward the side where the princess sat. He then took 
his seat beside the duke, and bending fondly to him, and seizing a 
hand with both his hands, he pressed it to his lips and cried 
Welcome, welcome, my dearest lord, to the house and the hearts 
of your truest lovers ! 

Then, giving a glance to the side where the princess sat, he 
caught a glimpse of her attractions, and sighing, said to himself 
O the pity, the pity ! But no matter ; her pride shall never suffer 
a single charm to take place; and so thinking, he turned his 
eyes aside. 

Mean tune, Abenaide arose with as little noise as a hare from 
her seat ; and stealing round, like a cat circumventing a mouse, she 
came behind Harry's chair, and reaching, and covering an eye 
with each of her hands, she turned his head to her, and made a 
sound with her lips as though she had kissed him. Harry opened 
his eyes in utter astonishment; while in a twinkling, standing 
before him, she chuckled a laugh, and cried My Harry, what, 
have you forgot me? Don't you remember your old playfellow, 
your little Mend Abenamin? 

Harry's eyes were now opened, in the midst of the hurry and 
agitation of his soul. At a glimpse he took in the whole oppression 
of her beauties ; and casting himself, quick as a glance of lightning, 
at her feet, he seized the hem of her robing and glued it to his 
mouth. 

At length, lifting up his eyes, he cried Ah ! what are all these 
wonders to me, or my happiness, unless my Abenamin will also 
become my Abenaide? That, replied the princess, is not at my 
option ; there sits my lord and father, at vhose disposal I am. 

Harry then rose, and throwing himself at the feet of his revered 
patron, embraced his knees in silence, while Mr. Clinton cried out 
Yes, my Harry, I understand you ; nothing shall ever be wanting 
to the happiness of my darling, that the power of his tender parent 
and loving uncle can effect ! I can have nothing in heaven or earth 



416 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

that is not the property of my Harry. Harry kissed his hands 
and sprung up. 

Mr. Clinton then continued T aver I am still in a labyrinth. 
Did you not say, my Abenaide, that you were also our Abenamin? 
I did, my father, says she, but I did not dare to avow myself. 
Ah! what a painful struggle did that restriction cost me, while 
I panted to catch and to cling to your honoured feet ; while I used 
to look and gaze upon you unperceived ; while my heart swelled 
with affection, and my eyes with restrained tears; and while 
I kissed in secret the book that you read, and the ground that 
you trod on. 

Abenaide then sat down, and Harry, lightly throwing himself on 
tho ground beside her, looked beseechingly around, and cried My 
lord my dearest lady our still precious Fanny Goodall can you 
vouch can ye warrant that I am safe in this matter ? Then looking 
up to the princess, and drinking her in No ! he cried, you cannot 
engage it ; I feel that I shall perish in the very ecstasy of the 
expectation of being united to her. 

Just then Mr. Meekly came in. He had been long and far away, 
upon many a blessed tour of doing good through the earth. But as 
soon as he learned of the arrival of his beloved patron and young 
lord, he rode post to embrace them. 

Harry sprung from love to friendship, and, catching him in 
his arms, cried O my Meekly, my dearest Meekly ! how seasonably 
you come, to temper by your advice the insufferable transports of 
my soul! Behold the regent of my heart behold the queen of 
all my wishes ! 

Meekly then fixed his eyes upon the princess, and soon after 
exclaimed Gracious father! what do I see? Can the Louisa be 
resuscitated, and new raised from the dead ? O, then, it must be 
so she must be her descendant. No one save my peerless 
patroness could produce the likeness of my patroness. But how 
this blessed miracle was brought about is the question. 

That is my question too, my dear Meekly, said Mr. Clinton, if my 
most noble brother would be so good as to solve it. I will gratify 
you, gentlemen, said the duke, in as few words as possible. 
Mean while the princess withdrew. 

On my embassy to the court of Morocco, I had several private 
interviews with the emperor before my credentials were opened in 
public. I had the good fortune to be liked by him, so that he suf- 
fered no day to pass without seeing me. His name was Abenamin ; 
he was accounted a great captain ; he exceeded all his dominions 
for grace of person and beauty of aspect ; and that which ren- 
dered him still more singular was, that he had given liberty 
to all the ladies of his seraglio, and for many years had kept 
constant to the reigning sultana, said to be the most exquisite 
beauty on earth. 

As we grew more intimate, in the exuberance of his affection for 
his empress he could not refrain from speaking of her to me ; and 
he promised that, before I departed, I should see and converse 
with her a grace, he said, never granted to any other man. 

At length the day being appointed for my public entry, I rode 






THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 417 

through the city attended by a sumptuous train, and, alighting 
before the palace, advanced to the hall of audience. 

The emperor was seated, with his sultana at his right hand, upon 
a throne of ivoiy. As soon as I had approached the presence, and 
began to open my commission, the empress gave a great shriek, 
and fell over in a swoon upon the bosom of her husband. 

The royal Abenamin instantly turned pale as death tore off her 
veil with trembling hands to give her air and called me to his 
assistance, as it is accounted profanation for any Moor to touch the 
person of the empress. But heaven ! O my friends ! think what 
was my astonishment when, in the pale face of the queen, I beheld 
the loved features of our darling Eloisa ! 

The court broke up in confusion, and her women came hurrying 
with drops and essences. As soon as she recovered, she opened 
her eyes upon me, and reaching out her arms, and catching me 
to her, she cried O my uncle, my dearest uncle ! am I so blessed 
then, as to behold you before I expire ? 

The monarch, in the mean time, looked upon me with a jealous 
eye, and twice put his hand to the haft of his dagger, but checked 
his rising indignation till he should have the mystery of his 
queen's behaviour explained. The women then raised her up and 
bore her to her apartment ; while the emperor, turning to me 
with no very friendly aspect, ordered me to follow him. 

When I had attended a considerable time in the ante-chamber, 
he came forth with a serene and joyous countenance, and embracing 
me, cried O my friend ! my dear kinsman ! how transported I am 
to find and acknowledge you for such ; the parent of my angel 
becomes a part of myself! 

He then led me by the hand into the bed-chamber of my Eloisa, 
where we renewed our caresses without restraint. But the monarch, 
fearing that these emotions would be too much for her, told me that 
he had something for my private ear till dinner, and took me into 
an adjoining closet. 

There seating, and taking me affectionately by the hand, I will 
now tell you, iny uncle, says he, how I came by this inestimable 
treasure of your niece. 

I had fitted out a royal ship of my own, not as a corsair, but 
rather for trade in the Mediterranean. On their return from the 
coast of Egypt, as they passed, after a violent hurricane, within . 
sight of old Carthage, my people perceived at a distance a sloop 
stranded on a shoal of sand about a league from the shore. Im- 
mediately they sent out a boat, and took the distressed company 
in, consisting of my charmer, two female companions, and three 
servants in livery, beside the boatmen. 

The iritenrlants of my ship behaved themselves with all possible 
respect toward the young lady and her attendants ; and endeavoured 
to quiet her terrors by assuring her that she was free, and that 
their prince was a person of too much honour and humanity to 
derive any advantage from the disasters of the unfortunate. 

The moment that they brought her before me, pale, trembling, 
and in tears ; while she dropped on her knees, and lifted to me her 
fine eyes in a petitioning manner ; the gates of my soul opened to 

v e 



418 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

the sweetly affecting image, and ever after closed, of their own 
accord, upon it. 

Ah ! I cried ; heavenly creature, calm, calm your causeless 
fears ! I swear by our prophet, and the god of our prophet, that I 
would rather suffer the gaunch than put the smallest constraint on 
your person or inclinations. You are free, madam ; you shall ever 
be free, save so far as I may bind you by my tender offices and 
affections. 

I raised her, and she grew something better assured; when, 
bending a knee in my turn, I kissed her robe and cried Look not 
upon me as your tyrant, look not on me as your lover ; but look 
upon me as your friend the tenderest and truest of friends who 
shall ever be ready to sacrifice his own happiness to yours. 

From that time I studied every amusement, every diversion, that 
might serve to dissipate the timid shrinkings of her remaining 
apprehensions ; while I conducted myself toward her with a distant 
though fond respect, not even presuming to touch her ivory hand. 

In the mean time my soul sickened, and grew cold to all other 
women. If you were ever in love, my dear D'Aubigny, you know 
that it is a chaste as well as a tender passion. I languished indeed 
for her I longed and languished to death ; but then it was rather 
for her heart than her person that I languished. 

One day, as she heaved a heavy but half-suppressed sigh Ah, 
my angel ! I cried ; I can have no joy but yours, and yet you have 
griefs to which you keep your friend your Abenamin a stranger. 
True, my lord, says she, tears breaking from her ; all your 
bounties have not been able to silence the calls of kindred or claims 
of nature within me. Ah, my parents ! my dear parents ! I feel 
more for you than I feel even for myself, in being torn from you. 

The weight of her affliction fell like a mountain on my soul, and 
crushed me to her feet. You would leave me then, Eloisa you 
wish to leave me ; but your generosity delays to tell me so, for fear 
of breaking my heart. Well, be it so go from me you know I 
cannot survive you ; but my death is of no consequence, my Eloisa 
shall be happy. I will go this instant, I will despatch my swiftest 
galley to Languedoc, I will write word to your parents that you 
are safe, that you are beloved, and yet pure and untouched, since 
respected as a deity. I will invite them to come and take pos- 
session of my treasures, my dominions, my heart; but, should 
they reject my suit, I again swear by Allah to send you to 
them laden with wealth, though I myself should drop dead at 
the instant of your departure ! 

The noble soul of my Eloisa became instantly affected. She 
caught a hand between both of hers, and, bathing it with tears, 
cried O, now indeed you have bound me by chains infinitely 
stronger than all the shackles that fasten the slaves to the galleys 
of Africa ! 

I kept firm to my engagement, and in a few weeks my winged 
messengers returned. But, the tidings, the very doleful tidings, 
for my beloved ! They brought word that they found no creature 
*ave two ancient domestics in the great hotel, as two ravens in the 
midst of a lonely forest. 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 419 

From these they learned that my Eloisa's mother and little 
brother were dead ; that her grandmother was dead ; her aunt the 
marchioness also dead ; and that the marquis had retired they 
knew not whither. 

She wept incessantly, and I wept with her. At length she softly 
said You have conquered, my lord, you have conquered ; I am 
subdued by your weight of affliction. O that you could but conform 
to one article more, that we might be united as one heart, and one 
soul, and one sentiment, for ever ! 

It was now, for the first time, that I dared to seize her hand ; I 
crushed it to my lips, and thrust it to ray soul. What would you 
enjoin, I cried? I would do any thing, dare any thing-, to be united 
to my Eloisa ; in life and in death, body to body, and dust to dust, 
never never to be sundered till her spirit should make the heaven 
of my spirit hereafter ! 

Ah ! she suddenly exclaimed, that is the very thing I so eagerly 
desire. Let the God of my heart be the God of your heart let 
the God of my spirit be the God of your spirit ; so shall we be 
united in him, and jointly partake of his blessedness through 
eternity. 

Ah ! I cried ; can I forego the divine precepts of our prophet ? 
Your prophet, says she, preaches only to the eye and the ear, and 
that is all that he does or can pretend to ; but CHKIST, my pro- 
phet, preaches in the heart to the affections. From him is every 
good motion, divine or human. He is the unknown God of your 
spirit, my master, my Abcnamin ; and you feel his precious power 
while you disavow his name. 

I was puzzled I was silenced. I bent a knee in reverence, 
kissed her hand, and withdrew. 

I sent for the chief of the Christian missionaries throughout the 
city and country. I consulted each of them in private, but re- 
ceived no satisfaction from them. They all appeared equally 
zealous for my reformation, but attempted it by different, and 
even by opposite, arguments. 

Some would have persuaded me to be Christian, by showing the 
absurdity of every religion that was not Christian. Others affirmed 
that my eternal salvation depended on my conformity to certain 
external rules and penances. While the greatest number inveighed 
against the Christians of every other denomination ; and would 
have thrust me wholly from Christ, if I did not consent to receive 
him within their stinted pale. 

I knew not what to do ; I was put to a stand, and quite con- 
founded by this multiplicity of conflicting opinions. At length a 
countryman of my own came to me from the desert. He had been 
a great sinner, but was converted by the sense of his sins ; and he 
was revered and resorted to by all the friendless and afflicted. 

I opened my soul to him, with all its doubts and difficulties. 
My friend in Christ, said he, with a gentle nnd still voice, they 
have been leading you all astray, quite away from the haven that 
stretches forth its arms for the reception of long-toiled mariners, 
whom storms have at length compelled to seek a final port. 

The God of your creation can alone be your redemption; the 
E e 2 



420 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

God of your nature can alone be the salvation of the nature that 
he imparted. But who shall convince you of this? Not all the 
angels in heaven, nor all the doctors upon earth, till the Christ 
of your heart shall be pleased to convince you that you are, as 
indeed you are (however mighty a monarch), a poor, frail, erring, 
vile, and despicable creature; subjected to innumerable lapses 
and infirmities, sickness, passions, and crosses, griefs, agonies, and 
death. When this is effectually clone, the whole of the business is 
done. You will call for and catch at a Saviour, in the sensibility 
of your want of him. When you come thus laden with your sins 
to him, he will in nowise cast you out. But he will take you, as 
Noah took the wearied dove into the ark he will take you within 
the veil of his own temple of rest ; and all sects, forms, and cere- 
monies will be as the outward courts, with which you shall have 
no manner of commerce or concern. 

My heart felt the weight and the fulness of conviction. I took 
him to my arms, and requested instant baptism. My Eloisa was 
called ; we locked ourselves in ; and I was washed by water and 
faith into Christ, while my kneeling angel wept a stream of delight 
beside me. 

It is said that possession cloys. But I experienced, my dear 
D'Aubigny, that love never cloys. Every day with my Eloisa 
seemed to triumph, in heartfelt happiness, over my first bridal 
day. But 0! what was the joy, the exultation of my fond 
heart, when she gave me to be the father of a little daughter 
of paradise ! 

One day, while we were toying and fooling with the smiling in- 
fant, and throwing her, as she crowed, from the one to the other 
Ah, my husband ! cried Eloisa, how poor I was lately ; no parents, 
no kindred, nothing but my Abenamin upon the whole earth! 
and now God has been pleased to make my affliction to laugh, 
and to give this babe for a further band, a precious link of love, 
between us. 

He was just in this part of his narration when the music sounded 
to the banquet. We instantly rose and joined our Eloisa. 

When the collation was removed Madam, said I to the empress, 
have you ever heard of a relation of yours, christened by the 
name of Fanny Goodall, and lately Countess of Maitland ? I have, 
said she, often heard my fond father speak of her with filling 
eyes. She is in this city, madam. She is no longer Countess of 
Maitland. She is now doubly your relation, your aunt as well as 
your cousin ; and goes by the title of the Marchioness D'Aubigny. 
With the good leave of my lord here, I will bring her to you 
directly. 

I went to the palace appointed for my residence : I there gave 
my Fanny a few heads of the story of our Eloisa, and took her 
hastily to the presence. 

The ladies looked at each other in long and silent admiration. 
Then opening their arms, and rushing together, they continued 
some minutes locked in mutual embrace. 

Madam, said the emperor, smiling, I think I ought to be allowed 
the aumc liberties with my aunt that your husband took with his 



IRE FOOL OF QUALITY. 421 

niece. Whereon he welcomed and caressed her with an affec- 
tionate fervour. 

O ! exclaimed the royal fair, how very poor, and how very rich 
our God can suddenly make ns! But then, lord of my life, to 
think of parting of parting with these dear friends again, perhaps 
never to see them more that's what sinks and wrings my heart 
in the very midst of exultation. 

That, my love, said the emperor, is the very important article on 
which I wish to consult with you and our friends here, our dear 
kindred in Christ. But I must first show them their young rela- 
tion, my little enchantress, my precious pearl, my eye-delighting 
Abenaide. 

He then stepped forth, and, after a while, led in a gracefully 
moving creature, but veiled from the head to the waist. Throw 
up your veil, my love, says he ; here are none but your friends, 
your very dear relations your lovely aunt, and your uncle, the 
Marquis and Marchioness D'Aubigny. 

She did as she was ordered ; and instantly broke upon my sight, 
like a new glory arisen upon mid-day. 

My Fanny seized upon her, as desirous of devouring her. And 
I, in turn, took her to me with tearful eyes, as almost persuaded 
that I embraced the newly-revived person of my dearest sister 
Louisa; so perfect was the resemblance in every grace and 
feature. 

Her royal father then gave a beck, and she instantly vanished ; 
while her absence seemed to cast a shade throughout the room. 

The monarch then, deeply musing and heavily sighing, began 
I am now, my dearest friends, friends beloved above the world, 
and all that it contains I am now to open to you my inmost 
heart, and to reveal a purpose whereon I have been ruminating 
these many months, but could not hit on an expedient for bringing 
it to pass. How opportune has our JESUS sent you to us on this 
occasion ! 

I have but two children living; my Abenaide, and a son by a 
former woman of my seraglio. His name is Abencerrage ; he is 
a youth renowned in the field, but of a proud and impetuous 
demeanour. He had long conceived an illicit passion for his 
young and lovely sister. At length the fire broke forth, and he 
lately attempted to carry her away. 

I would have instantly put him to death, had I any other 
heir to succeed to my dominions. I therefore contented myself 
with banishing him my court and my presence ; though 1 am 
sensible that this has not availed for the extinguishing his horrid 
flame. 

Now, my friends, should I die, or should this violent boy break 
into rebellion for he is the favourite of the licentious soldiery I 
tremble to think what would become of my bright-eyed dove within 
the talons of such a vulture. 

This, together with my eager desire of quitting the kingdom 
of infidels, and of joining with the blessed society of Christian 
people, has, after many struggles, determined me to abdicate my 
throne, as soon as I can amass and transmit a fund sufficient for 



422 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

supporting my Eloisa and myself, with becoming dignity, in her 
native country. 

Ah, my lord! I cried, clasping him passionately in my arms, 
regard not your treasures, delay not a moment for that! Your 
Eloisa's relations, both by father and mother, are possessed of 
princely fortunes, and they will be all freely at the disposal of 
your majesty. 

Ah, my D'Aubigny ! said he, I am not yet so duly mortified a 
Christian as needlessly to elect a state of dependence, or willingly 
to descend at once from the king to the beggar. I have, however, 
been preparing: I have already converted a large part of my 
effects into bills and jewels, of high value but light portage, to 
the amount, as I think, of about forty millions of French money. 
This I will transmit by you ; and, as soon as I shall have compassed 
an equal sum, I will stay no longer in Africa ; I will fly to your 
bosoms, my precious friends. 

In the mean time this violent and unprincipled boy gives no rest 
to my apprehensions. It is therefore necessary that I commit my 
Abenaide to your trust. It is necessary, I say, that I tear away 
my choicest limb, the dearest part of my vitals! Support me, 
CHEIST, in the trial ; but it must be gone through. 

This, however, must be done with all possible privacy. I am 
persuaded that my young villain has his spies in and about my 
palace. I shall therefore request my dear aunt to disguise my 
little girl in boy's apparel, and to blacken every part of her visible 
complexion, that she may pass unnoticed, as your page, through 
the midst of my attendants. 

At length the time approached, and pressed for my departure ; 
but how to part was the question. All attendants were ordered 
to avoid the presence far away. Our metamorphosed Abenaide 
stood weeping beside us, while her father and mother crushed us 
successively to their bosoms. All was passion, a gush of tears, but 
not a word was uttered on any part. 

Oh, my D'Aubigny ! cried the emperor at length, friend, brother 
of my heart, can you conceive what I feel at this instant ? I regard 
not the world, nor the things of the world. Omit such necessary 
accommodations as are common to us with brutes, and all belonging 
to the immortal and divine humanity of man is magnetism, is 
fellowship, the feeling as of steel to adamant, and of adamant to 
steel. There is the friendship, the endearment, the love passing 
love, and surpassing all other enjoyment. If we meet again, my 
D'Aubigny, I shall anticipate my heaven. 

Again he embraced his little angel ; and again he embraced his 
queen, and besought her to be comforted. We then took leave, as 
for the last ; and again they called us back, and embraced and took 
leave again ; till, seeing no end, I suddenly broke away, hurrying 
with us our Abenaide for fear of observation. 

I have little further to say, my brother. We arrived safe at 
Paris, where we received your letter ; and, impatient to make you 
happy, I despatched my Fanny with her train and the princess 
before me ; enjoining them, however, not to reveal our secret 
till my arrival. For, as I had charged myself with the loss of 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 423 

your Eloisa, I deemed myself best entitled to make you repa- 
ration in person. But I ought not to omit that, before I left 
Paris, I received a further remittance of a large sum from your 
son-in-law, so that we may speedily look to have the royal pair 
in England. 

Soon after, a post-chaise whirled into the court, and Harry 
flying out, caught Clement and Arabella into his strict embrace. 
He then hurried them in, where Mr. Clinton received, and caressed, 
and introduced them to the duke and duchess as persons of great 
merit, and his highly valued friends. He then presented to them 
his Abenaide, who saluted Clement, and embraced Arabella with 
an affectionate familiarity. 

Oh, sir ! cried our hero, kissing his uncle's hand, am I to be the 
last person in the world whom you will honour with a salute 
from your bewitching daughter? I ask your pardon, my lord, 
said Mr. Clinton solemnly; allow me then, at length, to repair 
my omission, by presenting to your earlship her little highness 
Abenaide. 

The duke and duchess and Meekly laughed ; but Harry was not 
a whit the slower in laying hold of his advantage. 

He kissed her forehead, her eyes, her cheeks ; and lastly dwelt 
upon her lips, as though he would have infused his soul between 
them. Harry, Harry! cried Mr. Clinton, I will never introduce 
you to my girl again, unless you promise not to kiss so hard, and 
bring so much blood into her face. 

Just then a footman entered My lord, says he to Harry, here 
are three carriages and several horsemen waiting without the gate. 
They inquire for one Master Fenton, who, they say, lives with the 
Earl of Moreland ; but I assured them there was no such person 
in the house. Oh, sir ! said Harry, these are our old friends the 
Fieldings, and out he flew. 

As he approached the carriages, the company gave a shout of 
joy. Why, sir, said Mr. Fielding, a servant denied you to us, and 
said that no one of the name of Fenton lived here. Oh! says 
Harry, don't heed the blockhead, he is but a new-comer. 

He then opened the doors of the carriages, and handed and 
caressed them in turns, as they came out, Mr. and Mrs. Fielding, 
and Ned and his blooming bride. 

Mr. Clinton received them at the door, with the joy of his heart 
apparent in his countenance. He then introduced them to his 
most noble brother and sister, to his friend Meekly, and lastly he 
presented his Abenaide to them, on whom they all gazed in mute 
and reverential astonishment. 

Harry then observing that his uncle had not equally presented 
his daughter to Ned Sir, said he, I apprehend that this is not 
quite fair ; I have already kissed the fair bride of my friend with 
all my heart, and it is but honest that he should be favoured with 
a salute from mine in turn. 

Harry then took Ned by the hand and presented him to his 
beloved. While Ned bent the knee, and, touching her hand 
tremblingly, looked awfully to her face, and said Yes, bride of 
Eden, lovely extract of every beauty ! you alone can reward, you 



t24 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

alone can deserve him ; you alone are fitted to be the mate of my 
incomparable lord and master, my patron and preserver! So 
saying, he lightly touched his lips to the polished hand. But the 
praises of her Harry had gone with a pleasant trickling to the 
heart of Abenaide, and, gently raising Ned, she affectionately 
saluted him with a glistening eye. 

Pray, sir, said Mr. Fielding whisperingly to Mr. Clinton, is the 
Earl of Moreland in company? That is he, sir, pointing to Harry. 
Oh, then, cried Fielding, he is titled below his merits ; it was for 
an emperor that nature intended him ! 

Dinner was then served. During the repast the duke said Let 
us not, my brother, keep our Harry in pain : why should we delay 
the happiness of children so very dear to us? With regard to 
your child's marriage to some mighty prince, as your son-in-law 
hinted, I think her more ennobled and more illustrious by her 
marriage with our hero here, who purchased her at his peril, than 
if she were mated to the greatest potentate on earth. 

You must excuse me, my noble brother, said Mr. Clinton; I 
will have no clandestine doings in this business. My girl shall be 
married in the face and witnessing of thousands; lest hereafter 
this young rogue should have the effrontery to deny her. What 
day of the week is this ? Thursday, I think ; let Monday se'nnight 
be the day. 

Harry rose, and pressed and kissed the hand of the duke with 
rapture, and then kissed the hand of his patron hi silent submission. 

In the mean time, all preparations were pushed into forwardness 
by Mr. Clinton. The many shops of the many towns within many 
miles around were emptied of their boards and sheeting, their 
knives and forks, &c. Hundreds of tables and forms were framed, 
hundreds of tents were erected. Proclamation was made in every 
village, and all people within ten miles were invited to the 
wedding. 

When the day approached, one hundred oxen were slain, one 
hundred sheep, with fifty fat deer, &c. &c. The spits fried and the 
caldrons smoked over the fires of many a field. 

At length the auspicious morning rose ; and Harry and his bride 
were already up and dressed in their respective apartments. 

The princess was habited, after the Persian fashion, in a vest of 
silver brocading, scalloped over a petticoat of the same fabric, that 
flowed in a train behind. A scarf of cerulean tint flew between her 
right shoulder and her left hip, being buttoned at each end by a 
rose of rubies ; her shining tresses of jetty black, bound together at 
her neck beneath a huge amethyst, fell down in luxuriant ringlets, 
and shaded and revealed by turns the fine bend of her tapering 
waist ; a coronet of diamonds, through which there waved a white 
branch of the feathers of the ostrich, was inserted on the left 
decline of her lovely head ; and a stomacher of inestimable 
brilliance rose beneath her dazzling bosom, and, by a fluctuating 
blaze of unremitted light, checked and turned the eye away from 
too presumptuous a gaze. 

Our hero coming foith, beheld her, as a pillar of light jusl 
issuing from her antechamber. He stepped back as she advanced, 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 425 

and fixed his eyes upon her in mute astonishment ; then springing 
forward, he fell prostrate and kissed the hem of her robing. 

Arabella attended her royal friend,, and Clement his noble pupil, 
just as Longfield entered to give an account of his expedition. 
But he had scarce begun his detail, when, catching the images of 
his long-parted friends, he cried Bless me, my lord, Mrs. Clement, 
I think ! Yes, my Longfield, said Harry, and here too is your old 
and fast friend, Hammel Clement. Clement would not have known 
Longfield in his present genteel plight; but hearing his name, 
and recollecting him at a glance he flew and seized upon him 
with a strenuous embrace. Arabella then advanced to welcome 
her old preserver ; but Longfield respectfully bowed and shrunk 
back. 

You shall not escape me so, my dear Mr. Longfield, says she. I 
cannot forget what I owe you, e\en my life and reputation; and I 
bless the Father of mercies, who has put it in our power to pay 
part of our debt, and so saying she embraced him with freedom and 
cordiality. Yes, my dear Longfield, cried Hammel, yours is the half 
of our fortunes, and more than the half of our hearts. Your heart, 
sir, said Longfield, will ever be most valuable ; but as to any thing 
additional, the bounty of my vn U ng master has rendered all further 
fortune quite superfluous to me. 

Longfield then beckoned his lord forth, that he might relate to 
his eye, rather than to his ear, the success of his commission. 
They hastened to a long barn, where he showed Harry two ranges 
of beautiful children, one of a hundred chosen girls, another of a 
hundred chosen boys, all dressed in a clean and elegant uniform. 
Harry walked between the ranks, his heart exulting in the sense 
of its own genial humanity. Then embracing his agent Yes, dear 
Longfield, he cried, these shall be indeed my children ; and I will 
prove a true and affectionate father to them. But let us hasten to 
bestow upon them a tender mother too, I trust. 

He flew back as a glimpse of lightning, and seizing and half- 
devouring the hand of his bride Will you pardon me, my beloved, 
says he, some matters that happened before our union? I have 
collected all the children I ever had before marriage. They wait 
for your inspection; and I hope that you will not prove a hard 
stepmother to them. You are a rogue, says she, archly smiling, and 
giving him a pat on the cheek ; but come along, and, so saying, 
away they tripped. 

The princess walked, with a silent and musing attention, up and 
down the ranges. Her heart grew strongly affected, and, taking 
out her handkerchief, she wiped away the dropping tear. And 
has my lord, says she to Longfield, has he indeed taken upon him 
to be a father to all this pretty host of little ones? He has so, 
please your highness, says Longfield, and has accordingly clothed 
and provided for them. O, she cried, under the FATHER which is 
in heaven, he is the dearest father that ever was upon earth ! So 
exclaiming, she turned to Harry, and, hiding her face on his 
shoulder, she pressed him to her heart. 

On their return, they perceived Mr. Clinton, the duke and 
duchess, all standing in the great folding-door ; and, flying up the 

Ff 



426 THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 

marble steps, they both bent the knee, and received the joint 
blessings and successive caresses of their three exulting parents. 

Just then Harry spied Goodman Dobson and his dame coming 
diffidently but puffingly up the avenue. Instantly he caught his 
angel by the hand, and hastened to meet them. He took them 
successively in his arms, and saluted them with warm affection, 
while with yearning hearts and bowels they wished him joy upon 
joy. They then kneeled down on each side of the princess, kissing 
her hands and garments, and blessing her for bestowing such a 
heaven of beauty upon their Harry But as soon as Harry told her 
that they were his fosterers, she raised and kissed them in turns, 
with her arms about their necks. Harry then gave them into the 
hands of his huntsman, with orders to take them to the larder. 

The multitude, before this, began to thicken apace. And the 
youth had got together in the great lawn, casting the quoit and 
the sledge, and leaping over a cord that was raised between two 
posts. 

My dearest Harry, cried the duke, I have heard things almost 
incredible of your prowess and action, but never saw any sample 
save the mounting of your Bucephalus. Will you be so good to 
give me some instance of your excellence among yonder young 
competitors, whom I suppose to be the most eminent that the 
shire can exhibit ? Do, my Harry, said Mr. Clinton, indulge my 
dearest brother on this our day of jubilee. 

Harry bowed, and ordered his page to bring him his quarter-staff, 
and despatched another for a cord and two long poles. He then 
walked down the avenue, attended by the males and females of the 
whole family. 

As they approached the lawn, a youth of uncommon vigour had 
cleared the former cord, though raised to something upward of five 
feet in height ; but all who attempted to follow either recoiled or 
pitched over. 

Harry then caused his two poles to be erected to an elevation of 
ten feet, with a cord reaching from top to top. The multitude 
came down in thousands to see what they were about. When 
Harry, having cleared the contested cord, went backward from his 
lofty poles about the distance of thirty paces ; then rushing forward, 
he advanced one end of his staff to the ground, and springing, and 
raising, and rising upon the opposite end, he pitched himself over 
the elevated string ; while the multitude beheld him, as a new-risen 
phoenix, suspended and glittering in the air, and then alighting as 
winged on the other side. 

The elements were rent by an universal shout, which followed 
and undulated after our company till they sheltered themselves 
within the house. 

The Fieldings then arrived with the Keverend Mr. Catharines, 
who was appointed to join the noble pair. 

After breakfast the carriages were ordered out. First, Mr. Clinton 
and Mr. Meekly moved away in the former's coach and four to the 
church. The family of the Fieldings then followed in a coach and 
four. Next went Clement and his Arabella in their post-chaise and 
pair. The duke and duchess then succeeded, in a sumptuous coach 



THE FOOL OF QUALITY. 427 

proudly drawn by six German greys, attended by a long retinue of 
French liveries, and the duchess's women in a coach and four. 
And last of all came our hero and his Abenaide, enthroned in her 
open chariot ; her four spotted Arabians, restraining their impatience, 
beat measures with their feet, scarce seeming to advance the pace 
of a tortoise. 

Harry's page closed the rear, mounted on his lord's charger, who 
stepped foaming behind the chariot ; and the long cavalcade nearly 
reached from the great hotel to the entrance of the town. 

The crowd, however, extended wide and far beyond the cavalcade. 
They bowed respectfully, and paid obeisance to Mr. Clinton, the 
duke, &c., as they passed ; but, as soon as they got a glimpse of 
the chariot of their young Phaeton, their acclamations became 
unremitted, and almost insufferable to the ear, like the shouts of a 
Persian army at the rising of the sun. 

Slowly as our Harry moved, the multitude strove to retard him, 
by throwing themselves in his way, that they might satiate their 
eyes and souls with the fulness of the sight. Bended knees and 
lifted hands, prayers, blessings, and exclamations, were heard and 
seen on all sides ; and all the way as they went, hundreds upon 
hundreds shouted forth the hymeneal of the young and happy pair. 



THE END. 
