THE
REVERIE:
A FLIGHT 
TO THE
PARADISE of FOOLS. 
— All things vai?!^ and all who in vain thiJigs 
Build their fond hopes of gbry^ or lajling fame^ 
Or happinefsy in this, cr th^ other life 
MiLTON, 
Publifhed by the Editor of 
The Adventures of a Guinea," 
IN TWO VOLUMES. 
V O L. I. 
'I II. . I T i jtf 
LONDON, 
Printed forT, Becket, and P. A. Da Fondt^ 
in the Strand. mdcclxiii. 
v^ 
TJtr- 
7\ 
THE 
CONTENTS 
O F T H E 
FIRST VOLUME. 
"! B O O ' K I. 
M C H A p. I. 
it introduSfioTi. Afuddmcxcurfionofanextraordi' 
'^ nary nature opens an uncommQn view of common 
> fcenes, I 
^ C H A P. II. 
«^ Fruitlefs refleSflom. Th£ bi/hry of Mr, Sugarcane 
"IT* is introduced by thai; ^f his illujirious father^ 7 
CHAP. III. 
' The hero of the tale makes his/ appejrci-iec. The 
happy fruits of good education^ 1 3 
CHAP. IV* 
Love triumphant over nature^ but foiled by art. 
Theatrical morality^ 1 5 
A 2 CHAP. 
^ 18710 
CONTENT S. 
CHAP. V. 
j^ well-laid fchcme difcippoitited. The greed adwiHr- 
tage of being, zv ell- read in the drama. The fcene 
cf ail ion is changed, 20 
CHAP. yi. 
■Squire Sugarcane arrives in England. An odd 
-i 7nedliy of high a?id lozv life. Prejudice ,of edu- 
cation involves hi?n in many difagrceahle circu'm^ 
fiances, and at length brings him into iinminent 
danger, 2^ 
CHAP. VIL 
Jn hair-h7'eadih efcape. The happinefs of being 
abfclutely difcngaged in life. An unexpe£ied 
piece of news fiews the perverfenefs of the huma^- 
heart, 27 
CHAP. VIII. 
The pleafures of theatrical fociety. The fquire cofn- 
?nences critic and patron : he a5ls the part of h- 
ion, a?id embraces a cloud injlead of a goddefs, 32 
C H A P. 1>C. 
lylr. Sugarcane commences flat cf man. Signal tn^ 
Jlances of nuniflerial confidence and favour. A 
common change. The conduof of a patriot, 38 
C H A P. X. 
'The hijiory of a cobler, who zvould correct the times^. 
The bejl way to zvin the hearts of the mob. 
Tie over-a^s his part, and is turned out as d 
tvr angler, '" 45 
C HA P, XI. 
He^rifes in life, but cannot leave off his old tricks, 
Arepulfe overturns his patriotifm^ zvhich is again 
renezved by anothenr. ■ The: great advantage of a 
certain qimlifyj generally d^friedy^.b.ut as generally 
CONTENTS. 
CHAP. XIL 
Luck h alL Me returns home^ and tr'imnphs over 
his enemies. Great difcoverics in philofophy. His 
Jlory concluded^ and Imnfelf left in a fog^ ^ ^ 
CHAP. xiir. 
An odd way of exprejfing favour or difike. The 
Hi/iory of the Co bier matched by that of A 
Crier ^ 6o 
CHAP. XIV. 
^et one knave to catch another. An inflame of 7no~ 
deration as 7?iuch out of courfe as in chara^ler. 
The parfon fivalloivs a [ugar- plumb ^ and does 
ivhat he is bidy like a good child ^ 65 
CHAP. XV. 
A game of football. A falfe fiep gives the c?-icr the 
better of the match. lie kicks the ball in his 
majlers face \ hut makes all up, and comes off" 
with flying colours^ ' 70 
CHAP. XVI. 
li'Iuzzle a hear, or he II bite you. Three rc?narkablg 
charaSJcrs. , Boys that play tricks Jhould beware 
of tell-tales, 76 
CHAP. xvir. 
A bad excufe better than none. The advantage of 
a friend in court* A maxim in law folvcs 
/^//, ^1 
CHAP. XVIIT. 
Modern mode/iy mid gratitude. Companions oi'e 
odious. ' A good metnory often makes a bad com- 
panion. It is prudent to make hay vohile the fim 
Jhines, ^ "85 
Q^H A P.\X%^. 
Signal, in/lani^es gf greatnefs of Jpptt^ /' Conji/lcncy 
'■ ■^" '^■■'t' - ^* A3 ^'-- ' ' 
(3 
1 
C O N T E N T S. 
$f chara5ler maintained, A fcene of uncommon, 
tendernefs, 91 
CHAP. XX. 
57;i? opening of a new fcene gives occafion for feme 
reflexions ^ which will probably be leafl agreeable 
to thofe who have mofi occafion for them^ 97 
C H A P. XXI. 
A life concluded in charaXer. An uncommoji legacy 
of love and gratitude. A particular circumftance 
neceffary to be attended to through the lourfe of 
this curious work^ is explained ^ 102 
CHAP. XXII. 
An account of an iiniverfal genius. Some curious 
fecrets in the trade of an author ; with a new 
way of replying to impertinent remarks^ 1 09 
CHAP. XXIII. 
Extraordinary inflames of one author s regard for 
the reputatioJi of another ; with a Jhort jnethod 
of filenclng competitors for literary fa-me^ 117 
CHAP. XXIV. 
A rare example of mod^efty and refpe£l^ on a inofi 
trying occafion. A Jure way of getting a good 
chara5ier \ zvith feme Jhort reflections on literary 
ambition^ and other more ferlous matters^ 122 
CHAP. XXV. 
The pleafures of bei?ig a great man. Ii<ijK\ ^fs in 
politicks. One drawn-battle leaves roornjor an- 
other* Children and fools fall cut at play^ 127 
CHAP. XXVI. 
A good way to make up for a bad market- Afyffe^ 
ries of fi ate preferment. Servants muft not ad- 
vife their maflers. The comfortable effeXs of 
modern honour. An heavy (loud gatherings 
5 in 
CONTENTS. 
CHAP. XXVIL 
AJlrange apparition difperfes the cloud. A nevo^ip'^ 
thod of making a good fieward. The perilous ad' 
ventures of the knight of the halter^ with ether 
favoury matters^ I40 
CHAP. XXVIII. 
ji?i appear-aJice of danger the mofl convincing ar^ 
gumcnt. A Jlrange charailer of a fi range fort 
of people. The hcfl foundation for popularity. 
The myflery of patriotifm, with fome low preju- 
dices of education, 146 
CHAP. XXIX. 
A famous war-fcene. The modern art of general- 
Jhip. A new method of reformation., with the 
lamentable hijhry of a penitential procejfton^ 155 
BOOK 11. 
C H A P. I. 
The happlnefs of hav'mg more money than a 7nan 
knows what to do with. The extenjive know- 
■ ledge of the lovers of Virtu accounted for, Po£ts 
not judges of paintings 1 6 6 
CHAP. IL 
Succefs no proof of -merit. The impropriety of 
being pleafed againji rule. A curious account 
of the great advantages of the ancient drama, 
r'ainters not judges of poetry. A capital 
defe£l in the deftgns of the two famous architedSy 
with the wonderful effe5l of a how window^ 
C H A P. III. 
No hag without a bottom. The advantage of keep- 
ing a good refolution^ an evening fpent in tajl&\ 
and a jaunt to Bath. The misfortune of want" 
ing fomething to wijh for ; with fo?ne uncommon 
7-efie£iions in pralfe of what no one defires to pof- 
fefs, ' 179 
CHAP. IV. 
Hijiory of Mr. Chatncelion. The pleafure and 
advantages of the friend/hip of the Great. Epi^ 
fode of Monfieur Frippeau and his lady opens 
fome fecrets not very pleafmg to the hero of the 
taUy 183 
CHAP. 
CONTENTS. 
CHAP. V. 
Misfortunes multipty. J new method of engaging 
the ajpjlance of the Great. Coynmon cccurrejices, 
Chama-lion breaks with his great frieiids rather 
unpolitely. His hijlory concluded with fo?n& odd 
reflexions, ig2 
C^H A P. VI. 
A rare charaBer, Defcription of a lady's cUfet. 
Pleafmg fneditations ; with one fide of a remark- 
able converfation. The hi/lory of Ca^lia and 
Strephon. Mafqued batteries mpfi dangerous in 
love as well as war,  199 
CHAP. VII. 
Tlje hiflory of CcvUa and Strephon, continued.- 
An extraordinary method of holding cOnverfation 
at a dijlance. People often pay for peeping.. 
Love is a riddle, 206 
CHAP. VIII. 
Continued. — Perplexity worfe perplexed. A flight 
prejudice of education opens a newfccne ofconfufion, 
A curious accou7it ef a Juggle*"' li*^ fii^^ the 
Devil at his own weapons ; but is fur p rife d hitn- 
felf in the mid/i of his triumph, 2 1 2 
CHAP. IX. 
The Hijlory of Calia and Strephon concluded. The 
fuggler juggled', and the 7nyftery cleared up at 
laji. Halit too powerful for eonviX.ion, The 
advantage of making the frft flory good, aiB 
CHAP. 
CONTENTS. 
CHAP. X. 
Different appearances of the fame objeSf feen in 
different lights. A whimfical reprefentation of 
the laft efforts of gallantry^ with other no lefs 
curious mattersy 227* 
CHAP. XL ^'f^-^ 
Anecdotes of a celebrated female, A fencer foiled 
at his own weapons. Secret of a correfpondence- 
not fo uncommon as unaccountable j with a ftr ik- 
ing inftance of vicious vanity. A new fcene^ 232 
CHAP. XIL 
Account of a remarkable perfon. Common confe- 
quences of a common conneSlion. The fcene 
changed, A good partner often helps out a bad 
gamcy 237 
CHAP. XIII. 
hooking back often dangerous. Female artifice tri- 
umphant over reafon and virtue. The natural 
confequences of this. A remarkable inftance of 
the effeSi of complying with thefajhion^ 244 
CHAP. XIV. 
Worfe luck^ and more of it. A new rnethod for 
breaking a bad habit. Travellers often return 
without their errand^ 250 
CHAP. XV. 
Anecdotes of a profefjed wit. A lucky hit made the 
mft of. Too much of one thing won't do. A^ 
rough retort of a coarfe jeft j with other curious 
matters of the fame kindy 256 
CHAP. 
CONTENTS. 
CHAP. XVI. 
Itiftances of the compajjion common on fuch occa^ 
fions, The pra£iical joker enjoys a double triumph 
over the wit. Other worfe confequences of the 
proftitution ofgeniusy 264 
CHAP. XVII. 
An old ohfervation confirmed by a new charaHer, 
A remarkable injlame of the inconftfiency of the 
human heart, A curious love-fcene proves that 
the pleafure of variety is fometimes attended with 
danger and inconvenience, 270 
CHAP. XVIII. 
A new motive for turning foldier \ with a JJjort 
view of the military profejfton. The fcene is 
ihangedy and a more extenfwe profpe5l opened^ 
277 
^ Jil^'"^ 
( i ) 
ADVERTISEMENT. 
IN the following work the judicious reader 
will directly trace the hand of the author 
of Chrysal. The uncommon approba- 
tion with which that performance has been re- 
ceived by the Public, determined the editor to 
fpare no pains nor expence, to recover the 
other remains of fo fuccefsful a writer. The 
difficulties attending fuch an attempt are ob- 
vious. From the fuppofed Clergyman'^ alone, 
into whofe hands they firft fell, could any ac- 
count of them be expelled : but how to trace 
him through all the various characSlers, which 
fuch perfons ufually afTume, was the queftion. 
At length, after a moft fatiguing fearcli, he was 
indebted to accident for that fuccefs which all 
his diligence had failed of. He was called up- 
on one evening by an acquaintance, to go with 
him to Bridewell, in fearch of a fervant girl of 
his, whom th€f laudable vigilance of the con- 
ftables had taken up in the Urcet the nio;ht be- 
fore, when fhe was fent on an errand, and the 
ftridt juftice of the magiftrate had committed lo 
the houfe of corrct^ion^ as flie unluckiiy had not 
a penny in her pocket to prove her innocence, 
or even pay a mellenger for going for her maf- 
ter. While they waited in the public room 
* See the preface to Chrysal, p. 21. — 
Vol, I, ft for 
a ADVERTISEMENT. 
for the return of a perfon Vv'ho was fent for her 
difcharge, they were {truck with the uncom- 
ir.only droll look and beha-viour of the wa'ucr 
who ferved the company with liquor. To di- 
vert the melancholy refiedions, therefore, v/ith 
which fuch a fcene of v/retchednefs and de- 
bauchery muil neceirarily affeit every humane 
heart, they called for a pint of wine, and de- 
ilred him to fit down arrd drink with them. 
'I'he invitation was readily accepted ; and the 
fellow obferving that they exprefled fome cu- 
riofity to know how a man of his apparent 
abilities could have funk into fo low a ftation, 
immediately gave them" the following outlines 
©f his hiftory. 
'* Gentlemen,, (faid he) there is nothing in. 
*' this life but ups and downs. Low" as you 
*' fee me at prefent, I have often figured in 
*-' an higher fphere, I have beeiq a player, 
*' a doctor, an author, and a parfon j and 
* have acted my part with proper dignity in. 
*' each charadler till the farce was eaided. I 
*' have alfo, indeed, amufed myfelf with tak- 
**' ins; a view of life in lefs exalted ftations: 
*' I have been a broken foldier, a ibipwrecked 
*' failor, a fool, a madman, and a gypfie ;. ia 
*' rewatd for fome feats of uncommon clever- 
^' nefs in th€ laft of which charadfers, I have 
*' had lodgings ailigned rae here, rent free,- 
<►'- for feven years, where, that 1 fnould not be. 
''- idle, I have defcended to the occupation 
^» in which you fee me. Howpver, 1 am not 
*^ difpiri-ted. Seven years will not lafl for 
^' ever ; and I hope to be prime minifler yety, 
<-' before 1 die." 
The- 
ADVERTISEMEN-T. 
Mr 
The moment he mentioned his having: been 
a parlon, it occurred to the editor, that this 
mia;ht polTibly be the one whoiii he had heen fo 
lony; in fearcH of. As foon as he (lopped there- 
i'arc to drink their healths, ' It muft be allow- 
' ed ( faid he) that you have (een life in va- 
rious lights ; but there is one circu^nflnnce 
in your hiftory which I do not underftand. 
You fay you have been a parfon — " *' Ave, 
fw, (anfwered the other) one of yci^r J}/f~ 
ordaifwi ones, who go about the world 
preaching poor people our of their fcnic?,. 
and then picking their pockets. BiU j1w 
conTcience was too tender for fucli a vi!;* 
trade, fo 1 left it and turned gypfie ; though I 
have had reafbn enough finceto repent of the 
manner in whicli I took that Hep, as I loli 
an opportunity of making myfortune.by it. 
You murt have beared of the book that has 
m^de fuch a noife lately, The /Idveniurcs of 
a Guinea, Sir, that bock was once mine; 
but I had not the good fortune to make 
a proper ufe of it. I muft needs attempt al- 
terinof, forfooth ; and before I had hnifiicd, 
' fomc impertinent fufpicions of my neigh- 
bours obliged me to (hift my quarters fome- 
vvhat fuddenly ; and in my hurry I forgot to 
put up that book along with the reft of my 
papers." 
The editor had fomedifEcuIty to conceal the 
pleafure which this account gave him, tiiough 
he was fenfiblc that the utmoft addr^fs was necef- 
fary, if he hoped to fucceed with fuch. a voluble, 
genius. "And pray, fir, (laid he therefore, .with 
*' a carelefs air) were you the author of that 
'' book ? "- " No, fir, (anfwered the cjther) 
a 2 I'was 
iv ADVERTISEMENT. 
'' I was not the author of it, but it was mine 
*' notvv'ithlianding. That, and fome other 
" papers of infinitely greater value, were given 
" to me by the woman in whofe hands the au- 
" thor left them. If you have read the pre- 
" face to that book, you muft remember file 
" fays, that her old lodger was fucceeded by 
^'^ a Clergyjfmn^ who left her houfe to go preach- 
'* ing about the country. I was that Clergy- 
" man^ fir. But it is not the lofs of that book 
" which I lament. Well as it has fucceeded, 
'* it was not to be compared with another of 
" the fame author's, which I made a Ihift to 
" carry ofF, and which would certainly have 
" made my fortune, had I not loft it in much 
** the fame manner as I did the other. But 
" it is in vain to grieve at what cannot be 
" remedied ; a»d fo, gentlemen, my fervice 
*^ to you." 
*^ You muft know, gentknien, (continued 
** he, as foon as he had drank off his wine, 
' which now began to warm his heart, and fet 
* all his fecrets abroach) that in the courfe of 
'- n\y rnifiijiry I infmuated myfelf fo.far into 
*^ the good opinion of the wealthy widow of a 
** country farmer, that £i\Q took me into her 
*' houfe, to inftru^L her children in the true 
" reformed principles of religion, having fallen 
*' out with her vicar about his dues. If I 
" could have contained myfelf, I might have 
*' lived happily enough with her ; but the fleili 
*' was frail ; I was then a young fellow, and 
*-' her dauohters were o-ood clever wenches, 
*' In fhort, I taught the two eldeft of them 
^' other lefTons befide religion. Such matters 
^^- caimot be long concealed^ Mv kind p'ji- 
" pils 
ADVERTISEMENT. v 
'' pils foon began to feel fymptoms that fliew- 
*' ecJ me it was time to decamp ; which I did 
*' accordingly, without taking any leave, ta 
" avoid the pain of parting : but as I was not 
" fo well provided for my journey as I could 
" have wiflied, I made bold to break open a 
" cheft in which the old woman kept her mofl 
*' valuable things, and took as many of them 
" as I could conveniently carry off. This 
*' obliged me to leave my own baggage be- 
'< hind me, which, to fay the truth, was of 
*' no great value, except thofe papers j and the 
" worth of them I was alfo ignorant of at that 
'' time ; though I am fenfible now, that it 
" greatly exceeded that of my booty, which 
" confifted only of an old filver tankard and 
" cav\'dle-cup, and a parcel of linen ; for, 
" tlie beldame kept her cafh fomewhere 
" elfe." 
This account was far from giving the editor 
fatisfadion, as he apprehended that it would be 
very difficult to prevail on him to make a dif- 
covery that might endanger his life^ by telling 
where he had performed thofe exploits. How- 
ever, he refolved to make the attempt, and, 
taking him into another room, told him, if he 
would let him know where thofe papers were 
left, he would give him the moft facred afTur- 
ance that no ill confequcnce fhould attend his 
coniidence, and that he would honeftly pay 
him the value of them, if he fliould be fo for- 
tunate as to recover them. The other turning 
his head on one fide, and fixing his eyes in- 
tently on him, with a look of inexpreflible 
archnefs, for fome time, " Why ? (faid he) 
*' there is fomething odd enough, to be fure, 
a 3 *M'» 
yi ADVERTISEMENT. 
*' in afking fuch a queftlon ; but as you ap- 
** pear to be more of a gentleman, than to 
*' trepan iuch a poor devil as me to the gal- 
*' lows, I will e*en tell you. As to paying 
' me, I fliall leave that to yourfelF, when you 
' get them ; and fhaironly define a guinea at 
'* prefent, to buy me fome lirtle neccflaries, 
'* as you lee I am rather out of repair."— 
This, demand was immediately complied 
with, on which he named a place above two 
hundred miles from London. However, v/ith- 
out hcfitating on the danger of being deceived, 
he fet out diredlly, and found, to his unfpeak- 
able joy, that once in his life the other had 
2(5led honeftly. As foon as he had made fome 
BecefTary enquiries, he went to the old gentle- 
woman, who was flill living, and after a little 
introdu6lory difcourfe told her, that he had 
come, in obedience to the dying requeft of an 
unhappy perfon, to make her the only reparation 
in his power for the injuries he had done her, 
by paying for the things he had taken away. 
At the mention of his name fhe burft in- 
to a flood of tears ; after the firft violence 
of which was over, fne confented to accept of 
the fatisfaclion he offered, and finding he was 
no flranger to hlsfiiend's other feats in her fd- 
mily, told him, that matters had not proved 
quite fo bad as might have been apprehended^, 
her eldeft daughter having mifcarried privately, 
on his going away -, fo that fhe fuffered no in- 
jury in her charad^er, and was fince well mar- 
ried to a'm^n-midwife in the next village 5 as 
her fecond was to the fquire's only fon, who, 
for reafons beft known to themfelves, made no' 
objedion to her for being with child. — Pleafed- 
with; 
ADVERTISEMENT. vii 
with this account, he payed her what flie de- 
manded for her things ; and then, carele'sJy en- 
quiring whether his friend had not left Tome 
books and papers there, hai the pleafure to re- 
ceive them all, tied up as they had been left; 
the good woman declaring flie had all along 
been convinced, that a "man who knew lo 
much of religion as Wis friend ih^ parpn^ would 
certainly pay her fome time or Other ; and 
therefore ihc had taken the greatcfi: care of 
them. 
Flufhed with this fuccefs, he returned to Lon- 
don, and going to iJridewell to communicate 
the good news to his new/r/W/, he found that 
the guinea he had given him had put an end to 
l)is adventures the very night he got it, one of 
his fellow prifoners and he havnig, for a trial of 
their heads, drank fuch a quantity of o^in as 
killed them upon the fpot. This event ^ave 
him an abfolute property in his acquifi- 
tion, which he now offers to the Public, with 
the fame fcrupulous fidelity he obferved in re- 
lation to the former works of this author; and 
he hopes this honeft account, added to what 
he faid in the Pretace to that applauded per- 
formance, and the arguments urged in the 
Advertifement prefixed to the fecond edition of 
it, vyill obviate any fufpicion of its aiming at 
particular charaders, or being other than a 
mere work of imagination. 
POST- 
( viii ) 
POSTSCRIPT. 
jT may not, for obvious reafons, be improper 
to inform the Public, that this concludes the 
works of our author, of this or any other enter- 
taining kind 5 the x^fi rf ^^^ writings relat- 
ing folely to his attempts to find the Philofopher^s 
$ione* 
THE 
THE 
R E V E R I Ej 
O R, A 
Flight to the Paradife of Fools. 
CHAP. I. 
IntroduEllon. A fudden excurfion of an extraordi^ 
iiary 7iature opens an uncommon view of commoK 
fcenes, 
AS I indulged myfelf one evening in the 
pleafure of reading the divine poem 
of Paradise Lost, which I do as 
often as health and ferenity of mind. 
make me capable of enjoying fo fublinie an en- 
tertainment in a proper manner; when I came 
to the palTage * from whence the lines, pre- 
fixed to this work are taken, my imaoination 
caught the facred fire, and I purfued the 
thought, 'till, wearied with the inexhauftible 
* B. III. 1, 444, &c. 
Vol, I, B variety 
2 THE REVERIE. 
variety wliich it opened to my view, I funk in- 
to that furpenfion of fenfe, which is called A 
REVERIE; when the foul only wakes, 
and, breaking through its corporeal incum- 
brances, ranges at will over the boundlefs ex- 
panfe of creation, and joins in converfe with 
congenial fpirits. 
The objects about which my mind had been 
employed remained fo ftrongly imprinted on it, 
that it immediately continued the fcene, but 
with that confiftency and conneclion which dif- 
tinguifh the vifions of imagination from the 
confufioh of common dreams. 
I thou2;ht I found myfelf (I knew not how 
tranfported thither) on the confines o^ that 
world, which Milton fo beautifully defcribes. 
The idea of fuch a fcene raifed my curiofity fo 
hi^^h, that, in defiance of the dread of ventur* 
ins: alone in a place where I was an utter ftran- 
ge7, I was going to mix directly with the mul- 
titude, that I might take a more diftindl and 
particular view of the wonderful things which I 
cxpeded to fee there, when a being of moft 
tremendous afpedt, appeared fuddenly before 
rac:." Hold prefumptuous mortal I (faid he, 
with a frown that nailed me to the ground) nor 
run into a labyrinth, from whence it is impof- 
fible to return, without the aflifl:ance of fome 
luperior being to dire6l your flep$, and difperfe 
the mills of prejudice and ignorance, which at 
prefent obftruci your fight." 
Such an interdiction was not inefreClual ; I 
Itopped, abafhcd and terrified ; but curiofity 
ao-ain getting the better of my fear, " Pardon, 
mi5"hty lord ! (anfvvercd I, proflranng myfelf 
before him) the error of inadvertency, nor im- 
pute 
THE REVERIE. 3 
pute to thy fervant the fault of his nature. The 
defcription I have read of this place has in- 
flamed my foul with a curiofity too flrong to 
bear. O let thy beneficence indulge it for a 
moment. To thy diredlion I refign myfelf. Do 
thou prefent the neceflary clue to guide my 
fteps, and open my eyes to the wonders which 
furround me." 
" Arife ! (replied he, fmoothing his brow, 
with a fmile of complacency) I blame not thy 
curiofity ; under the direction of reafon, its im- 
pulfe is the ftrongeft and moll extenfive caufe 
of human knowledge. But the more impor- 
tant duty of my particular ftaticn permits mc 
not to attend to the gratification of it myfelf. 
I prefide over thefe regions of folly and confu- 
fion, which my ftri6i:eft vigilance is not moue 
than necefiary to keep from falling into utter 
anarchy. However, thou fhalt not be difap- 
pointed. The fpirit who condu6ls my fubjecSis 
hither from the earth will foon arrive. Him 
will I order to go with you, and give you the 
gratification you defire, which the nature 
of his office, and his converfation in the 
world, enable him to do more fatisfacSlorily than 
I can, who am too much taken up with other 
matters, to attend to fuch trifles as the actions 
of mankind. And opportunely here he comes. 
Ariel, (continued he, addreffing himfelf to 
another fpirit who juft then joined us) this 
mortal is permitted to take a view of our myf- 
lerious empire. Do thou condu6t him in fafety 
through it, and inform him of every thing that 
is proper for him to know, and for thee to re-r 
veai." 
B 1 .At 
4 THE REVERIE. 
At thefe words, he vaniflied from my fight ; 
and Ariel advancing to me with an air of afta- 
bility and kindnefs, ** Come, thou moft fa- 
voured of mortals, (faid he) and enjoy an in- 
dulsence hitherto denied to man. The adven- 
turous bard, v/hofe bold defcription led you hi- 
ther, fnatched but a general glimpfe, as he flew 
by. The v/hole fhall be difclofed to you, and 
all its myfteries explained." 
■ Encouraged by the manner in which he fpoke, 
I raifed my eyes from the ground, where fear 
and reverence had fixed them, and addreffing 
myfelf to him, " Accept, (faid I) moft graci- 
ous fpirit, the warmefl expreilion of my grati- 
tude for this ineftimable favour. Lead where 
thou wilt, thy wijling fervant follows ; but if 
it be not too much for me to afk, vouchfafe firft 
to inform me vi^hat is this place called, and who 
are the inhabitants of it ?" 
" The world, which is thus opened to youc 
view, (anfwered he) is T H E P A R A D I S £ 
OF F O O L S 5 where fv^lf-deluded man, thro' 
endlefs ages, continues to a6l over the ablurdi- 
ties in which he blindly placed the happinefs of 
his life. 'Till you have completed the appointed 
probation of mortality, and are purified by 
death, from the ftains and infirmities of a cor- 
ruptible body, you are not able to fee their ac- 
tions in their genuine colours, -ftripped of the 
difguifes which impofe upon themfelves i for las 
they are aduated by their former paflions, they 
ftill labour under all the weakncflbs and imperr 
fci^ions of their former fenfes : however, I will 
remove the veil for a moment, and give you a 
fight of human nature, in a ftate that nevgr 
was before revealed to mortal eyes.'* — Saying 
this, 
THE REVERIE. 5 
*^his, he touched my eyes with the end of a 
wand wlfich he held in his hand, when inftantly 
a flood of light broke in upon them, that illu- 
mined all my foul. 
It is impoffible for words to convey an idea 
of what I felt at this view of human life, di- 
verted of all the fpecious colouring which men 
mutually put on to deceive each other, and that 
with fuch eagernefs and induftry, as often to 
hide the impofition from themfelves alfo in the 
end, and fo become the dupes of their own de- 
ceit. Amazed at fuch a fcene, I could not 
help exclaiming, " O fapient fpirit, what can 
this be ? The adlions of thefe beings bear the 
ilrongeft refemblance to thofe of man ; but 
there is a vein of folly runs, through them all, 
which makes them look as abfurd and ridiculous 
as the tricks of children in their mimic plays. 
Can this be their eternal employment ? Or is 
it pofTible that they fhould be infenfible of the 
groflnefs of fuch folly !" 
" Such is the life of man, (returned the fpi- 
rit v/ith a fignificant fmile) and fo appear the 
moft important of his actions, to beings unaf- 
fe(5led with the weaknefs of his nature. This 
world is, as it were, A Reflection of that 
which you have lived in. In it, as in a mir- 
ROUR, you behold the human heart in all its 
various fituations. You fhall have a view of 
the* whole ; but to make the gratification of 
your curiofity the more fatisfa£lory, I will lead 
you firft to yon fantaftic fcene, where your know- 
ledge of fome of the a6lors will make the farce 
more interefting to you ; for you muft obferve, 
that as this world of ours is but a fhadow of 
that of man, it neceflarily is divided like it into 
B 3 difFeirent 
6 THE REVERIE. 
difFerem countries, which bear the fame names, 
and are in every relpedt under the fame circum- 
. ftances as thefe. But I fee your fight is dazzled 
with this extraordinary degree of light ; I will 
therefore draw the veil over it again, and reftore 
things to that appearance which is fuitcd to 
your prefent ftate." 
" Whenever occafion requires, I will re- 
inove the obftacles which obftru6l human fenfe, 
and enable you to perceive the particular ob- 
jects which I point to, at the greateft diltance; 
free from the confufion that an unlimited view 
of fuch a complicated fcene mud unavoidably 
throw you into. The walls of the clofet fhall 
be tranfparent to your eye ; and the fecret 
whifper found diftindly in your ear." — With 
thefe words,, he waved his wand before my 
.eyes ; and immediately the fcene funk into its 
original obfcurity. 
The fpirit then took my hand, and rifmg 
with a bound, we glided through the air, with 
a velocity that diftanced thought, though with- 
out. any apparent motion of our own, till we 
arrived at the place which he fixed on as a pro- 
per ftation for our purpofe. 
As foon as we flopped, " We are now (faid 
he) in the midfl of the bufy fcene ; but I have 
made your form imperceptible to thofe purblind 
beings, fo that you may indulge your curiofity, 
T/ithout interruption or difcovery." 
CHAP. 
THE REVERIE. 7 
'chap. II. 
Fruithfs rejkaions. The hijlory of Mr. S u G a R - 
CANE is introduced by that of his i I lujhious fa- 
ther, 
^TP I^ E firft thing that caught my attention, 
A when I had recovered from the aftonifh- 
ment with which my method of travelling had 
ftruclc me, was a mixed multitude of aU ages 
and degrees of mankind, clapping their hands, 
and fhouting round a perfon, who was addreiV- 
ing them in the moft infinuating manner, while 
people, employed by him ferved^them with wine, 
in quantities fufficient to drov/n every o-jiminer- 
ing of reafon, and deprive them of all power of 
attending to what he faid. 
My guide faw my furprize, and without 
waitmg for my defiring an explanation of the 
caufe of it, refumed his difcourfc in thefe words, 
which he uttered in a voice, that, to the grofs 
fenfes of the beings round us, feemed the foft 
whifper of the pafTing breeze. 
" I fee you are amazed at the unaccountable 
extravagance of the fcene before you. This 
one inftance, even were there not ten thoufand 
others equally flagrant, would be fufficient to 
fhew how abfolutely folly rules the heart of 
i?iari. 
" Of all the tranfaaions of human life, there 
is fcarce one of more real importance to it than 
this in which thcfe people are at prefent en- 
B 4 gaged.. 
8 THE REVERIE. 
gaged. They are chufing a perfon to reprefent 
them in the legiflature ; to protect their pro- 
perties, to promote their interefts, and provide 
laws for the prefervation and increafe of their 
happinefs and glory , and confeqUently into the 
hands of this reprefentative do they commit the 
care of every thing juftly dear to them in the 
world. (You are to take notice, that in con- 
formity to the illufion under which thefe infatu- 
ated beings a6l, I fpeak of them and their ac- 
tions, as if they ftill were in the world they 
have left ; and this caution I give you, once 
for all, to prevent miftake and confufion.) 
*' But what are the qualifications required 
for this facred truft ? and by what arts does the 
candidate for it infinuate himfelf into the con- 
fidence of the people, to obtain fuch an unli- 
mited power over them ? Examine the fcene be- 
fore you, and there you fee the whole myftery. 
The ambitious are plied with promifes, the co- 
vetous with bribes, and all with liquor, till 
they are heated to a degree of intoxication fuf- 
ficient to make them give credit to whatever he 
fays, it matters not how contradi61:ory to com- 
mon fenfe, and the condu£l of his pafl life : 
for who could be expedted to facrifice his for- 
tune, and proftitute his reafon in the manner 
this perfon does, to a romantic defire of doing 
fervice to thofe who are fo wretchedly impro- 
vident that they will not ferve themfelves ? 
What has he who fells himfelf a right to ex- 
pe6l, but to be fold again ? 
" Thus far the ele6lors fcem to be the only 
fools, and to leave a name of ftill a blacker im- 
port to their. elected reprefentative'. But to a 
nearer view the imaginary difFerence vanifhes, 
and 
THE REVERIE. 9 
and all appear equally entitled to admifTion into 
this place. 
" For who, that gave the leaft attention to 
the voice of reafon, would diiTipate his own 
wealth, and facrifice the folld happinefs of in- 
dependence, to acquire a power of committino- 
a breach of truft, as abfurd as it is perfidious? 
Or what are the mighty advantages even pro- 
pofed by the mod fanguine purfuer of fuch a 
ichcme? Nothing but a deceitful fmile of court- 
favour, an ignominious preference in the exe- 
cution of fome iniquitous job, for which he 
receives the paultry reward of a precarious pen- 
fion or employment, the value of which is in- 
confiderable, in comparifoji of what he has ia- 
viOied in the infamous purfuit ; not to mention 
the proflitution of his confcience and honour. 
" Nor does the foUy of his eledors, in fuf- 
fenng themfelves to be feduced by fuch bafe mo- 
tives, in the leaft acquit him of perfidy. The 
moft venal eleaor who ever took a bribe would 
refufe the candidate with deteftation, who fhould 
openly avow the iniquity of his intentions, and 
tcU him, he bought his power on purpofe to fell 
It again. ProfefTions of honefty, however im- 
probable, are always expeded ; and though par- 
tiality palliates to himfelf his own venality and 
corruption, he looks for promifes of the oppo- 
fite virtues from the candidate, which he im- 
plicitly believes, becaufe it is his intereft that he 
mould have them. 
^ '' Thus grofs as this prevarication is, it ob- 
viates every excufe the candidate can make for 
his corruption, and convids him of perfidy 
even againft his equally corrupt ekaor. But 
not to dwell upon the iniquity of this pradice, 
^-^ * there 
10 THE REVERIE. 
there is a degree of folly in it, that would ex- 
ceed b«lief, did not too frequent experience 
prove it. It is felling a man's birth-right for 
even lefs than a mefs of pottage ; for v^^hat fe- 
curity has the elector of enjoying his bribe, or 
the reprefentative his penfion, when the very 
adt that earns them thefe wretched wages of 
proftitution, abfolutcly enflaves them to the 
tyranny of that power which they have thus 
jointly laboured to eredl, and which can deprive 
them of thefe and every other emolument of 
life at pleafure ? 
" I have been infenfibly led into thefe reflec- 
tions, by the execrable folly of the fcene be- 
fore us; but, obvious and juft as they are, the 
force of them will appear in a ftill flronger 
light, when illuftrated by a fhort view of the 
life of this very candidate, the circumflances of 
which prove the truth of every remark that I 
made, beyond a poiTibility of doubt. General 
rcafoning is too often founded on hUc princi- 
ples, and leads the unwary mind into error ; 
but inflances from matter of facl can never de- 
ceive. 
" His name is Sugarcane: he was born in 
London^ where his father, for fome little time, 
followed one of the meanefl mechanic trades ; 
to which, after unexpectedly outliving the neg- 
le(Sts and cruelties of a parifh nurfe, he had been 
bred at the parifh charge. 
" The fanguinenefs of his temper equalled 
the flrength of his cdnflitution, and v/ould not 
permit him to remain long contented in fo low 
a ftation, though poverty feemed to preclude 
every poffible hops of rifmg to an higher, ex- 
cept by the flow fteps of honeft induftry. But 
5 this 
THE REVERIE. ii 
this he defpifed as beneath him ; and being freed 
from every reftraint of honefty and virtue, by 
the principles vi^hich he had imbibed in his edu-- 
cation at acharity-fchool, he refolvcd to ftrike 
out a fhorter way, or fall in the attempt. 
" Accordingly, in a little time after his 
marriage vi^ith my mother, he quitted his trade, 
and laid out her fortune, vi^hich was no more 
than the favings of a life of fervitude, on the 
flock of a public houfe, as the way in which he 
could exert his abilities to beft advantacrc. 
" In the courfe of his education at the cha- 
rity-fchool, he had formed acquaintances with 
feveral of the mod promifmg youths of the age, 
his fchool-fellows, the vivacity of v/hofe parts 
had been early difplayed in offering infults to 
the very hands which reached them bread, pa- 
trolling the flreets at midnight, beating the 
watch, breaking up brothels, which refufed to 
fubmit to their pleafure, and {landing bullies 
for whores ; and who as they advanced to riper 
years fhewed equal genius and fpirit, in flriking 
out and executing various ways for remedying 
the partiality of fortune, and wrefting her fa- 
vours from the lefs worthy hands into which flie 
had blindly given them. 
" With thefe he immediately improved his 
former acquaintance into the clofcft intimacy, 
not only affording them an hatbour in his houfe 
when they were under apprehenfion of the un- 
generous feverity of the laws, for few of them 
ever fell from the hopes of their youth > or re- 
linquiflied the pradices iri which they had been 
fo early trained ; but alfo frequently purchafmg 
the prizes which they had fo gallantly taken at 
the hazard of their lives, and fo faving them 
jB from- 
12 THE REVERIE. 
from the additional danger of offering iliem to 
idle to ftrangers, In return for which fervices 
they generally gave him fuch cheap bargain?, 
that the profit over- weighed his fears, and con- 
firmed his hopes of making an eafy fortune in 
a fliort time. 
" But this happy profpecl was foon overcafl. 
Some of his moil intimate friends having the 
bad luck not to come oft fo cleverly in their en- 
terprizes as ufual, his zeal for the public good 
prompted him to turn evidence againftthem ; by 
which precaution alfo, he prevented their mak- 
ing difcoveries to his difadvantage. But though 
he faved his life by this prudence, circumftances 
appeared fo ftrong againft him, upon the whole, 
as the original contriver, and principal manager 
of the fcheme, that he was ordered to take a 
voyage to the IFeft- Indies, to aiHft in civilizing 
the favage natives, and improve the interefts of 
an infant colony, by his fuperior abilities and 
addiefs." 
** I have been fo particular in this afFair, 
ivhich happened when the perfon before us was 
about three years old, becauie it laid the foun- 
datfon of his prefent fortune. His father natu- 
rally took him with him ; and as his prudence 
had made him be always upon his guard, he 
was able to make fuch provifion for his voyage, 
that it was neither fo uncomfortable, n'or his 
profpc6l fo defperate as is ufual with perfons in 
his circumftances. 
" The firft thing he did on his arrival, was 
to purchafe a plantation, which he was able to 
flotk fo well, that in a very (tw years, be- 
tween the profits which he reaped from that, 
and the advantages his fuperior knowledge gave 
hii:n 
THE REVERIE. 13 
him in other dealings, he not only acquired a 
fortune beyond his moft fanguine expedtations, 
but allb arofe to the higheft honours and power 
in that part of the world to which the ignomi- 
nious manner »of his going there was no ob- 
ftrudion, as it had been the general cafe. 
CHAP, HI. 
TJoe htro of the tale makes his appearance. The 
happy fruits of good education. 
** T T may be judged that his worfhip's mind 
JL was too intent upon matters of more mo^ 
ment to permit his taking much thought about 
the education of his fon. Indeed, the notions 
he had formed of fuch affairs, from the educa- 
tion he had received himfelf, made him think 
any great trouble or expence about fach a trifle 
quite unnecelTary. He therefore had him taught 
to read and write a little by an attorney, who 
had unluckily carried the pradlice of his profef- 
fion rather too far in his own country, by fign- 
ing a client's name to receipts for money, with- 
out his knowledge, for which he had been com- 
pelled to travel hither, where he now ferved his 
worfhip in the capacity of his clerk ; and the 
politer accomplifliments of dancing, mufick, 
fencing, he. he. he was inftru6led in'by a young 
gentleman from the theatre, w^ofe intenfe ap- 
plication to the bufmefs of his profeflion had fo 
entirely wrapped him up in perfonated charac- 
ttTvS, that he had unfortunately forgot to lay 
them 
14 THE REVERIE; 
them afide, and re-afTume his own in the com- 
mon affairs of life ; but had gone in many dif- 
ferent ones, according to the parts he meant to 
play, to different tradefmen with whom he had 
a defirc to have dealings, who, upon the difco- 
very of the miftake, were fuch illiberal difcou- 
ragers of merit, as to impute it to a fraudulent 
defign, and lay him alfo under the neceflity of 
making the fame voyage. 
" As the young fquire's parts were lively, 
he foon made a happy proficiency under fuch 
eminent mafters. Before he was quite fifteen, 
he could dance, fing, and play on the guittar 
almofl as well as his mafter , and repeat feveral 
fpeeches out of plays, which he had learned by 
rote from him, to the great delight and furprize 
of all who heard him : and by eighteen, he could 
make a fhift to read a play himfelf, and write a 
billet-doux, as well as was neceffary for a gen- 
tleman of his rank and fortune. 
" Nor was the care of his tutors confined 
to the accojHplifhments of his perfon only : 
tbey alfo formed his mind in proper principles, 
dvil, fecial, moral, and religious. Accord- 
ingly, to open his way of thinking, and free 
him from the narrow prejudices of vulgar edu- 
cation, he was taught, that religion was a 
cheat ; virtue, want of fpirit, and law a bug- 
bear, fit only to reftrain and terrify the ignorant 
and poor : and thefe opinions, far from being 
merely fpeculative, ruled the conftant pra6lice 
of hisjtfe. . Bred up among a crowd of flaves, 
who 'trembled at his nod, he looked upon him- 
felf as entitled to treat every one with haughti- 
^nefs and tyranny. He indulged every pailion 
with which youth and flattery could inflame his 
heart. 
THE REVERIE. 15 
heart, laughed at every thing that was called 
facred, and enquired what was law, only for 
the pleafure of tranfgrefling it. 
" While his pleafures affecSled only hlmfelf, 
he was fafe from interruption or reftraint from 
his father; but at length, feme confequences 
happening to attend them, which interfered with 
his bufmefs, fuch as the difabling and deaths of 
fome of his Haves, whom the fquire had diverted 
himfelf with proving his ftrength and dexterity 
at his weapons upon ; and the flight of others, 
for rapes committed on their wives and daugh- 
ters, he refolved to fend him over to England^ 
to polifli his manners, and complete his educa- 
tion. 
" Nor were thefe, weighty as they were, 
the only motives for his forming this refolution. 
An affair of another nature made him alfo think 
his fon's abfence necefTary, at leafl, for fome 
time. 
CHAP. IV. 
Love triumphant over nature^ hut foiled by art, 
Theatrical morality, 
" 'nr^ HERE lived in the neighbourhood of 
Jl his worftiip a clergyman, who had been 
obliged to leave his native country, to avoid 
being thrown into jail for a debt he had con- 
trad^ed by going to law, to defend a living 
which had been given him by a nobleman, to 
whom he had been tutor, and whofe right of 
prefenta-r 
i6 THE REVERIE. 
prefcntation was difputed by the b;ihop of the 
diocefe. 
" His lawyers had encouraged him to carry 
on the fuit by the moft confident afllirances of 
fiiccefs, and his patron promifed him to defray 
the expence of it ; but, on his being caftby the 
bifhop, his lordfhip denied his having ever given 
him fuch a promife ; and his lavv^yers abfolutely 
refufed to make even the leaft abatement in the 
bill of cofts, virhich they immediately brought 
him, and which was fo entirely beyond his 
ability to difchargc, that he had no way of pre- 
ferving his liberty but by flight. 
" It muft be thought, that the converfation 
of fuch a perfon could not be much in the tafte 
of his new neighbours ; but the inofFenfivenefs 
of his condudt, and the convenience of the in- 
fluence v/hich his virtues foon obtained him 
over the ignorant favages, infenfibly reconciled 
them to him, and even gained him fome degree 
of their efteem and refpeft. 
" E uphrafior ' {th?x was the clergyman's 
name) had a daughter much about the age of 
our young fquire, who was blefTed with every 
beauty of mind and body. Neighbourhood na- 
turally introduced an acquaintance between their 
families, which was foon improved into, a ten- 
derer connection between the young pair. 
*' Nor was this to be wondered at I Her it 
v/as impoflible for man to behold iinmoved ; and 
in the gifts of fortune, and the external advan- 
tages of form, he had a confeffed fuperiority over 
all the young men in that part of the world. As 
to the defeats of his mind, they feemed to pro- 
ceed rather from want of proper education than 
from any natural propenfity to vice  and there- 
fore* 
THE REVERIE. i> 
fore, as he was ftill (o young, might eafily be 
removed. 
" From the time he became acquainted with 
Maria, (fo Euphranors daughter was called) 
his heart felt fenfations which it had ever been 
a ftranger to before. He was unhappy every 
moment he was from her, yet when in her fight, 
there was a majeftic delicacy in her whole be- 
haviour, that humbled him in his own eyes, 
and held him in a ftate of diftant awe and almoit 
adoration. 
*' This necefTarily had an immediate efFecl 
upon his whole conduct. Fie grew thoughtful, 
difcontented, andrefervedj complained of the 
deficiencies .of his education, which her accom- 
plifhments of every kind fhewed him in the moft 
mortifying light, and avoided the company, 
and exprefTed an abhorrence of the pleafures he 
had always been fo fond of before. 
" Such a change foon alarmed his theatrical" 
tutor, (the other had been long difmifl'ed from 
his care of him) as he faw'that it threatened 
the fubverfion of his afcehdency over him. To 
obviate fuch a misfortuijc required his immedi- 
ate care ; in which he was fo far from doubting 
of fuccefs, that he even hoped to turn it to his 
advantage, by his experience and addrefs, and 
make it a foundation for a firmer power than he 
yet enjoyed. 
" Accordingly he threw himfelf one evening 
in his way, a^ he was returning from Eiiphra- 
nor's', and obferving him more than ufually 
thoughtful, " What is the matter, (faid he) 
clapping him familiarly on the fhoulder ; Has 
Dulcinea frowned upon her love-fick fwain ? 
Hah ' hah ! hah ! Gome chear up ! we will 
find 
i8 THE REVERIE. 
find fome way to' appeafe her wrath ! What, 
figh for a woman ? for fhame, let no fuch thing 
be faid : it is beneath you, quite beneath you. 
Who'd he that fordid fooU/h thing calPd man."- ■ 
The lordly bull ranges thro* all the fields 
And from the herd fingling his female out^ 
Enjoys her^ and abandons her at zvilL 
** There's an example for you to imitate; fol^ 
low the didates of nature, unfophifticated by 
prieftcraft, and be happy. What mifchief have 
priefis done in the world ? If it were not for the 
writings of poets, and the practice of players, 
to open the eyes of mankind, there would be 
no fuch thing as happinefs or pleafure. Before 
men were made fools of by religion, the fexes 
converfed without reftraint, and variety gave a 
relilh to enjoyment : and fo it does ftill in my 
country. Dear Lcndon f thou paradifeof plea- 
fure ! there is opportunity for indulging every 
paffion : opportunity, that is not negle61:ed. 
There the wife world laughs at every foolifh no- 
tion which inte. feres with delight. Beauty is 
not kept only to be looked at ; it meets defire 
half way, and courts the ufe it was defigned 
for ; and fo it would here, if men would manage 
right, and not raife obftacles to their own hap- 
pinefs." 
'' This elaborate fpeech had the defired ef- 
fe6^. The awe in which the fquire had been 
kept by his miftrefs, had already begun to fit 
very uneafy upon him, and his own inclinati- 
ons confirmed his tutor's arguments. Accord- 
ingly he refolved to follow his directions for 
the 
THE REVERIE. 19 
the attainment of a pleafure, which he faw no 
other profpe^t of enjoying. 
" He no fooner fignified this refolution, than 
it filled his tutor with the higheft joy. He em- 
braced him in rapture ; and, in the fullnefs of 
his heart, difclofed a variety of fchemes for ac- 
complifliing their defign ; all objetSlions to the 
juftice of which he eafily removed ; proving by 
the unerring morality of modern comedy, that 
woman is hut a creature made for mans pleafure^ 
and therefore that every method for making her fuh- 
ferziient to this original end of her creation^ is lawful 
for him to ufe. 
" This do£i:rine he confirmed both by the prac- 
tice of the finefl gentlemen, and by the implicit 
confefiion of the fineft ladies of the age, who 
would never go to fee the plays, in which thofe 
principles are openly inculcated, with fuch ea- 
gernefs, nor encourage the players, whofe 
greateft merit confifts in giving them all the 
force and graces of expreflion and adlion, and 
whofe own lives are invariably formed upon 
them, with fuch diftinguifhcd marks of their 
favour, if they could difpute the truth, or dif- 
approved the practice of them. 
" This reafoning appeared fo conclufive, that 
it removed every fhadow of fcruple ; and they 
diredlly entered into confultation upon the 
means for putting their fchemes in execution ; 
which they fettled without any foolifh reftraint 
from the miftaken prejudices of honour, virtue, 
or religion. 
CHAP* 
ao THE REVERIE, 
C H A P. V. 
A well-laid fcheme dtfappoinied. The great advan- 
tage of being well-read in the drama. The fcene 
of a^io?i is {hanged. 
« T>URSUANT to their plot the fquire 
A went next morning to vifit Alaria^ as 
ufual ; when he declared his paffion with the 
moil folemn aflurances of fincerity ; as an in- 
contcftible proof of which, he propofed an im- 
mediate marriage, but to be kept fecret from 
both their fathers, till they fliould find fome 
happy opportunity jof gaining their approbation 
of it. 
" At the former part of this propofal, a mo- 
defl blufh overfpread Maria\ face; and fhewed 
that her heart had no obje£iion to it \ but the 
firft mention of fecrecy reilored her to herfelf. 
She thanked him politely for the favourable 
opinion he profefled to have of her, but afTured 
him, at tke fame time, that die never, indulged 
even a thought which {he imagined improper 
for her father's immediate knowledge, much 
lefs would venture upon the moft important 
allien of life, without his advice and approba- 
.^^tion, . ■ 
'' The determined manner in which fhefaid 
thisj-^^convinced her lover, that it was in vain 
to prefs 1^ farther. He, therefore, returned, 
to his tutor, greatly dejefted at the difappoint- 
ment : for ^^ ^he confented, the tutor was to 
have 
THE REVERIE. 2t 
have dlfguired himfelf, and personated the 
chaplain of a man of war that happened to lie 
upon the coaft at that time, to marry them ; 
which his theatrical talents enabled him to do, 
without danger of dete(Stion5 and then, when 
his pupil's pafTion was gratified, it was only 
confeffing the ftratagem, (and all flratagems are 
lawful in love and war) and parting with her zft 
once ', or, if fhe fhould prove refraiflory, and 
difcover the whole, his worfhip's power, which 
would not fail to be exerted on fuch an occa- 
fion, was fufficient to bear them through tri- 
umphant. 
" But unexpected as this difappointment was, 
the tutor foon found refources in the fertility of 
his own genius to remedy it. After a paufe of 
a few moments, 
*' Calijia ! (faid he, fpeaking to himfelf as if 
in deep confideration) Callfla I and then prove 
a criminal correfpondence, both before and after 
her marriage, with fomc faft friend who would * 
not deny the charge ! Yes ! that might do ; but 
ftay l-'-Monhfua! Aye ! Monlmia is the thing. — 
Then fpeaking to the fquire, as if he did not 
know that he had over-heard him : 
" Well then (faid he) if fhe will preclude 
herfelf from the poor confolation of pity, let her 
blame herfelf. My bow is not trufling to one 
ftring. Yes ! you fhallhave her, my friend ; you 
fiiill have her as long as you pleafe ; and vv^hen 
your defires are fatiated, you fhall set rid of her 
without reproach. My plot, it is tme, is deeply 
laid ; but I have precedents enough in dnamatic 
Writ to juftify it. You (hall marry l^r publicly, 
' (leave me to reconcile your father to it !) and 
then what iseafier at any time than to catch fome 
faithful 
22 THE REVERIE. 
faithful friend in bed with her, which may be 
brought about by your itealing from her in her 
lleep, and letting me, for inftance, take your 
place ; after which a divorce will be obtained 
without difficulty. 
*' Then pluming himfelf in his fagacity, and 
ftrutting a ftep or two back and forward with 
an air of importance, " I have not ftudied the 
drama fo long (faid he) to be at a lofs now 
for a fcheme to fupplant the virtue of a girl, or 
elude the vigilance of a bookifh doating father ; 
let her therefore tell him her ftory, as foon as 
fhe pleafes, I am prepared for both. As for his 
worfhip, I know that he will readily join in any 
thing to pull down the pride of that parfon, in 
revenge for his having the afTurance to arraign 
his conduct by preaching up to others, and 
pradtifing himfelf, a courfe of life, in all re- 
i'pedls, fo oppofite to his own.'* 
" But deeply as this defign was laid, it met 
with the fame fate, and from the fame motive, 
with the former. The moment her lover left 
her, Maria informed her father of his propofal, 
who in the uprightnefs of his heart went directly, 
and difclofed it to his worfliip. It is impofdble 
to defcribc the rage into which fuch a ftory 
threw him. He immediately fent ofF his fon 
to England^ to prevent the difgrace of his mak- 
ing fo unworthy a match : and, far from being 
obliged to Euphranor foranaking the difcovery, 
bore him ever after the moft implacable hatred, 
for being father to the objedt of his fon's paflion. 
*' As for the tutor, the time appointed for his 
travels not being yet expired, he was obliged to 
flay behind, and truft his pupil to his own ma- 
nagement." 
CHAP. 
THE REVERIE. i^ 
»S2< 
CHAP. VI. 
Squire SuGARCANE arrives in England. An odd 
medley of high and low life. Prejudice of edu- 
cation involves hi?n in many difagreeable circwn^ 
Jiances^ and at length brings him into imminent 
danger, 
** /^ U R hero arrived in England without 
\J any accident. His father, it may be 
judged, did not burthen him with much advice. 
Two things only he cautioned him a2;ainft^ 
which were extravagance, for his pride had 
prompted him to give him unlimited credit, and 
matrimony without his exprefs approbation. In 
every thing elfe, he left him to his own go- 
vernment, or indeed, more properly fpeaking, to 
chance. 
" But he might have fpared himfelf the trou- 
ble even of this much. The moment his fon 
was out of his fight, he fcorned all ref.raint, 
however eafy and juft ; and if his father's advice 
.had any influence upon him, it was only to raife 
a defire of oppofition to it. 
" Accordingly, as foon as he got to London^ 
he ran into every fafhionable cxpence, with an 
cagernefs that feemed to court ruin. He had 
houfes fumptuoufly furnifhed at all places of 
pleafurable refort ; he fct up equipages which 
vied in magnificence with thofe of a fovereign 
prince, kept runnirtg-horfes, hounds, and 
whores ; and, to complete his charader, played 
deeply 
24 THE REVERIE. 
deeply at every game, in which art and experi- 
ence could give his antagonifls an advantage 
over his ignorance. 
" All this he did, from an abfurd vanity of 
following the faftiion ; to indulge his own tafte, 
which the manner of his education had fixed 
upon the moll vulgar pleafurcs, and grofTefl fen- 
fualities, he ran into the oppofite extreme of 
low life. Thus he oftener flept in fome filthy 
brothel, than in any of his own elegant houfes ; 
while his equipage waited whole mornings at 
his door, he was in a dirty difguife driving an 
hackney coach ; he got drunk with his grooms, 
and rode his own races 5 and the converfation 
of his dog-boys was the greateft pleafure he 
reaped from his hounds. The miftrefi^s whom 
he kept at the moft profufe expence, he feldom 
even faw; his amours rarely foaring higher than 
the humble patrollers of the flreets ; and while 
he was throwing away thoufands among gam- 
blers of fafnion, his heart knguiflied for a 
game of put, or all-fours, for a pint of beer, or 
a dram of gin ; and he often ftole away, from 
the mofl elegant entertainments which luxury 
could devife, to caroufe and riot among chair- 
men and porters in a night cellar. 
" Such a cpurfe of lif^ neceflarily involved 
him in numberlefs fcrapes and troubles. Accuf- 
tomed to converfe with none but dependants, 
and lord it over flaves, who dared not even 
murmur at his cruelty and abufes, he could not 
bear to be treated as an equal by perfons whofe - 
more moderate expences made him think them 
of inferior fortunes -, and on the flightett con- 
tradiction to his will, inhis fervants, or any 
Others of the lower ilations of life, would fly 
4 out 
THE REVERIE. 25 
out into hisufual outrages, beating and wound- 
ing them in the moft cruel manner. 
" The confequences of this conduct were al- 
ways difao-reeable. The former returned the 
infblence of his behaviour with the moft morti- 
fying contempt ; or with perfonaj affronts, 
which pride and cowardice equally prevented 
his refenting in the only manner that could put 
an end to them ; and the harpies of the law ex- 
torted ample iatisfadlion from his purfe for the 
injuries to the latter, and that often after he 
had fuffered fufficiently before from the fuperior 
ftrength of thofe who complained of him. 
" Such an hurricane of riot and debauchery 
was too violent to laft long. An accident that 
happened in one of his nocturnal exploits low- 
ered his fpirits for a time, and gave his pleafure 
a lefs tumultuous turn. 
" A party, among whom he was, having 
Tallied out one night from the tavern in the 
madnefs of inebriation, to fcour the ftreets, 
and fignalize their bravery on all v/ho fhould be 
io unfortunate as to fall in their way, ftunibled 
upon a watchman afleep upon his {land, l^he 
figure of the wretch would have befpoke com- 
paflion from any human creatures un^'er the di- 
redtion of reafon. He was worn out with a'^e, 
and appeared an object much more proper to 
receive, than give prote6tion. But the mifery 
of his appearance only raifed their mirth ; anJ 
one of them of uncommon wit and humour 
.faying what a furprize it would be to the old 
fellow to awake in the other world, our hero, 
who was the moft drunk in the company, and 
perhaps moft accuftomed to fuch feats, diredlly 
drew his fword, and plunged it into bis bodv." 
Vol. I. C^ '^ SGch 
26 T HE REVERIE. 
" Such an a£lion ftruck them all with hor- 
ror. 7 hey inftantly took to flight, in which 
he attempted to ibllow them ; bur confcrous af- 
fri^'^ht deprived him of the little ftrength which 
liquor had left, and he fell at his length in the 
fticet, where he lay unable to rife, though not 
infcnfible of the danger that hung over his head, 
his apprehenfions of which were far from be-' 
in<> leflened by hearing the wretch cry out mur- 
der ; as he thought it impoilible for him to out- 
Jive fuch a wound, though the joke he- had de- 
iic^ned was difappointed, and it happened not to 
put him to immediate death. 
*' The firlt cry of murder brought a number 
of the nei2;hboui ing watchmen to the place, who 
found the fquire with his drawn fword lying on 
the ground by him, and every circumftance of 
his appearance confirming his guilt. But if 
this .had not been fu'fncient, there wanted not 
direct proof of it ; for fome of his compani- 
ons confidering theconfequences of having been 
known to have been in his company, and aware 
of the danger that might attend his impeaching 
them, returned immediately to the place, and 
charged him diredly with the fa6l. 
" On this he was dragged away to the 
round-houfci wdicre his fright foon r-ecovered 
him fiom his drunkennefs, and (hewed him all 
the horrcrs of his fitnation. In vain did he of- 
" for immenfc fums for liberty to make -his efcape ; 
the aiTair was now public, and the watchman's 
Vv'ound was declared mortal, by a furgeo'n 'who 
-had been called up to drefs him.  ' 
'-<■ Accordiniily, after iufiering the iiifults- of 
the watch ; and the revilings (;f his companions, 
I-who f£i:ov:e-to,lhcw their own innocence by 
-' " - ' ■ aggravating 
THE REVERIE. 27 
aggravating his guilt, for the remainder of the 
night, he was taken before a magiftrate next 
morning, where the circumftances of his crime 
were examined into with themoft excruciating 
minutenefs, and the confequenccsof it I lazoncd 
in fuch terrifying colours as were fufficient to 
ftrike the boldeft heart with dcfpair ; and when 
thus properly prepared, he was committed to 
the common prifon, to wait the fentence of the 
Jaw, among the vileft malefactors who difgrace 
the human name. 
CHAP. VII. 
An hair -breadth cjcapc. The happinefs of being 
ahfohdtely difengaged in^ life. An unexpe£ied 
piece of news Jhevus the perverfenefs of thd-human 
hearth . 
'^ T"^ H E news of the fquire's misfortune 
JL was immediately i'pread over the whole 
town, and of courfe foon came to the ears of 
his father's correfpondent ; who, though he was 
highly diAatisfied with his manner of life, 
thought it his duty not to defcrt him in fuch a 
dreadful condition. He therefore went directly 
to. the magiftrate, and learning the cireum- 
il^nccs pt the affjir from him, found reafon to 
lufpect that it. was not fo bad as was rcprefented ; 
but was a'^-o-ravatcd with a defiija of extortins> 
money from the tcrrilied criminal. 
*-*,Iii confequenee of this fufpicion, he feijt 
for a furgcon of character, and going to the 
C 2 .place 
28 THE REVERIE. 
place where the watchiiran lay (an attorney's 
houfe) infifted on feeing his wound opened ; 
when it appeared fo far from being mortal, that 
thefurgeon declared it was not even dangerous, 
with the lead care, the fword having happily 
hit upon a rib, and fo only glanced between 
that and the fkin. 
*' On this difcovery, the merchant demanded 
his friend's being admitted to bail ; and on the 
magiftrate's confcnting, becaufe he did not dare 
to refufe, went himfelf to the prifon, with the 
joyful tidings : where he found the defponding 
wretch furrounded by a gang of follicitors, and 
knights of the poft, who were planning fchemes 
for his efcape by perjury and chicane, and at 
the fame time exaggerating his danger to en- 
hance the price of their owndamnation ; in ear- 
neft of which, and to quicken their invention, 
they had already received all the money in his 
pocket, which amounted to a confiderable fum. 
" At the firft Tight of the merchant, thefe 
harpies vanifhed like owls at the appearance of 
the fun. The good man faw the fquire's dif- 
trefs, and judging that it might be a proper 
time to work upon him, foftened thus by fear, 
he fat down, and entered into a friendly expof- 
tulation with him on the folly, vice, and dan- 
ger of fuch a life as he had led ; and concluded 
by wifliing, that his prefent almoft miraculous 
efcape mi^ht make a proper impreiTion upon 
him, for the remainder of his life. 
" The fquire heard the former part of his 
difcourfe with lif'clcfs inattention j but at the 
mention of his efcape, he fell upon his knees, 
■a^llv" "eagerly kifling his friend's hand, conjured 
hiiri'tG cuhfirm the happy word. 
v '^ '2 " It 
THE R E V E R I E. 29 
'' It is impollible to defcribe his fituation on 
being fatisficd that his danger was over. His 
fpirits, ever in extream, were raifed as high as 
they had been dejedted before ; {o fudden a 
tranfition from defpair to happinefs (for fo his 
joy for that moment might juftly be called) aU 
nioft depriving him of his fenfes. He broke 
out into fuch inconfiftent extravagancies of ex- 
ultation, that he made his friend for fome time 
fear he ihould utterly lofe his reafon. But his 
l^rength foon failing under fuch accumulated 
fatigue, his fpirits funk into a fettled calm ; 
and he left the prifon in the moft rational ftate 
of mind he had been in fmce he came to Efjg > 
kind, 
" The horrors he had endured in this affair 
made an impreflion on his mind, which influenced 
the remainder of his life. His danger determined 
him for ever againft fuch exploits as that which 
drew hini into it ; and the behaviour of his 
companions gave him fo ftrong an averfion to 
fuch fociety, that he refufed their vifits of 
corgi atulation on his return to his own houfe, 
and never would mix with them more. 
" He was now in fuch a ftate of (ufpence, 
for the choice of his future life, that had any 
principles of virtue been inculcated in his mind 
by education, he might moft probably have fol- 
lowed their direction. But when the voice of 
pleafure, the tuT.ults of diflipation, and vice, 
were filenced, all was a wretched void within 
him,, and he was really obliged to give into the 
firft fchemeof a6i:ive idlenefs which chance fug- 
gefted for want of knowing what clfe to do. 
" Juft in this critical time, he happened-to, 
receive a packet of letters from home. That 
C 3. , ..of 
30 THE REVERIE. 
of his father he threw careleHrly by, fcarce hal' 
read throuoh : but the fight of his tutor's hand 
raifing an expectation of fomenews concerning 
A'laria^ his pailion for whom he had never been 
able entirely to fubdue, he opened it with ea- 
gernefs, though he had no reaibn to expe6l' any 
account particularly interefting to him. 
*' His tutor informed him, that his father 
looking upon her as the caufe of his being 
obliged to fend his fon to England^ the moment 
he was gone (hewed the moft rancorous ha- 
. tred to her and Euphranor^ "wWxch his power 
gave him fo many opportunities of wreaking, 
that he made their lives quite miferable : they 
refolved, therefore, to leave that country, and 
feek feme happier retreat elfewhere ; but as 
they Were juift: ready to go, Euphranor received 
a letter from the brother of the lord to whom . 
he bad >been tutor, to inform him of his lord* , 
ihip'-^ death,- and defi re that, he would return to 
; lingland 'vis^oon 2iS poffible, to take pofTe/Iion of - 
- k',A*eiV)?. confiderable \Wm^ juft then become va- 
I ,jj^t<ifi- his gift, -and which he kept for him i 
■'7fc^4itTgV that- he had-difcharged the debV,-whiQh*. 
-j. *^hd, been the occafion of his going abroad j, "r. 
"^adtJi^at .op; receipt of this, news they left the- > 
plttc<^«.ri<fj:M]y,- jiotvrnore to their own fatisfac}^^ 
ti&iif'*Vl>.^ii«fQ the Thortification of his father'^  
-at'»t:Jieir'^^^)p^;' fortufic and efcape from .vhis^^- : 
poWfeu.',** ■ jS''^.';^tv\.- „ ,-■'-'>■■■■';*: i::i-; -y^riS^/ 
>' )i^l)iV aidc^tiJ^^thiJew kipi^ in^ a Vlalengjfc- 
confli£t :'^;^fg Jf^^^^lf^t^tlie ftrcj/fedl emotioks^ 
at the-^i8<>u-ghraf^^?vteng in^tj^e^mex^uft^'; ;. 
.try with him> .-^e'at W^i^{4v^-^0 fiaWer^^ 
^'putj'-and pielfcd hkjiiSff >it«^*t"^5li^ Tht>\g a^i'e^^ 
- * ■ '■ '■''■ -^^ Brr^i^'Mt^'il^r ; ^& 
THE REVERIE. 31. 
ably {he mufl be furprifevl at the great iaiprove- 
ments flie woulvl lee in his appearance and ad- 
drefs, which he did not doubt would make fuch 
an imprclTion on her in his favour, as fhould 
greatly facilitate his d( fires. 
'' But a moment's ret^jclion overthrew all 
the e fiattering hopes ; ?,p.d Ibcwcd him the ut- 
ter i.i probability of her ever lillening to tlie 
adJreilcs, or even receiving the vifits of a man 
by whom (lie had been treated in fo bale a man- 
ner ; for to n. it!. -ate the fevcrity of his father's 
n-e, and wipe off" the difgrace of having pro- 
posed marriage to one (o much beneath him, 
he had openly declared the defigns he had 
formed for her ruin. 
** But this was not what gave him the 
greateft pain. The advantageous change in 
her father's affairs removing the only obje^lion 
^ which he thought could be'made to her, it ira- - 
mediately occurred to him, that fome perfon of 
. diftin<5tion would moft probably be. captivated 
by her charms, at her return to England, and 
marry her ;^. arid it was death to him to thmjfe 
that .fhe. -fhould make any other man haufp;^ 
■though he had lofl all hopes of ever obtaiSinS 
herhimiVIf;  , ■ y^ l^' ■ 
", '^ But thefe difagreeable re9e<5fions f<)(5j)fe^V'c 
l^lace to thoughtsof another;riature.^^;is»5twtxd' 
.,^.,c\tM been in fiich a continiied a^t'^t^ofi* e^.er 
■;^it^;;^»is 'coming to Lmdon,, lltgit^hej^^'jiot 
^^:^c^;remeo':ber^^d the" many 'fii^^ 
:^^^r'had fb ofteri^toltl. h imioT jwiin?thea]:resv ^or "' 
, ■ plea,f«res^<9;^&c!fpwr^^^ 
laajiCFs jol^^ of 
32 T H E R E V E R I E. 
them in tliis letter had an immediate effe<5\ up- 
on him, in his prefent undeterniined ilatc ; and 
Jie rcfolv^ d to look there for that happinel's 
which he had mifieu of hitherto." 
CHAP. VIII. 
The pleofures of theatrical fociety. Tloe fquire com- 
mences critic and patron. He a^ts the part of 
lA.icn, and embraces a cloud injlead of a goddefs* 
" T N purfuance of this refolution he dire(5):ly 
JL became almoft an inhabitant of the play- 
houfe. He made acquaintances with all the 
.players ; he attended rehearfals, drank tea in the 
green-room ; and in a very little time had all 
the terms of theatrical criticifm at his fingers 
ends. 
" He now thought himfclf an happy man. 
The mirth and wit of the a6^ors, the freedom 
and eatb of the acShrefTes, and the obfequioul- 
nels and flattery of both quite charmed him. 
His table v/as conflantly filled with them; 
while they in return for his hofpitality con- 
vinced hi:r, that he had overlooked his own 
abilities, ai,d was really endowed with the 
moft refilled tade, ajid exquifite judgement of  
the age. ^ . ' - 
*' Asfoon as he had made this difcovery, he  
afTumfed all the, coniequence of this new cha- 
ra<^kr. He retailed the'pbrafes of criticifm, 
M^hich. he liiaft lately picked wp> 9»^ all occafions 
yvnh,'tiie cidft: decifiYJeviair f /poke v/ith».c6n-/. 
^'"^'^ 
THE reverie: 33 
tempt of authors whofe names he fcarcely 
knew, and praifed thole of eftablifhed reputa- 
tion ; but all in general terms, and merely as 
an echo to the town. 
" It may be thought that this courfe of life, 
idle and infignificant as it was, muft be more 
harmlefs at leafl than that which he had led 
before ; but ftill it was not free from its incon- 
vcniencies alfo. ♦ 
" Such a fet of company neceflarily precluded 
him from that of all perfons v/hofe converfa- 
tion miijht have been either an advantage or 
an honour to him ; befides^ to fupport the dig- 
nity of his charadter, he was obliged to fet 
up for a patron of the polite arts, which laid him 
open to the impofitions of every ignorant pre- 
tender to them ; as he was utterly deftitute of 
the leafl: degree of judgment to direct him in 
the diftribution of the rev/ards which their 
flattery and importunities extorted from his ig- 
norance and vanity ; fo that, though he had re- 
trenched mod of his former expences, on his 
entering into his prefent way of life, he found 
but very little advantage from his oeconomy ; 
the cra\'ings of his new dependents proving as 
eft'edtual a drain to his money as all his mure 
fhewy extravagancies had been before. 
■^ijut this'was only a trifle," in comparifon 
■ of other conrecjijences which attended this con-" 
neflioii. Siich a fortune as he poireffed was a 
lure to every fcheaiing genius, to try their abi- 
lities upon him ; the adlrelTes, in particular, 
. ipread open all their nets, to talce him in for*a 
^ fei^ilement j at .leaft-, if lio't even-, entrap hxui iiV 
-  jh'e pn^rriage noofe, ak'^h^ wa^'-a-.batc'helor.. 
' ♦ " This, was the Yecret rt^arofi^\£^*ihi^jiffi.ciGufnefs 
>*,-., 
34 THEREVERIE. 
topleafe him, which has been obfervcd before; 
but his attention was too much taken up with 
the add rcfles paid to his underftanding, to admit 
his minding thofe offered to his perlon.- 
*' At length, however, one of the female ad- 
venturers of the llage hit upon a plan, in which 
her experience promifed her fuccefs. She faw 
that vanity gliCered through his fhallow heart, 
and was the ruling principle of all his actions : 
to catch this, therefore, a gilded bait was all that 
was neceflary. For this purpofe, fhe contrived 
to convey him a letter, glowing with the 
warmed profeflions of love, but lamenting the 
rcftraint which a fuperior ftation laid her under 
from making herfelf known, or gratifying the 
paflion that preyed upon her heart. 
" The receipt of this letter threw him into 
the higheft perplexity -, he ran over every 
fcene of his life, to try if he could, from any 
circumftance, find out who this enamoured 
fair could be; but all in vain. However, his 
ignorance by no means cafed him of his anxiety ; 
he had too good an opinion of himfelf to doubt 
the truth of what foe faid j and his darling 
vanity was too ftrongly flattered by the thought, 
to admit his flighting fuch an honour, could he 
poilibly difcover by whom it was done him. 
" The fair one, who faw him every day, foon 
had an opportunity of obferving his diftrefs, 
which was the fignal fhe wanted to convince 
her that the lure {he threw had taken. Accord- 
ingly, in a day or two after fhe wrote him ano- 
ther letter, ia which fhe appointed him a place 
of meeting) biit under the mofl folemn adjura- 
' tipns of fccreAy and honour, when fhe availed 
"^herfelf .fq well of her theatrical art of varying 
■^/ her 
THE REVERIE. 35 
her appearance, and perfonating a ficlitious 
chara6ter, that, with the afliftance of the play> 
houlecloaths, and a good quantity of paint, fhe 
pailed upon him for a beautiful young lady of 
the firft quality, who had accidentally been 
fmitten with the charms of his perfon. 
" The delicacy and modeft referve with 
which (lie revealed her own paflion, and re- 
ceived his addrefles^ gained fo complete a con- 
queft over his intoxicated heart, that he out- 
went her moft ("anguine expe«5tations, and made 
diftant propofals of marriage, at the very firft 
interview ; but thefe the charadler fhe a(Sted 
would not permit her to underftand too readily ; 
and his refpeft prevented his fpeaking plainer, 
on fofhort an acquaintance. 
" But an accident foon removed this diffi- 
culty, which was equally diftrefling to them 
both, though from fo diftcrent motives. Going 
to the play the next evening as ufual, he was 
furprifed to fee Maria glittering in all the pride 
of drefs in one of the ftage boxes; the fight of 
her put him fo much ofF his guard, that, hap- 
pening to catch 'her eye, he bowed to her di^ . 
redly in the moft familiar manner: but what 
was his confufion, to find, that inftead of ac- 
knowledoino; his falute, (he turned from him 
with a look of ineffable contempt. 
*' Such an aflro»tt, in fo public a place, could 
n:ot efcape notjce. The eyes of every one were 
immediately fixed upon him, in fo-fignificant a 
manner, that he could not ftand it ; but vi'as 
forced to retire, burlting with^refentment,. be- 
hind tiiG fcene.s-, where he had the additional. 
niQjrtification to learn, that ftie was^above ev.ei^y ' 
attack he could make upon; herVybfeing latel^ 
C. 6 "niariiet?" 
ss. '^.h;b_;r.e V E R I E. 
married >to th<;!yoUfJg nobleman who was fitting 
Withher, 3qJ was the fame who had recalled 
her father 'ajict her from the place of their ba- 
Hlfhment. 
'' It is impoflible to defcribc the malignant 
pafTions which tore his heart at this news : his 
love was inftantly turned to the moft rancorous 
hatred ; and envy prompted him to ruin an hap- 
pinefs which he had not been able to prevent, 
" While he was revolvino; various fchemes 
for this purpofe, his unlucky genius blundered 
upon one, which drew that mortification ten 
thoufand fold upon his own head which he de- 
figned for her. He thought that the fafeft 
way he could take to humble her pride (for his 
courage was cooled from any attempts which 
might poiribly endanger his dear perfon) was to 
fhcw her, that he had been as great a gainer as 
file by not being married to her, and to return 
her contempt in kind. 
" Accordingly, at the very next meeting 
his enamourea fair one indulged him with, 
he propofed an immediate marriage, which 
he pre lied with fuch unfeigned ardor, that, 
after fome few ftruggles between her love for 
him, and her regard to the dignity of her 
rank, flie confented, her fear of being prevented 
by her nobh: friends and family palliating the 
precipitancy of fuch a ftep. 
*' The exultations of two perfons, happy thus 
in the fuccels of their defigns, well fupplied the 
place of pomp, and ceremony at the wedding ; 
but what was the "bridegrcom's afloniihment 
next niorning,_ to find a , faded veteran of the 
lUge in his armsv imlead pf a dutchefs in all 
Tlie pride of bjCaaty, rank, and fortune ; for the 
■ V.V ; ' i- . ■-  warmth 
THE REV E R rE; 32* 
warmth of the night had irielted?: the ^inted 
bloom upon her cheeks, and re-ftocfetl'faer to her 
natural appearance, which day -light diiplayed 
in no very favourable light. 
" He ftarted from her in horror ; and as foon 
as he had recovered the ufe of fpeech, which 
fuch a fight for fome time deprived him of, flew 
into the moft outrageous fury, and fwore he 
would be revenged, in the dreadfulleft manner,, 
for fuch an infamous piece of deceit. 
'' But his bride was too well acquainted with 
the world to be terrified at his threats. She arofe 
with all the expedition, that her delicate regard 
to decency would permit, and throwing herfelf 
at his feet, alledged the violence of her paflion 
as an excufe for her ftratagem ; (and all ftra- 
tagems, fhe faid, were lawful in love) befought 
his forgivenefs in the tenderell terms, and 
vowed the moft exemplary duty, love, and vir- 
tue for the reft of her life, promifmg to make 
ample amends for the imaginary difparity of 
rank; (for his own fortune placed him above 
regard to mercenary confiderations) by her ia- 
eeftant attention to his pleafurc 
*' Well as fhe a6led her part, the abufed huf- 
band remained inflexible, vowing to purfue her 
with the utmoft feverity ; a refolution which 
the remembrance of his own treatment of 
Maria, now retorted in fuch a fignal manner 
. on himfelf, enforced with every motive of hatred 
and revenge. 
" But his wrath had aslittle. efFe£l upon her 
as her entreaties poffibly could. have upon him.. 
She arofe from his feet v^ith an air oifdifdain; 
and telling him, that if he did not Is'np^ vvhat  .. 
was due to the chara^er of his wife, ihe^would. 'i.. 
33 THE REVERIE; 
foon inform him,drefled herfelfwith thegrcatefV 
compofure, and wifhing him a good morning, 
left him to go to breakfaft with what appetite 
he could. 
'* Nor were her threats in vain ; fhe went 
dirc6lly to a lawyer, by whofe advice fhe took 
fuch meafures as obliged her hufband to com- 
pound matters with her, and give her fuch a 
iettlement (as he did not chule cohabitation) 
as enabled her to pay the debt of gratitude, and 
keep thofe now who had kept her in former 
days. 
'* This affair broke ofF all his theatrical con- 
nections, and left him as much atalofswhat to 
do with himfelf as he had been when he firft 
entered into them. But the death of his father, , 
of which he received the account jufl: as he had. 
concluded this tranfa<5tion, freed him from this 
uncertainty, and engaged him in^purfuits of a 
quite different nature from thofc he had hi* 
therto followed. 
CHAP. IX. . 
JT/r. Sugarcane co?n?7icnces Jiatefman* Sipial 
inftances cf mhiijierial conjidenct: (md favour, 
A coniTiion change, The condu^ of a patriot. 
<< 'T^H E death of his father put Mr. Sugar." 
J_ cmte (ior he muit no longer be called 
by the familiar title of fquire) in poilelTion of 
fuch an immenfe fortune, that he immediately 
.cpnfi(i«*ed himfelf as one of the pillars of the 
riatVi and lookiiig on every thing elfe as be- 
' ". neath 
THE REVERIE. 39 
neath his dignity and importance, devoted him- 
ielf entirely to the care of nations. 
" In purfuance of this refolution, he waited 
dirc6tly on the minifter, and difplayinghis own 
confequence in the ftrongeft colours, informed 
him of his defire to become a member of the 
fcnate, and offered him hisTerrice in the moft 
unlimited terms. 
'' The minifter, whom long experience had 
taught to read the human heart, immediately 
faw what ufe he might make of fuch an offer, 
from fo fanguine a volunteer. Accordingly he 
thanked him for the honour of his friendfliip 
in the moft polite manner, encouraged him in 
fo laudable a defign, and treated him with fuch 
a refpeclful intimacy, as quite won his ftiallow 
heart. 
" As foon therefore as he was fatisfied that 
he had him fecure, he told him one day, with 
an air of the higheft fatisfa6lion, that he now 
had an opportunity of fhewing him the confi- 
dence he had in him, and at the fame time pro- 
curing him that rank in the ftate which he de- 
ferved, by getting him returned for one of his 
boroughs. 
" Mr. Sugarcanis joy at this news may eafily 
be conceived ; he thanked him in the warmeft 
terms of gratitude for (o great a favour ; and 
on the minifter's exprefling fome concern for 
the expcnce which might poflibly attend an op- 
pofition that was defigned againft his intereft, 
declared the ftrongeft contempt for fuch paultry 
confiderations, and infifted on the honour -of 
defraying the whole himfelf. 
" Accordingly he went dite«5lly down to the 
borough, where he entered on the complicated 
■ tuiinefs 
40 THE reverie: 
bufinefs of elecftioncering with fuch fplrlt, and 
carried it on at To procure an expence, that his 
opponents were glad to fubmit to the miniftcr's 
terms, which they had abfoliitcly rejected be- 
fore, to avoid the vexation and difgrace of beinir 
foiled by a Itratagem. 
" It may be thought that his being made a 
property of in fo notorious a manner, would 
have made him fee his folly ; but it was no fuch 
thing. Far from being oftended, he took it as 
an inftance of the higheft confidence in his 
friendfhip, on the minifler's reprefenting to 
him, that the bufinefs of the ftate could not have 
been carried on without giving him up for that 
time, and promifmg to make him ample amends 
on a more favourable occafion. 
*' Grofs as this impofition was he blindly fub- 
mitted to it feveral times fuccefiively, cajoled by 
alFurances of friendfhip and artful hints of having 
bis fervices rewarded in the end by a peerage. 
" He lived thus upon air for feveral yeais, 
fquandering more in purfuit of a fhadow than 
the acquiiltion of the fubftance could ever pofu- 
bly refund him. At length, hovv-evcr, his eyes 
were opened ; and hefavv the abufche had fuf- 
fered in the molt mortifying light : but inlUad 
of being cured of his madiiefs, it only gave it 
.another turn. 'He dircdlly commenced patriot, 
in the prefent fenfe of the word, declaiming 
a^ainfl the minifler and his niCiifures, with as 
much vehemence and hear as he had declaimed 
for them before; and laviHiing his fortune as 
prdfufcly, inopnofition lo his intereft, as he had 
formerly done to fupport it. 
«' Evident as ihemotivcs of this change were, 
the giddj m latitude lufFered themfelves to be 
deceived 
THE REVERIE. 41 
deceived by it ; or rather indeed, they received 
it as a colour to palliate the abfurdity of their 
confiding in him, and juftify their taking the ' 
bribes with which he buys them. 
" On this fyftem he proceeds now, undif- 
couraged by the many difappointments he has 
met with, and the difficulties into which fuch 
complicated diffipation of his fortune, immenfely 
great as it was, has thrown his affairs. In his 
prefent attempt, it is true, he has a profpeft of 
I'uccefs ; but how far this will anfwer his ex- 
pectation of making him happy, or what ufe 
even he will make of it, the leaft experience of 
human life fufficiently fhews. — But I fee an un- 
eafmefs in your looks. If I have faid any thing 
that you do not comprehend, fpeak your doubt 
with freedom, and 1 will refolve it with pleafure", 
" Thiscondefcenfion (anfv/ered I) O moft be-' 
nevolent fpirit ! is agreeable to the excellence 
of thy nature ; and I were unworthy of the fa- 
vour you offer, if I let a falfe modeily, a proud 
reluctance to (hew my ignorance, prevent my 
accepting it. It is mofl true, that you have 
faid Ibme things which I cannot underfland the 
meaning of. You fay he commenced a patriot, 
in the prefent fenfe of the word. Can any word 
be plainer? Or what fenfe but the obvious na- 
tural one can it be taken in ?'* 
" Your inexperience,in the ways of the world, 
(replied he with a fmile) leads you into ^s i?5i^ 
difficulty. Your notions are all merely fpecu- "^ 
Jative, formed on reflection and not on obfer- 
\ation. You confider things as they ought to 
be, fuppofmg man to aCt upon the principles of 
reafon, not as they are, under fo contrary a di- 
rection ; and this miftake of the merely-learned, 
' . . is 
42 THE REVERIE. 
is the caufe of the very litde fervice which thci^ 
works do in the world. 
" A patriot, in the original and proper 
meaning of" the word, is tiie nobl.-ll: title wiiich 
can be given to man ; and includes every virtue, 
moral, ibcial, and civil. But fo entirely is the 
ufe of words changed with the courfc of things, 
that llrippcd of every idea which can dcfcrve 
refpeft, it iniplicij only a faciious oppoftr of 
the meafjircs or" the court, who pretends a re- 
gard to the public welfare, to gain the confi-* 
dence of the people, abd make himfelf of fuffi- 
cient confecjuence to be admitted to a fhare of 
the fpoil which he declaims againft. (You 
are to obferve that I fpeak in the general. 
That there are fometimes men who really de- 
krve the title in its moft exalted fenfe, and 
poflefs every virtue which they make profeliion 
©f, 1 will Hot deny ; but they are too few to 
place in oppofition to the multitude ; and the 
exception only proves the rule.) You heard 
with what vehemence Mr. Sugarcane harangued 
againft the minifler, accifrng him of betraying 
the intereds, and over-turning the conftitutioji 
of his country, and founding his own prcten- 
fions to merit with the public on the effe6lual 
means he defigned to make ufe of, to defeat 
fuch pernicious defigns. Thefe profeffions you 
fee have been fuccefsful ; how far they were 
fincere, there is a fcene juft opening which will 
inform you." 
The crowd by this time was difperfed, fatis- 
fied with what they had got, or expecSling no 
more then ; and the candidate was retired to 
enjoy his luccefs with a few fclecl friends. But 
fcarce was he featcd, when he received word, 
that 
THE REVERIE. 43 
that a flrange gentleman wanted to fpeak with 
him in private that moment. 
Mr. Sugarcane imagined that it was one of 
his opponents, who was coming over to him, 
a nd wanted to make terms ; and therefore gave 
dfrc(5^ions to have him fliewn into his clofet, whi- 
ther he foon followed him ; but what was his fur- 
prize to fee that it was a friend of the minifler's, 
whom he well knew to be in the greateft confi- 
,dcncc with him. 
As foon as the common compliments of 
civility were paid, " You wonder probably. 
Sir, (faid the llranger) at this vifit from me, 
but the motive of it will excufe the abruptnefs. 
I come to propofe an accommodation between 
you and the minifter. The neceflity of aftairs 
obliged him to treat you with an appearance of 
unkindnefs^ but that is now over, and he is 
willing to make you amends." 
" Amends, Sir I (anfwered Mr. Sugarcane^ 
with an haughty air) I do not underftand you. 
I have difcovered the iniquity, the danger of 
the minifter's defigns, and am determined to de- 
feat them. I icorn any accommodation with 
the enemy of my country." 
" This way of talking. Sir, (interrupted the 
other) may do very well amongft a crowd of 
drunken voters, but to me it is nonfenfe. If 
you will deferve the minifter^s friendfhip, it 
is offered to you j if not, he is not afraid of you. 
He is futliciently acquainted with the practices 
by whicJi you have carried youj- point here ; 
und you kn9w what an appearance they will 
have before the committee upon a petition." 
The mention of a petition threw yir.Sugar^ 
catie into evident confufion, as he was confcious 
of 
44 THE REVERIE. 
of the illegality of his proceedings. This the 
gentleman inftantly obfcrvcd, and refolving to 
take, the advantage of it, *' My mefl'age, Sir, 
(faid he in a peremptory tone) requires not a 
moment's con fide ration. In a word, will you, 
or will you not, be the minifter's fiiend ? This 
is the laft time you will be aflced." 
" On what terms? (anfwered Mr. Sugar- 
cane faultering, and even blufliing at his own 
bafenefs)" " On the term.s you have fo often 
propofed, (replied the flranger)" " How Sir I 
I propofe terms to the minifter !" (interrupted 
Sugarcane with an air of furprize and difdain) I 
do not underftand you, Sir. I would have yoa 
to know. Sir" " Look you. Sir, (faid the 
flranger dryly) this way of talking ligniiies no- 
thing, as I obferved to you before j nor have I 
much time to ftay. You have folicited, fre- 
quently and earneftly folicited for a particular 
place : pray. Sir, what was this, but implicitly 
offering your fervice to the minifter, if he 
would give you that place ? Now, Sir, that 
very place is vacant, and at your fervice, pro- 
yided you will write the minifter word, ex- 
prefsly and pofitively, to prevent miftakes, that 
you will fupport his intereft, in every thing re- 
quired of you, without referve : and I would 
recommend it to you to confider, whether you- 
are like to get lb much by oppofing him. In 
the mean time, to fecure your intereft with- 
your electors, he confents that you fhall abufe 
him as much and as grofsly as you pleafe.'* 
Mr. Sugarcane feemed to hefitate for a f^w 
moments, and then reaching his hand to the 
gentleman, '' Give my compliments to our 
fe;nd, (faid he) and tell him he may depend 
UgOU' 
THE REVERIE. 45 
upon me. I never was his enemy, farther than 
my intereft required, and now he has gained 
that to his fide, he has gained me alfo." 
He then fat down to write the letter required 
of him, to prevent his forgetting that he had 
made terms ; as foon as he had finifhed which 
the flranger departed, to avoid fufpicion, and 
Mr. Sugarcane returned to his company, where 
he profeflcd patriotifm, and railed at the mini- 
fter with greater rage and vehemence than ever. 
CHAP. X. 
The htjhry of a cohler^ who would correSi the 
times. The hejl way to win the hearts of the 
mob. He over-aSis his part^ and is turned out 
as a zvrangler. 
SO glaring a reprefentation of human folly 
overwhelmed me with confufion. I was 
afhamed of participating, in a common nature, 
with fuch monfters of abfurdity, and turned 
away difgufted from the odioufiy ridiculous 
fcene. 
The Spirit read the fentiments of my heart, 
and fmiling with ineffable contempt, refumed 
his difcourfe in thefe words : 
" Your vanity is offended at this flory, as if 
it refle(Sted any difgrace upon yourfelf. This 
is another inflance of the folly of man, to think 
his. confequence fo extenfive, as to be affe6ted 
by any thing not immediately levelled at him. 
Carelefs of deferving praife himfelf, t^is pride 
is piqued at the reproof offered to others-; 
but 
46 THE R f: V E R I E. 
but ill this he only betrays his own infirmities. 
No man was ever hurted at hearing: a fault re- 
proved of which he was not guilty himfelf. 
The confcious heart is eafily alarmed. His too 
ready fenfibility takes the imputation that was 
never meant, and turns general iatire into par- 
ticular reproach. 
As for me, think not that I take plcafure in 
painting things worfc than they really are. If 
the picture is difagrceable, the fault is in the 
original ; I copy nature, and am equally above 
flattery and abufe. You mult therefore drop 
this review, if you are diflatisfied with truth in 
its genuine colours.'* 
" Have compaffion, gracious Spirit, (an- 
fwered I, with a molt refpcdful obeifance) 
on the weaknefs of my nature, nor impute to 
pride the effc<5l of fhame. I felt the force of 
that ridicule, to which you held up fuch egre- 
gious follies, and hope to receive this advantage 
from it, that I fhall never fall into the like 
myfclf. Continue therefore the inltrui5tive pic- 
ture, and your fervant fliall join in the honeft 
laugh you raife, even though it be againft 
himfelf." 
The humility and candour of this declara- 
tion removed the Spirit's difpleafurc, and he 
proceeded. " Nothing fhews folly in a more 
contemptible light, (f..id he) than its being re- 
peatedly duped by the fame deceit. Of all tire 
pretences which have impofcd upon the credu- 
lity of mankind, this of patriotifm has been 
ofteneft ufed. The reafon is evident ; the 
whole fyftem of human politics is fuch a med- 
ley of folly and corruption, even ujuier the 
wifeft admin libations, that if a fupcrior power 
did 
THE REVERIE. 47 
did not conllantly interpofe, to difappoint the 
deepeft defigiis of man, and obviate the efFe<5^s 
of his wiTdom, the very face of nature would 
be changed, and all her works overwhelmed 
in confufion and ruin. 
'' Obfervation of this uninterrupted feries of 
errors and misfortunes, without attention to 
the fource of them, gives weight to the cla- 
mours of every felf-ele6led reformer, againft 
thofe in power, and makes the giddy multitude 
Jiften to bis fpecious promifes of redrefs, as 
a drowning perfon catches even at a firaw ; 
their conftant difappointments not in the leaft 
abating their credulity. 
" Nor is affectation of reformino; confined to 
the higher ranks of life, where affluence may 
feem to give a title to idlenefs, and flatter am- 
bition wirh a profpc6t of fuccefs. The meanefi 
-mechanic will undertake to mend the ftate; 
and if he can but harangue with noife and vi- 
rulence, will find fools of all denominations to 
liilen to what he fays. 
" An inftance of this may be worth attending 
to ; and yonder little village, at this very time, 
affords one of a mofl flriking nature. Obferve 
that man, fitting in all the mimic pomp of flate, 
and haranguing to the gaping croud around 
him, with all the afrecied agitation and vehe- 
mence of voice and gefture of a rantiiig player, 
'tearing a paflion to pieces on the (luge. Lifren 
to him but a moment, and you Vv-ill find him 
utterrly ignorant of every rule of fpt^ech, as 
well as every principle of reafoning, conti- 
nually comrr.ittino; blundi^rs in each beneath a 
man of (enfe to utter, and which none but. per- 
fons under the ftrongefl degree of intbxi-cation 
could 
4S THE REVERIE. 
could hearken to, without difguft and contempt. 
Yet by thefe very harangues, frothy, extrava- 
gant, and blundering as they arc, has he arifcn 
to the ftate of confequence in v^'hich you now 
behold him. 
'' He was bred a cobler, and worked at his 
trade for fome years in that very village with 
tolerable credit: but nature having unluckily 
given him fome vivacity of parts, without any 
prudence to dire£l them, he foon grew weary 
of working, and fpent all his time in railing at 
the parifh-officers, and accufmg them of num- 
berlefs abufes in the performance of their fevc- 
ral duties. 
*' This naturally drew a crowd every mar* 
ket-day about his ftall, to whom he fet forth 
the public grievances in fo pathetic a manner, 
and with fuch ftrong intimations of his own 
integrity and ability to redrefs them, if they 
would put the power In his hands, that they 
promifed to chufe him churchwarden at the 
next veftry. 
" Intoxicated with this fuccefs, he imme- 
diately enlarged his plan, and ventured to at- 
tack the fteward of the manor, for having (as 
he alledged) encroached upon the common, 
and extorted exorbitant fees in the courfe of 
his office. Nor did he (hew greater refpe*5t to 
the lord himfelf, but had the aflurance to charge 
him direclly with countenancing his fteward's 
oppreflions, and defigning to deflroy the court- 
rolls and turn all the tenants out of their 
farms ; and for fear thefe charges (hould be re- 
futed, he involved in them every one in the 
parifh who had any opportunity of knowing 
the truth ; and to invalidate their teftimony, 
and 
THE REVERIE. 4^ 
and deprive them of all refpetSl, branded theai 
aijd their families with the moft atrocious crimes, 
publifhing every private calumny that malice 
had ever invented, and raking up the afhes of 
the dead for fcandal and defamation. 
" Such a condu6t foon won the hearts of 
the mob, as it pulled down thofe above them to 
their ov/n level. Accordingly he became their 
idol to fuch a degree, that they implicitiv be- 
lieved every word he faid, and refolved unani- 
mouily to fupport him at the approaching vefcry. 
" But he had ovcr-a6ied his part, knd in the 
warmth of his paffion pro'/oked the better part 
of the pariiliionerS'fo much, by his perfonal re- 
flexions and abufe, that before he could be 
elecSled, he was prefentcd in the court- leet as 
a common difturber, and condemned to be fet 
in the fcocks for a public example. 
" Though in the heat of his patrlotifm he 
had often braved danger, and boailed that he 
would bear any pcrfccution, rather than de.'ert 
his friends, in fuch a glorious caufe ; when it 
came to the teft, his refolution failed him, and 
he manfully ran away to the County-town, 
where, as he was out of the pow^r of his perfe- 
cutors, whofe fubordinate jurifdiction was con- 
fined to their own pariui, and could not reach ' 
him there, he gallantly bade them defiancj?', and 
renewed his abufe, railing at them with' all the 
rancour of impotent refentment. 
Vol. I. D G H A P. 
ii*:> 
50 THE REVERIE. 
5c^^i^^»c£^g^i;g£^g5^; 
C PI A P. XL 
He r'lfes hi Vife^ but cannot leave off his old tricks, 
A repulje overturns his pairiot'ifjn^ which is again 
renewed by another. The great advantage of a 
certai?!' quality^ generally decried^ but as generally 
pra£lifed, 
*' AS he had nothing to fupport him but 
jfx what he earned by his trade, which he 
had alfo greatly neglected ever fince he had 
turned reformer, to the no fmall embarrafl'ment 
of his private affairs, he had reafon to ap- 
prehend all the miferies of want, on his remo- 
val into a ftrangc place. 
" But his friends relieved him from his fears, 
and generoufly fubfcribed. their fhillings a-piece 
to buy him a new fuit of cloaths, and fet him 
up in a ihoe-maker's fhop ; for he was above 
cobling any longer, and h-..d been made free of 
the gentle craft for a. pot of beer, and a- fine 
fpeech or two, in one of the little corporation- 
town's he paffed through in his travels. ' 
" The racket that had been made about him 
.^ ' dj;JEW fo Jiiany cuilomers to his fliop, that he 
;:; W'jls ni . a fair way of earning honeft bread, if 
;? fei?.courd,have kept himfelf quiet, and applied 
:*'■ -diligently to his work ; but the itch of reform- 
'..j[ii^ had tak^n fuch fail hold of him, that he 
/*^©Uld, not help meddling 'with other people's 
'QphcqrnSy every where he Went. 
^■'■^■- *'.yZ- '■\.: " Accordingly 
THE REVERIE. 51 
«' Accordingly in fome little time after he 
was fettled in the county-town, he took an op- 
portunity one day, when the principal inhabi- 
tants were met together at a charity-feaft, to 
prefent them with a full account of all the 
great things he had promifed and propofcd do- 
ing in his own parifh, had he not unluckily 
been driven out of it, which he had got aa 
attorney's clerk to write out fair for hiin, in a 
fair hand, and on gilt paper, and kindly offer- 
ed his fervice in the fame manner to them. 
*' But they had heard his character before, 
and judging that they could get nothing but 
trouble by admitting f ;ch a wrangler among 
them, prudently declined his offer, and return- 
ed him his paper. 
" It muft be imagined that fuch an indignity 
provoked his wrath to the highelt degree; but 
he thought proper to fupprefs it, in a great 
meafure, for fear of difobliging fome of his 
culfomers ; and fo only expoftulated mildly with 
them, inftead of flying out into fcurrllity and 
abufc, as he had done on the former occauon. 
" This rebuff damped the ardour of his pub- 
lic fpirit fo far^ that there happening to be a 
law-fuit at that time between that town and the 
next, about the bounds of their feveral com- 
mons on a barren heath, and all the" inhabitants 
not agreeing ih their opinions of the town-'  " 
clerk's manner of carrying it on, and arvplying.  f > 
the revenu>.s of the corporation, as is .aiway#', -, J 
the cafe, in fuch alfairs, he refolvecj to chartgef.-'''^^:*:* 
fides, as all great men have d'onev'ahd.'p'^cf^^t^^^^^ 
him that alfiftance which the plhersfiad'/Ji^.-..*'*  
fore refufed to take, againlt^him. > ',1  ' '""*'. * 
' D ?cv' >,"■' '■■*t To  " 
■.■'.'.■.  . ■  * 
52 THE REVERIE. 
" To this purpofe he drew up a pompous 
cpiflle, which he got the .ichoolmaftcr of the 
town to write out iair, and coirecSl the fpelling 
pt"; and putting on his Sunday coat, went to 
deliver it himfclF, as the fureft meflenger: but 
the town-clerk not being at home, he was 
forced to leave it with his maid, faying he 
would call next morning for an anfwer. 
*' He went accordingly in the highefl: ex- 
pectation ; but you may judge what was his 
ciifappointmcnt, when he was told, that it was 
impcffible for him to fee his worfliip, his flioes 
being jufl: then carried to the cobler's to be 
mended, fo that he could not come down flairs 
to him. - 
" A wife man is never dejecled at a difap- 
pointment,and often turns a misfortune to his ad- 
vantage in the end. Our hero thought this an ex- 
cellent opportunity for getting his worfhip's cuf- 
tcffh in the way of his trade 5 from which he pro- 
inifed himfelf more folid advantage, than any 
he could expert from his firft fcheme. As foon 
;^.s.he received this account therefore, he went 
^^irctfily home, and prepared another epifllc, in 
^"\vhich he informed hisv/orfhip, that hearing he 
bad had the misfortune the day befoit to have 
' one of his fliocsjip, he thought it his duty to 
. ■ inform him, that he had difcovered a method 
of rricnding fhoes, that effeilualjy fecurcd them - 
£romfuch accidents -everlafter, which he was 
r$dy toprapiife u^pn his ivorfnip's, or even to 
^V -.communicate. to-Hi'scobler, whenever he plcafed 
*:/ to confuit with him upon the aflair. And as a' ' 
j^-jproof c^ thecxcelltnce of this invention, he 
*>.rgtr.ti>er toJii.hiiTi, that he had tried it with great 
fV^&^&:^ iC^'fVn ■ ^^^ own fl^ioes, v/hich had been 
". ■'.^■■■^^j<»:^*'-:.'^'/'' '■ mad«^ 
THE R E V E Pv I E. 53 
made of fuch bad ftufF originally, that they 
were burfting out 'every moment; fo that he 
was generally confined two days in the week, 
patching them up, before he had the good for- 
tune to make this difcovery ; llnce which they 
flood fo well, that he did not fear but they 
would lait out their time with fatisfacSlion : 
and laflly, to enhance the value of this ofrer, 
be added in a poftfcript, that he was the cobler 
who had been driven out of fuch a village, by 
the malice of a parcel of fcoundrels, and no^ 
kept a fhoemaker's fliop in that town, where 
he did not doubt but his talent of fpcakijig would 
be as fei-viceable to his worfhip, by bringing 
over the mob to his fide, as it had been terrible 
to the others. 
" This letter alfo he carried himfelf, as he 
had done the former ; and to encourage the 
maid to deliver it carefully to her mafter, gave 
her a pinch of fnuftoutof his own box, teUing 
her, as before, that he would call again for an 
anfwer. 
" But cunningly as this fchemev/as laid, the 
.fuccefs fell quite fliort of his expectation ; for, 
the next time he called, the maid returned hir.i 
both his letters, telling him that her malkr 
thanked him for his kind offers, but had no oc- ' 
cafion for them at that time.i and was befide ict* 
very bufy juft then, that he^gould nat haye.th'^-'. 
pleafure of taking a cup of ale with him,.;ibtt!;v 
iliould be glad of his comjpapyfcJnie: other xJa^fv 
" It is impoilible to- tixprerss/thc. rage int:(^5V-\;; 
which this aftronting repulfij thre-'^'"ihim.' B^!' 
retLTTued diredlly to his fofrrier p'rincipies of-g^ai - 
'Triotifm, and railed at the. tow.ii't4)t,v.k;;'W^^ 
much virulence as the moft in:e<^;l^;jdl'\his 
enemies, . -/ '^"■j^-i^hCitJgh 
54 THE REVERIE. 
** Though niodefty is a virtue pralfcd by 
every body, the quality dire(Slly oppofite to it is 
much oftener lucceJsful in the world. This 
was exa(Slly the cafe with this pcrfon. There 
was nothing, however defperate, in the vt^ay of 
his trade, that he would not undertake, and 
promift^ to perform with the greateft confidence, 
not in the leaft difcouraged or abaflied by the 
many mifcarriages he met with. It muft be 
acknowledged, at the fame time, that by thus 
indifcriminately undertaking every thing, he 
fometimes happened to cobble up a breach, 
which much abler hands would never have at- 
tempted. 
** But this was far from provinghis having any 
real merit, any fuperior fki^l in his trade, or 
recommending him to the cuftom ot- perfons of 
prudence and confideration ; as among fuch a 
number of attempts, it was next to impofTible 
but rome fhculd fucceed. However, he plumed 
himfelf upon every accidental inltance of fuc- 
cefs, as if he was the only one who underflood 
any thing of his bufinefs ; and though he was 
no better than an interloper, as one may fay, 
himfelf, and had never ferved a regular appren- 
tlcefhip to the (raJc, he treated all his brethren 
with the utm(. ft contempt and abufe, calling 
them ignorant pret-^nders, and blundering fools, 
who knew nothing of the bufinefs they pro- 
fcfTcd. 
" Though this condu6t naturally difgufted 
jcvery perfoii of fenfe, the unthinking fhallow 
■crowd vta«; pleafed with it ; and taking his 
■^. abufe of the reft of the craft, for a proof of 
vhis own lUperior fkill, fo many of them brought 
^ 'thcii ihoes-to hi5 fiiop to be mended, that he 
* made 
THE REVERIE. 
55 
made a fhift to live tolerably well ; which was 
more than he could have expe6Led, had he mo- 
deilly waited to be recommended by his merit, 
and not proclaimed his own praifes in this 
manner*" 
CHAP. xir. 
Luck IS all. He retur?is homey and irtufnphs over 
bis ene?nies. Great difcoveries in philofophy. 
Hisjiory concluded, and bimjelf left in a fog, 
*' TT is an old obfervation, that one lucky 
A hit, no matter hov/ accidental or impro- 
bable, oftener makes a man's fortune, than the 
beft concerted fcheme or greateft merit. Oi" 
this the hero of our tale had the happinefs t<? 
be a mod fignal inftance. 
*' One of the principal gentlemen of his 
own village happening to tear his fhoe quite 
acrofs one day when he was a great way from 
home, fent for feveral of the molt eminent cob- 
Jers and fhoe-makers of the place to try to 
have it mended, but after many unfuccefsful at- 
tempts, they all pronounced it beyond the reach 
of their art, to make it ever do again. 
' As It was quite a new fhoe, this gave the 
gentleman a good deal of vexation, and coming 
to the town where this perfon lived in his way 
home, he was prevailed upon to apply to him. 
Though his former knowleJ^re ot him fjave him 
out a mean opinion of his fldll, astHe cafe was 
defperate he thought is no great matter- to try 
what he could do 3 accordingly he ferit fol" him^ 
' D 4 wh» 
56 r n E REVERIE. 
who no Cooner faw the fhoc, and heard in 
what manner the others had attempted to iiiend 
it, thziix he at once pronounced them botchers 
in his ufual ftile, and, without the leaft hefita- 
tion, undertook to let it to rights ; which he had 
the good luck to do Co efFeclually, that the gen- 
tleman not only gave him halt' a crown for his 
trouble (which by the by, mnny thought to be 
more than the ilioe was worth the firltday) but 
alfo recommended him to all his acquaintances, 
lo that he had as much bufmefs as he could pof- 
ilb!y do. 
" Could he have been contented, he was now 
in a fair v/ay of doing very w^ell ; but the old 
lord of the manor where he had formerly lived 
happening to die, he prevailed upon this gen- 
tleman to ufe his interefl with the heir to have 
the prefentment of the court-leet withdrawn, 
and on obtaining his rcquefc left the bufmefs of 
his iTiop, and went back to his old trade of 
harran^uing the mob, which he did fo fuccefs- 
fuily, that at the next veftry they bore dovv^n the 
gentry by their numbers, and chofe him church- 
warden, in fpi'iht of all oppofition. 
'*■ In this fiiuation you behold him at prefent, 
boailing to his infatuated followers what great 
things he defigns to do, for the go d of the pa- 
rifh. But all this eal"e and confidence in his 
words and looks are nothing but afFedtation and 
grimace. He is fer.fiblc, nov/ his having ob-r 
tained the immediate object of his ambition has 
given him time to think, that he has climbed to 
the highed pinnacle of his popularity, fro?n 
whence he mud inevitably foon fall ; as it is 
abfolutely out of his power to perform the lead 
part of his fine promifes to his deluded party, 
who 
THE REVERIE. 57 
who will therefore hate nnd defpife him as ve- 
hemently as they admired him before, the mo- 
ment they find their di fappointment. 
*' Much as a confcious apprehenfion of this 
allays the pleafure of his prefent fucccfs, there is 
another refledl:!on which comes nearer to his 
heart, and fills him with fears of a ftill feverer 
nature. 
" Though the bufinefs of his fliop, after 
that lucky accident of fettins; the p-cntleman's 
moe to rights, was much more profitable to him 
than he had any reafon to have expevSlcd, the 
natural reftleffnefs, and vanity of his temper 
prevented his making the proper advantage of 
his good fortune, and providing for a rev^erfe, 
by prudent oeconomy : fo that all the horrors 
of want already began to flare him in the face, 
as he can never expe£l the fame fuccefs where 
he is at prefent, the better fort of people bavins:, 
mofl: of them taking jufl: offence at the infoletiBe 
of his prefent behaviour, as well as his former 
abufe, and having befide no opinion of his £kill 
in his trade, and his own party being too poor 
to afford him any profit by their cuftom. 
' Nor is this all. Provoked, at. ths felf-fufH- 
ciency and arrogance v/ith which he affe£is to 
look down upon all his brethren of the craft, 
the worfliipful company in the village 'w,here be 
now lives have unanimoufly entered into a" ffc- 
folution never to confuU with him, on any of 
the aiTairs of their bufinefs, fuch as fixini^: the 
price of leather and hog's bridles, and many 
other things of equal importance, without he 
will fabmit to be examined in the terms of thl-ir 
myflery, which would not be likely to p&ve 
much to his credit, as he never ferved -an"?p~ 
D 5 prentic^ihip 
5$ THE REVERIE. 
prenticefhip to the bufinefs to learn them as they 
diJ i (o that he will be left to trade entirely 
upon his own judgment, which, befide the ha- 
zard and difcredit of it, will alfo lofehim many 
a good job, as there are feveral people fo fond 
of aciing with due deliberation, that they will 
not htivc a crack in an old fhoe cobled without 
fummoning half a dozen of the moft eminent 
of the craft, to confult upon the matter. 
** His freedom of the trade in general they 
do not deny, but, by a bye law of their own 
corporation, they have this power of refuiing 
to confer with him, which they are determined 
to exert. 
*' It may be thought that their afting in this 
manner betrays a prejudice beneath fuch a 
grave and reputable fociety ; hut the truth is, 
they have abundant reafon to juftify their pro- 
ceedings. 
*' To gain a reputation on his firft fetting 
up the fhoe-making trade, he had ventured 
hap-hazard to afiert many things which were 
contrary to the common practice of his bre- 
thren, and rcfle(^ed great diflionour on them, 
for having followed fuch abfurd opinions (o 
long. 
* The principal of thofe, and that which he 
laid the greateft flrefs upon, was a new difco- 
ver}' he pretended to have made of the caufe of 
foTT^e particular ivaters tanning ajps- hides bet- 
ter than others. The fact had Jong been 
known to the whole craft, Vv'ho managed their 
bufinefs accordingly, and fent their v/arcs to 
thofe places, futisfiec] with the ctfecSf, without 
giving themfelves the trouble of enquiring into 
the caufe- 
« But 
THE REVERIE. ^9 
*^ But he looked upon this as beneath his fa' 
gacity. He wrote a book, in which he demon' 
-flrated by many learned arguments and curiou^ 
experiments, that water ivas water and net fire ; 
and to give the greater weight to this important 
diicovery, he made a parade of going to all the 
tanners yards about the country, where he 
raked in the mud and filth of'the common 
fhores, till he was almoft iufFocated by the 
ilench -J and then proved to the entire fatis/ac- 
tion of the ignorant croud that flood gaping, at 
him, that the f cum which Jiuck to the fides of the 
Jhores zvas no longer floating in the water ^ and 
branded all his brethren of the craft with his' 
familiar titles of fools and blockheads^ for not 
having found out this important fecret before. 
" Such an opinion was beneath an anfwer. 
But though his brethren did not think it 
worth their while to enter into a difpute 
about nothing with one who gave pofitive 
afiertions for proofs, and anfwered rational 
arguments with perfonal reflexions, they re- 
folved to take the firjft fair opportunity of hum- 
bling his pride, and fhcwing the world their 
contempt of him, which they have now done 
in a manner that he will not eafily get over. 
" You now fee what a poor profpecSl ha has 
of bufinefsin his trade, fufTicient to fupporthim 
in the ftate he afTumes ; but this h not his only 
diftrefs. '^Lhe common motive cf paiviotifm is 
the price for which a ?nan can fell himfelf and 
his party ^ to the lord, or fteward of the manor, 
whom he was raifcd on purpofe to oppofe. 
This price is always in proportion to the oppo- 
fition, which it is in the patriot's power to 
give. '»^ 
D 6 *' Bu^ 
6o THE REVERIE. 
*^ But unluckily for this perlbn, his whol'i 
confequcnce depends upon the actual exertion 
of that oppofition, and muft inevitably ceafe 
the moment he attempts to drop it. This the 
fteward knows as well as himfelf ; fo that his 
hopes from that quarter are cftedlually cut off, 
fliould his poverty prompt him to make the bafe 
attempt." 
CHAP. XIII. 
An odd way of exprejjing favour or diflike, Tlje 
hi/iory of the Cobler Tuatched by that of A 
Crier. 
*' T SHOULD imagine (laid I, perceiving 
J_ that my guide had iinifhcd his account of 
the cobler) that he has fomething to fear more 
irnmedi.itcly than want, which in a great mea- 
fure obviates the danger of that. 
*' You fay his deluded party will defpife hfm. 
Will :hey not do more ? Will they not be pro- 
voked by fuch egregious abufe, to take perfonal 
levenge ? To puii down his houfe over his head, 
and bury hiin in the ruins ? or tear him limb 
from limb, the fuft time they catch him in the 
Itrsets ? the mob is capable of any outrage, 
and here they have an appearance of reafon to 
jullify whatever they do. 
" I think hi:> cafe is fially defperatc, and that 
the only hope he can have of ciciiping is to fiy 
ence more to the county town, and follow his 
trade. His ambition mufl: be pretty well cooled 
fey this timCj and therefore he will be able to 
apply 
THE REVERIE. 6i 
apply diligently to his work, and may pofTibly 
earn an honeft and comfortable livelihood." 
" To unexperienced reafon (anfwered the 
fpirit) your remark appears juft. But better 
knowledge of the ways of man (hews that fuch 
fear is quite unneceflary. Did the people ex- 
prefs their refentment in the manner you men- 
tion, it is moft certain that they would not be 
io often abufed as they are by pretended patri- 
ots. An example or two of the kind would 
efle£lually put a ftop to that trade, how lucra- 
tive foever it is, which would be a real advan- 
tage to the community in general. But the re- 
medy might be attended with confequejiees nibre 
d:4ngerous than the difeafe. Would the m.ob, 
if once permitted to take the power thus into 
their own hai.ds, never rife but on fuch occafi- 
ons ? would they lay it down when their end 
is anfvv^ered, j\nd go no farther ? would not the 
beft members of the ftate be involved in ths 
fame danger, on every mifcarriage in their mea- 
lures, though impoffible to have been prevented 
by human means. The mob is a many headed 
monftcr, that mull be kept in fubjeclion, or it 
will become the moft infupportable of all ty- 
rants. It knows no mean, and therefore muft 
not be trufted with 'power. 
" But as to thefe people, they have been fo 
often impofed upon in this manner before, that 
the abufe is become familiar to them, and they 
will not even feel it after the firft moment, 
and then too their refentment will fpend itfelf in 
fcurrility and invectives, levelled oftener ngainft 
fi^uhs in the perfon's private character, than his 
abufe of them. 
^ Indeed 
..'% 
62 THE REVERIE. 
'^ Indeed nothing can be more ridiculous 
than the manner in which they exprefs theiV 
fentimcnts on fuch occafions. IVhile a 7nan , 
is their favourite^ they are cont'uiually getting 
drunk with drifiking his healthy zvhen he is dut ^ ,^>. 
cf favour zvith thenl they get drunk with drink' « ^ ': 
ing his confufion\ a bumper toaft in either caAf- .J; 
being the higheft, and often the only mark of ; ^ 
their approbation or diflike. " "* 
*' Nay fo far are they from harbouring a dan- . ' 
gerous refentment, even forthegrofl'eft ill-ufage  
of this kind, that, if the party has procured ^- _; 
money enough to give them plfenty of drink. '^ 
by the very fale of themfclves, the]^ forget alj 
that has happened, and flock to him, with as  
much pleafure as if he were their greateft bene- c 
faftor. ;^ 
" Strange as this conduct may appear, every Si 
day's experience furnilhes inftances of it ;. but ^* 
of the many which mark thechapaifler of the ;' 
prefent age, the moft glaring is that of the*. ..^ 
perfon whom you fee in yonder cloiet, fpurning ; 
the enfigns of grandeur from ^ him, with aa ■ 
air of diflatisfacSlion, that fhews their infuffici- ; 
ency to procure their owlier happinefs. His 
whole life is fo flrong a fatire on th'is partiGuIar^ 
folly of patriotifm, that a (hort view of 'it can 
not be improper. 
" He was born in this manor, where his an- 
CcftorSj-who were but'peafants, acquired fb con"- 
fidcrAble a property by their honeft induftry, as 
enabled them to make- a better appearance" than, 
manj^lof' the "gentry. " -'._" 
<<3^^n he Came into pofTtiTian of .his for- 
turte,Vhe^ lived in fo hofpitable and genteel Ji 
manner^.that he w^s greatly liked by his nei^h- 
'*'..■■ '■* «l(>urA 
T H E R E V E R I E. 63 
)Ours of all ranks, who never fufpedted that his 
. g^neroJity was ultimately fubfervicnt to the moft 
.♦.cnterprizing ambition ; but a lucky event fecured 
"ir l)is hopes before they difcovered, and could 
■^f ti!1ce any meafures to defeat them. 
k ,' " '* There happened to be at that time a vaga- 
' ^irond-fellow in the next county, who pretended 
[ -a claim to the lord of this manor's whole eftate, 
which he talked of going to law to recover, as 
' jfoon as* he could raife money to fupport the fuit, 
' for he was himfelf very poor^- and lived upon 
.. the charity ^of one or two great folks, who 
maintained* h'im rather to plague the lord, than 
from any^perfonal regard to himfelf, or opinion 
of the juftice of his claim. 
*' The* lord was convinced of his own right, 
and very we.ll able to fupport it. However, to 
. prevent trouble, he gave notice to all his te- 
, nants not to give his adverfary any affiftance on 
pain of. fotfeitlng their" leafes, in which there 
was a claufe exprefly to that purpofe. 
."'  " But this did not hinder fome defperate fel- 
lows, who had ran out their fortunes in whoring 
and gaming, or were upon their keeping for 
^eer-ftealiqg, and Tuch illegal pra£lices, from 
, ^ joining- with him underhand, in' hopes that if 
he fhould recover the eftate, he might be eafily, . 
prevailed upon, in return for their fervices, not 
only to forgive their offences, but alfo to rein- . 
iia^e them in their farms, of grant them leafes 
of thofe which belonged to the friends.pi his 
. opponent. '>.'" '/? V^' ".- 
"Such a combination naturllly alarthcd ^ir 
thofe who were in the interefl: of tle:"prefcnt 
lord, efpecialJy as it was headed by a-ve^y-bold- 
fpiritcd. turbulent fellow, one of,. the^ principal 
* ■ !" * gentry 
64 THE REVERIE. 
gentry of the parifli, who had juft before ran 
away v/ith the wife of one of his neighbours ; 
and therefore, though he bullied the hulband in- 
to compliance, could not expe^l to live in qui- 
et under a landlord who was remarkably ftri(5l 
in the execution of the laws. 
" This was a fair opportunity for one of fuch 
an enterprizing fpirit as this perfon before us, to 
ingratiate himfelf efFe6lually with the lord of 
the manor. Nor did he fail to improve it ; for 
putting himfelf at the head of his family, and 
all thofe whom his hofpitality had attached to 
him, he drove that gentleman, great a bully as 
he was,, quite put of the paridi. 
''rSp'fignal a piece. of fervice did not remain 
long uiirewarded. The crier of the court-kct 
happening to die juft then, he was unanimoufly 
choien into his place the next court-day j and 
the lord thought him fo firm in his intereft, that 
he not only approved of his tenant's choice, 
but alfo made him clerk of his own kitchen the 
very next vacancy. 
'' In this fituationofcricr he conducted himfelf 
with fuch addrefs,that he was able to put only thofe 
he plcafed on the grand-jury, and by that means 
frequently to oppofe the fteward himfclF in 
things which he knev/ to be difagrceable to the 
parifti : at the fame time managing matters fo 
artfully, that he never abfolutcly broke with him, 
nor gave him reafon fulficicnt to juftjfy his 
turning him out of his clerkfliip; having al- 
ways fome plaufible excufe to palliate what he 
did; and profcffing the highell fidelity and at- 
tachment to the lord's fjrvice, which he took 
every, occafion of promoting, that he thought 
would not injure him, in the opinion of the 
"^oplc. .5 " The 
THE REVERIE. 65 
*' The popularity and power which he ac- 
quired by this conduct was far from being 
agreeable to many of his neighbours, particu- 
huly of the better fort, who did not like to fee 
a man whom they looked upon as their inferior 
rife over their heads in fuch a manner, that they 
were become no better than mere cyphers in the 
parifh, not being able to make a petty confia- 
ble, or get a prefentment for mending a road, or 
even making a ftile, without being firft obliged 
to cringe to him for his confent. 
C H A P.'XlV^li'if' .iji.., 
Sd one knave to catch another. Jn.wjldhic of mo-^ ^yg 
deration as much out of coi{ffi las in charade r. 
The parfon fwalloivs a fti^ar-plurnh^ and does 
what he Is bid like a sood chihL 
AT length one of the gentry, a cunning 
old fellow, who knew the world and 
all its ways well, refolved to try if he could not 
fupplant him in the favour of the people, by 
making him appear a favourite of the lord's ;. 
after which he knew it would not be difficult to 
do his bufmefs with him alfo, who was already 
far from being well pleafed with his condudf. 
" Accordingly he employed emifTaries to in-r 
finuate to the parifhioncrs, when their heads 
were hot with liquor at fares and wakes, that 
it was imprudent in them, to put thcm^felves fo 
much in the power of a perfon who- held fo 
proiitable a place under th^ldrd of th^ manor 
" ■ as 
66 THE REVERIE. 
as clerk of the kitchen, as he would not fail 
to give up their intcreft, on any ^^^reat occa- 
fion, for fear of being turned out of h.scmploy- 
meiit. 
" Thcfe infinuations foon came to the crier's 
ea^-s, v'.'ho, wit out waiting to let tht people 
ruminate upon the matter, went among them 
dire6lly, as if he knew nothing of whnt had 
pafl'ed J and took occafion to tell them, in rhe 
courfe of his conver anon, that he had accepted' 
of the clerkfhip, only that he might be able ta 
ferve them more effetSiually, by takmg care that 
the provifions, which they were obliged by their 
tenures, to fupplv for the fupport of the lord's 
houfe, were not embezzled privately by the fer- 
vants, and they put to the expence of more ; 
and, as a proof of the advantage of this care, he 
aflured them, that many a time, when the lord 
had given fomeof his hungry followers a letter 
to him, to get a bafket of broken victuals, he 
had returned for anfwer, that there was fcarce 
enough for the family, and fo fent the beggars 
away with empty bellies. 
" This artful turn gave the afFair quite ano- 
ther look. They implicitly believed every word 
he faid ; fo that he foiled his enemy, cunning 
as he was, at his own weapons, and made the 
attack, defigned to have over-turned him, fervc 
to eftablifh his intereft more firmly. 
" But this difappointment did not difcourage 
the other, who now had new motives for driving 
to get him out of favour ; for having married 
two of his fons to the fleward's daughters, he 
judged that if he could contrive to have the 
crier turned out, it would not be difficult for 
him to get the younger, who was a fine pro- 
mifin^- 
THE REVERIE. 67 
mifing lad, and fond of living at home among 
his friends, chofen in his Head ; by which 
means the management of the whole manor 
would come into the hands of his family, feve- 
ral of his relations, who all depended upon him, 
having good employments under the fteward 
already. 
*' But how to efFe£l: this was the queflion j 
for the crier's popularity feemed fo firmly eftab- 
liflied, that it appeared dangerous even to at- 
tempt any thing agalnft him. After much de- 
liberation, he refolved, as the method moft 
likely to fucceed, to fet up a rival againft him 
for the people's favour ; and then he did not 
doubt, but their own ficklenefs would foon 
make them quit their old engagements and 
jeadily enter into new. 
.. " Nor was he long at a lofs whom to fix 
upon as mod proper for his defign. The old 
parfon of the parifh dying fuddenly one day juft 
after eating an hearty dinner of pork and peafe- 
pudding, the lord gave the living to a young 
man who had lately come into the parifh with 
the fteward. 
" A particular circumftance made this choice 
very difagreeable to many of the principal pa- 
rifhioners. The greateft part of the income of 
the living confifted in the rents of a large quan- 
tity of glebe land, which was let out in parcels 
to feveral people for a certain number of 
years. 
" The leafes, by which thefe farms were 
held, were never fufPered to run out ; for as the 
parfons^were only tenants for life, thev had no 
great regard to their fuccelTors i and had there- 
fore come into a method of renewing the leafes 
at 
68 THE REVERIE. 
at particular times, in confideration of a ftateJ 
fum of money, which was clear gain to them. 
By thefe means the tenants looked upon the 
Jands as their ov/n inheritance; and had built 
houfes, and fettled themfelvcs upon them ac- 
cordinulv. 
" But the late parfon, thinking they had too 
great bargains, refufed to renew their leafes at 
the ufual time, unlefs they would give him 
much higher lines than they had ever given to 
any of his predeceflbrs ; which they refolved 
not to do, imagining that as he v/as very old as 
well as very avaritious, the fear of dying with- 
out getting any thing would make him abate of 
his demarnj. 
" In thiif manner things ftood for fome years, 
neither party chufmg to comply, v.'hen the 
death of the old parfon, and his being fucceeded 
by one whofe youth gave him a reafbnable ex- 
pe(Si:ation of feeing their leafes determined, 
when it would be in his power either to turn 
them out, or raife their rents to the full value, 
alarmed them all in the higheft degree. 
*' To prevent fuch a misfortune therefore^ 
tHey dire(5tly agreed to offer their new parfon 
the fum which had been demanded by his pre- 
deceflbr, and which they had always fo pofi- 
tively refufed to give him. But what was their 
adonifhment when, inftead of accepting their 
offer, he cooly told them, he thought the in- 
come of the living, as fettled by the incumbent 
immediately before the laff, was fufficient, 
wherefore he defired no more ; and prayed to 
God to enable him to make as good ufe of that 
as he had done. 
" Suck 
THE REVERIE. 69 
" Such an a6t of true generofity, not only 
won the hearts of thofe who reaped the benefit 
of it, but alfo gained him the general efteem of 
„the whole parifh ; efpecially as he lived entirely 
amongft them, and fpent 'his income in the 
raoft unbounded hofpitality ; not hoardino- it 
up, or laying it out in other places, as m oft of 
his prcdeceflbrs had been accuftomed to do. 
" On him the crier's enemy pitched, as a 
proper perfon to rival him in the favour of the 
people ; accordingly, having gained his good 
opinion by going conftantly to church, and be- 
having there with a grcat'appearance of devo- 
tion, he took an opportunity one day to in- 
fmuate to him, that he ought to exert himfelf 
more than he did in the affairs of the parifh, and 
not tamely fubmit to the ufurpations of the 
crier, who was for engroiung all the power into 
his own hands, without ever regarding whofe 
right he invaded. 
" Thefeinfmuations were not without efFeit. 
The parfon's heart, though above avarice, was 
not infenfible to ambition. He readily took the 
bait; and, as he was quite unexperienced in 
fuch affairs, fubmitted himfelf i.mplicitly to the 
government of his advifer, w^o, while he 
pretended to have nothina; but to reftore him to 
the confequencedue to his ftation and virtues, in 
view, really made a property of him to promote 
his own fchemes. 
C H A P. 
70 THE REVERIE. 
CHAP. XV. 
A game cf football. A falfejlep gives the crier the 
better of the match. He kicks the ball in his maf" 
tersfacc^ but makes all up, and comes off with fy^ 
ing colours, 
*' ' I ^ H E regard with which the parfon be- 
X. gan to be fpoken of by the whole pa- 
rifh icon gave the crier the alarm ; which was 
confirmed by his op ofmg him in two or three 
trifling things in the veftry ; in which his opi- 
nion was received with fuch deference, that it 
was probable he would have rifen fairly above 
him in a little time, had not fortune, the cricr*s 
conftant friend, ftood by him efte6lually on this 
occafion. 
" A friend of the parfon's had been appointed 
by thefteward, to repair and fet up a parcel of 
fcarecrows, to frighten their neighbours cattle 
from trefpalfing en their common ; for which 
purpofe, the court-leet had ordered him a fum 
of money out of the parifh ftock. 
" Such comniiiTiuns had ufually been given 
as a plaufible colour for beftowing io much 
money, without any defign of their being exe^ 
cuted. In this fenfc, did this pcrfon under- 
fland his; and accordingly gave himlelf no 
trouble about the performance of it. ' 
" The crier, who had connived at many 
things of the kind before, immedi <tcly took fire 
at this, and rel Ived to piofecute the man for 
embezzling the mone) of the parifh. 
" For 
THE REVERIE. ^j 
" For this he had many reafons : he knew 
that an aa;oi), wnich had luch an appearance 
ofpubhc Ipint andjuftice, would greatly repair 
his c.edic vyith the people, which he could not 
but be ienfible was on t-.e decline j and then 
as the parion's intimacy w.th the dtlinquent 
would prooably make him take his part, he 
thought that would be a favourable opportunity 
tor giving a check to his growing popularity. 
' Nor was he miftaken in his conjeaures. 
1 he parfon, m the warmth of his heart, not 
only efpoufed his friend himfelf, but alfo en- 
gaged ail his party to fjpport him, without ever 
coniiJcring that appearances were fo ftronelvr 
aga.nlt hmi that everyone, wno was not in 
tne fecret of fuch affairs, mufl harbour a difad- 
vantageous opmion of himfelf for abettine fuch 
an action. ^ 
" Accordingly, the next court-day the crier 
made h,s attack, and diiplayed the heinouf- 
nefs of fuch a flagrant ad of injuftice to the pub- 
lic m io ft: ong a light, that the mob, who never 
examine more than one fide of a itory, were all 
or his party; fo that the parfon was not only 
toiled in his attempt to fave his Iriend, but alfo 
entirely loft his credit with the people, who, in 
the phrenzy of their refemment, loaded him 
with every icandal and execration, which the 
molt envenomed malice could invent. 
"This affair effediually reftored the crier's 
credit ; but though he had fuccceded in this 
hrit objea of his defign, it was attended with 
confequences he had n..t forefeen, and which 
were far from being agreeable to him. 
'; The fteward, v^ho had appointed the par- 
Jon s friend to the employment which had in- 
^ volved 
72 THE REVERIE. 
volved him in this difgrace, thought it incum- 
*bent upon him to fupport him in coiijundion 
with the parfon j and when the crier had car- 
ried his point againft them both, reprefcnted the 
affair to the lord of the manor, as an infult up- 
on his authority, and a certain mark of difaf- 
fe6lion to his intereil. 
*« The crier, who meant nothing lefs than 
to have embroiled himfelf with the lord, or even 
Vvith the fteward, was furprifed at this charge. 
However, he had gone too far to think of re- 
treating now; and therefore refolved to oppofe 
their meafures in good earncfl: tliefirll: time they 
feemed to clafh with thfe rights or interell: of 
the people, which he knew to be the certain 
way to fecure his party to him, as it would 
make them all as defperate as himfelf. 
" This he did not long want an opportunity 
of doing. There had been a fum of money 
raifed by the court-leet fome time before, to 
defray the charge of repairing the manor- 
houfe, of which there remained a good part 
unexpended, there having been more levied 
than was neccflary for the occafion. 
" As it had been the cuftom of this manor to 
give money to the lord himfelf on thefe occa- 
fions to lay out as he thought proper, he had 
always appropriated any furplus that remained 
to his own ufe, without thinking himfelf ac- 
countable to the court-leet for it : but now the 
crier, who, by his place of clerk of the kitchen, 
had an opportunity oflooking into all the lord's 
accounts, finding that the fum was pretty con- 
fiderable, propoied to the court-leet to lay it 
out, in difcharging the bills of fojne poortradef-^ 
men which had been left unpaid on a former oc- 
cafion, 
THE REVERIE. 73 
cafion, and to whom the whole manor had 
palled their words ; and to this eftetSt he drew 
up an addrefs to the lord. 
" Though this was a direft attack upon the 
lord, and in a moft tender point, there was 
fomething (o plauilble in the propofal, that he 
did not chufe abfolutely to reje<5l it. However, 
not to give up too much, or eftablifh a prece- 
dent for fuch attempts for the future, he gave 
general orders to the court-leer, to pay off thofe 
tradefmen with that money as of his own free 
motion, and without talcing any notice of the 
application, which it had made to him to that 
purpofe. 
" But the crier, perceiving the defign of this 
proceeding, refufcd to accept thofe orders, and 
infifted ablblutejy on having the authority of 
the court-leet to difpofe of the money allowed, 
in which his old fupport the mob followed his 
opinion fo firmly, that the orders were reje6lcd 
in fpight of all the parfon and fleward both 
could do to prevent it. 
*' Such a triumph filled the mob with the 
moft extravagant joy. They extolled the crier 
to the fkies for his public fpirit and fidelity to 
their intereft ; and, were drunk for a whole 
week v/ith drinking bumpers to his health, 
while they ofiered every kind of infult to his op- 
ponents, particularly the parfon, and branded 
them with the moft infamous and improbable 
crimes. 
" But though the lord had not been able to 
make them receive his orders with due refpect", 
he refolved to fhew them, that he v^ould have 
them obeyed without regard to their oppofition. 
Vol. 1. £ u Ac- 
74 THE REVERIE. 
" Accordingly, he ordered his receiver to 
pay the money in difpute to thofe people, and 
take their receipts for it of hfs own mere autho- 
rity, without defigning to confult the court- 
leet any more about the matter; and, to fliew 
his refentmentto the crier, turned him dire<Slly 
out of his clerkfliip, as he did all his friends out 
of the feveral employments they had in the 
manor under his fteward, giving them to the 
friends of the parfon. and of the gentleman who 
firft llirred him up againfl the crier. 
" The latter was' now at the highefl pinna- 
cle of popular glory ; the idol of the mob, and 
the apparent vi6lim of the perfidy and oppref- 
fion of his enemies. 
" But he knew the world too well to be con- 
tent with fuch an unfubftantial phantom as the 
favour of a mob. He had laboured all his life, it 
was true, with indefatigable afiiduity to arrive at 
this point; buthefoonfhewed he had other views 
than thofe he pretended ; and that all his pro- 
feliions of re2:ard and attachment to the good 
of the parifo, were only lures to draw in the 
giddy multitude to trud themfelves fo implicitly 
in his power, that he might be able to get the 
price he defired for betraying them when he 
law a proper time. 
" Accordingly, upon fome hints of his in- 
tentions, the lord fent a new fteward to take 
care of the eftate, the former one having been 
made di (agreeable to the tenants, by the vio- 
lence and over-bearing of fome of his fervants, 
who had not fpirit to fupport what they faid, 
when they were called to account foi" it, though 
he was himfelf a good-natured eafy kind of man 
5 ^'« 
THE REVERIE. 75 
in the main, and had formerly been very weJl 
liked by them. 
'' The new fteward and the crier foon came 
to a proper underllanding over an hearty bottle, 
of which they were both remarkably fond ; and 
the latter bar2:ained to fell his friends, and refi;>ii 
his criers place, in confideration of being made 
an efquire, and getting a falary to fupport him 
fuitably to his new dignity. 
" It is impoffible to exprefs the rage of the 
mob, at feeing that they had been fo long the 
dupes of his defigns. They got drunk for a 
week together with drinking to his confufion, 
made fcurrilous ballads againft him and his fa- 
mily, and loaded him, in his turn, v/itli exe- 
crations and abufe. 
" But a new patriot ftanding forth to engage 
their attention, they forgot the crier, and went 
on in their old way with as much eagernefs and 
credulity, as if they had never been deceived. 
" As for the parfon, his polite friend ferved 
him nearly in the fame manner as the crier did 
the mob. As foon as his turn was ferved, and 
his fon chofen into the crier's place, chiefly by 
the afiiftance of the parfon*s friends, he not only 
dropped his acquaintance, but even gave him irp 
to the crier's refentment; who had privately made 
it apart of his bargain that he fhould be flruck 
out of the quorum^ in revenge for the trouble 
and expcnce he had put him to in the courfe of 
this aftair. 
' As the old crier has been fo fuccefsful in 
all his fchemes, 1 fee you wonder how he came 
intx> this place ; but if you confider that vanity 
and an abfurd ambition of being made a gentle- 
man, were the original, the leading motives of 
E 2 ;<]] 
76 THE REVERIE. 
all hi;; labourr, ycu will acknowledge that tHe 
e2;rcgious follv of the end, takes off all meHt 
from the means, and makes his fiiccel's ridiculous. 
" Nor is he infcnfible of this hiinlelf now 
that it is too late. Though the unthinking mean 
Ipirited mob have forgot his abufe of them, and 
croud to his table to eat his meat and drink his 
wine, with as much readinefs and pleafure as 
if their own and their family's intereft had not 
been fold by him to purchafe them ; the re- 
proaches of his ov.'n heart embitter his enjoy- 
ment of their company, and make their profef- 
fions of refpect naulcous. He pines for his former 
popularity ; and, unhappy in the accomplifh- 
nient of his hopes, finds too late, that the end 
of all his labours is vanity." 
CHAP. XVI; 
Muzzle a hear^ or hell bite you. Three rernarkable 
charaSlers. Beys that play tricks jlould beware 
of tell-tales. 
I WAS, by this time, fo fick of patriotifm 
and public fpirit, that, as foon as my guide 
flopped, i refolvcd to beg that he would change 
the fubje(SI:, to fomething more deferving of the 
obfervation of a rational being. 
" Enough, moil judicious fpirit ! (faid I) 
enough haft thou faid to prove the jullice of thy 
remark, in every rank of life, 1 fee the fame 
caufes produce the fame efiedis. Coblers and 
criers diiier but in name : but furely it muft- be 
otherwife in hightr fcenes, where the great 
affairs 
THE REVERIE. 77 
affairs of nations are tranfa^ted. The mind 
muft be extended in proportion to the greatnelb 
of the rubjciSls upon which it is employed, and 
can never look down to the trifles which en- 
grofs the attention of paultrv villaoers. Let us 
therefore turn away fron this fccne of drunk- 
ennefs and folly, and feek for matter more wor* 
thy of our obfervation elfewhere. 
" 1 will indulge you j (anfwered my guid ) 
but you will find little advantage in the change 
of place. Folly reigns every where alike, and 
more exalted ftationb only make it more ridicu- 
lous : and luckily a fcene prcfents itfelf toour 
view, which fhews this in the moil iiiik;ing 
light. 
" Turn your eye this way. — Yen fee thofc 
three perfons yonder. They arc juft entering; 
into a conference upon one of the moft extra- 
ordinary fubje^ls that ever (hewed the incvon- 
fiftency of human notions. We will hear i; 
from themfelves ; but firfl, while they make 
the common preface of empty cornplimenis, 
and unmeaning queftions, which arc made the 
introduftion to converfation even on the moil: 
important fubjecls, I will give you a fliort fketch 
of their lives as far as is neceflary to make you 
underftand what they fay. 
" They were born in different manors be- 
longing to the lord who owns that in v/hich 
the crier made fuch a figure ; but their being- 
educated together at the fame free-fchool gave 
rife to an intimacy which has grown up with 
them through life. 
" When they were taken from fchcol they 
were put to different profeffions, as interefl or 
jiclinaiion directed. 'He on the right 'chore 
E 3 the 
yS THE REVERIE. 
the law, in which the acutcnefs of his genius 
enabled hin> to make fuch a proficiency, that in 
time he was entrufted to fearch for informations 
iigainft fuch perfons as trefpafl'cd on the lord's 
jlemefne, or killed his game, and to fue them 
and the tenants who did not pay their rents 
puncl:ua]ly. 
*' This employment was not only very profi- 
table in itfclf, but alfo gave him an appearance 
of fo great cdr.-fequence in the court-leet, that 
he was generally on one fide or the other in 
every private difpute that arofe in the manor, 
" The next, as you fee by his habit, was 
bred to the church, in v/hich he laboured fo 
fuccefsfully, that he got a good vicarage before 
he was very old, imd, having the character of 
being a great fcholar, was alfo prefered to the 
honourable employment of teaching the lord of 
the manor's fon and heir his letters. 
^' As for the third, he was too idle to take 
to any particular profefiion : but, by the intcrefl 
ci his friends he got into the fleward's ofRce,, 
Vv'here he had feveral petty employments, whicli 
brought him in a good penny in the whole. 
" Jjut this war. not all. Having always 
fhewji a remarkable turn for making bawbles 
and nick-nacks, and being a perfedt mafter of 
the puncS^ilics of drefs and addrefs, and all 
the other accomplifliments of a fmall genius, 
he was chofen as a proper perfon to provide rat- 
tles and paper-kites for his young mafter, and to 
teach him to cock his hat, and ride his hobby 
horfe with a good grace. 
*' As they were all known to be very well 
qualifed for thefe important places, there was 
no obje£tion mad'e to their being honoured with 
them. 
THE REVERIE. 79 
them 5 and they executed their feveral charges 
with proper dignity and care. But an unlucky 
afFair foon happened, that threatened not only 
the lofs of their prefent employments, but alio to 
prevent their being ever entrufted with any other. 
" You may remember I told you there was 
a fellow who pretended a right to all the ef- 
tates of this lord. His family came originally 
from the manor in which the lawyer was born, 
and where moft of the inhabitants had a flrong 
attachment to him, both as they were natu- 
rally very proud, and thought it would be a great 
honour to them to have their townfman made 
lord of the manor, and alfo that they flattered 
themfekes with the hopes of getting good 
farms from him, in fome of his other manors, 
in cafe he could make good his pretenfions ; 
for they were alias poor as they were proud. 
" Befide, there was another- reafon for their 
defiring to change their land-lord. Before the 
eflate came into the pofleiTion of the piefent 
lord, they had been accuftomed to have their 
landlord live among them, and hold his courts 
and receive fuit and fervice in this manor. But 
this lord, having many better houfes to live in, 
had removed his habitation j and of courfe dif- 
continued thofe ceremonies, fo that they loil ail 
that parade of grandeur in which their pride 
had taken fuch pleafure. 
" Now, as this fellow founded his preten- 
fions on being defcendcd from the family of their 
old lords they expelled that he would come 
and live among them, as they had done ; or at 
leaft reftore them their court-leets, and all their 
ceremonies and perquifites again, never confider- 
ing that the employments and placesof honour and 
E 4. protit. 
'^0 THE R E V E R I E. 
profit, which they held in the other eft.ues of 
tlie prcfent lord yielded them more than the en- 
tire income of their manor. 
*' It is not ftrange therefore that the lawyer 
Aiould have received an early biafs in his fa- 
vour ; which was alfo cotifirmed by his being 
educated at that free-fchool, the mafter and 
uHiers of which were all notorious for the fame 
principles, and^ took all pollible pains to inftil 
t'i^em into their pupils, in which they were 
not unfuccefsful, with the lawyer's two friends 
as well as with many others,  
'^ It happened in. fome little .time after they 
v/ere preferred to thofe employments above-men- 
tioned, that a pcrfon who had formerly been 
very intimate with them all three, having been- 
educated at the fame fchool along with them, 
faid,, among a mixt company in the unguarded 
cpennefs of converfation, when wine removes 
all referve, that he had once little thought of 
their beiiio; ever put into places of fuch confi- 
dence under the lord of the manor, as he had 
often feer> them, on their bare knees, drink con- 
i'/fufion to hin> and all his friends, and fuccefs to 
"the hopes of his enemy. . 
. *^ There was fomcthing fo fingular in this 
fpeech, that: it flfuck all the company with fur- 
fnzQy but ouQ gentleman in. particular, who 
i .. was warmly attached to tHe lord's inti-refl, de- 
r- Tued all prcfent to- take notice of what this per- 
['/'fon h^d laid, as' he was refolved to put him to 
'" rhc proof of it, it being as bafe in him to throw 
. thofe afperfions on the characters of pcrfons of 
■ft i-ch' note, -if they were innocent, as it would 
be criminal in all who heard him to conceal an 
affair of fuch <bnfex]ue!ice, in cafe they were 
gui-ty.. ^' Thunder^ 
THE REVERIE. 8r 
" Thunder-ftruck at this, the other who 
had no intention of turning informer againft 
his friends, and had only faid it in the courfe 
o fgcneral chat, ftrove to evade the fubjeci:, and 
give the difcourfe fome other turn, hoping that 
the gentleman would think no more of it ; but 
finding thrt he would not be put off lb, but 
perfiifed in his refolution, he appealed to the 
i'ancflion of private converfation, where all that 
was faid had ever been held facred, and the dii- 
cloilng of a fyllable accounted a breach of the 
laws of- focietv, and that mutual confidence 
which alone makes it a bleffing. 
*' To this the gentleman anfwercd that he 
was neither ignorant of, nor defigned to in- 
fringe upon thefe laws j but that here a fuperi- 
or duty iutervei^.ed and fuperfcded them ; no- 
thiiig private being to be put in competition 
with the welfare oi the public which he thought 
to be concerned in this aftair. 
C I-I A P. XVU. 
jf had excufe is better than none. T.1jj adnjantagh , 
of a friend in court* A maxim in law fohes- j.\ 
ail.  , . ■' * ''^.V' 
" A C c b R D I N G L Y he went the very 
Jr\ next morning and informed the lord of 
.the whole matter, who. called all his principa,! 
.fervants together, to confult what was proper 
to be done in this cafe ; for as it concerned hr^s 
E 5 own 
gi THi: REVERIE. 
own family particularly, he would not a£l with- , 
out advice, that he Ihould not be lufpedled of 
partiality, who all agreed that it ought to be 
enquired into with the greateft ftri(Slnefs. 
" On this the perfon who had undefignedly 
given the information was brought before them, 
when be gave fuch a vague account of the af- 
fair, that the lawyer, who was appointed by the 
other two, to fpeak for them all, as heft quali- 
fied by his profeiTion to defend a bad caufe, 
thought it the beft way not to deny the charge 
dirc(5]v, but to ftrive to turn it off, by faying 
it was not impofliblebut they might have played 
fuch foolifli tricks, when they were boys at 
fchool, b'Jt that the condud of his whole life 
ever fmce he came to man's eftate was a fuffi- 
cient proof of the fmcerity of his attachment to 
his lord ; and, to confirm this, he inlianced his 
having profecuted with the greateft vigour, fe- 
veral of the parifh in 'which he was born, and 
even fome of his own family, for this very of- 
fence with which he was now fo abfurdly charged, 
fmce he came into his prefcnt employment. 
'' Plaufible as this defence was, the gentle- 
man judged from the manner in which the ftory, 
had been originally told, that there rauft be 
more in it j he therefore infifted that the perfon 
who had told it fhould declare pofitively, and 
without prevarication or referve, whether he 
had ever known them drink thofe toafts fmce 
they left fchool ? where? and on v;hat occa- 
fions ? 
" Thefc queftions were too clofe to be evad- 
ed. He was therefore obliged, in defence of his 
own chara-f^er, which was now at flake, to de- 
dare the whole j accordingly he faid that he 
bad 
THE REVERIE. 83 
had heard them drink them feveral times, at the 
houfe of an haberdafher of fmall wares, who 
kept a fhop in the county-town, where for 
many years they ufed to meet conftantly twice 
or thrice a week, and indulge themfelves in the 
moft fanguine profeiTions of thofe principles 
over their wine ; who was fo flrongly attached 
lo that perfon himfelf, and fo well pcrfuaded of 
their attachment to him alfo, that when he came 
to die, he bequeathed his real eftate, which was 
very confiderable, to the lawyer, with handfome 
legacies to the other two, leaving him (the in- 
former) but a meer trifle, as he doubted his 
being ftaunch to the caufe ; and, as a confirma- 
tion of what he faid, added that the fettlement 
which the lawyer had fince made upon his wife 
at his marriage was of that very eftate which 
the haberdaiher had left him. 
" This eave a different face to the whole af- 
fair. The lawyer in particular gave himfelf 
up for ruined,, and would gladly have com- 
pounded for the lofs, not only of his prefent 
employment, but alfo of all farther hopes. 
" But he had better luck. The majority 
of the fervants, who had been called into con- 
fultation upon the affair, did not think it pru- 
dent to eftablifh a precedent for looking fo far 
back, and one of them particularly, who had 
been bred to the law himfelf, faid '' that this ef- 
'' tate fhouldbeconfideredas a fee, given by the 
*' haberdafher to his lawyer, and that it was an 
*' eftablifhed rule that a lawyer Diould fay any 
" thingthathisclientdefiredfor his />^, without 
*' being called in queftion for it ; for if it were 
*' otherwife, and lawyers made anfvverable for 
*' v/hat they faid, there would be an end to the 
£ 6 bufinefs 
84 T H E REVERIE, 
*' bufincfs at once, as the great art and m) {lcr3?' 
**' of it coiifilled in faying any thing that might 
"^ any way conduce to carrying the point, vvith- 
*' out regard to decency, truth, or any fuch 
'' immaterial confidcrations : whereas if o-entle- 
* men of the law were to be called to account 
" for what they faid in the wayof their bufmefs, 
'' and fortheirfee, no one would ever undertake 
'^ aweakcaufe, and fo the profelTion would fall 
" to the ground. Befide, it was a point agreed 
*' upon, in all the books, that what a lawyer fays 
^^ for his fee, is never to be confidered as his pri- 
" vatefcntimentoropinion; elfe how could law- 
** yers rail at, and abufe their moft intimate 
'' friends, in she rnannerthey do every day, for 
"*' aflrangertheyknow nothingof, andinacaufe 
"' they tire ito'nvi need to be wrono;, Vv'ithout 
■^* breaking V/ith' them, or giving them the leaf!: 
'' offence; as an inRance of which, he added that 
*■' he had himfelf often gone dire£ily from court 
"to dine with the man whom he had fpent the 
'*^ whole mornini^ in abufino-; therefore no man 
" was to be called to account for what he faid 
" for his fee: and this opinion he fupported by 
*' a firing of quotations from all the grave and 
" learned fages of the law ^ and by the con- 
" rtant and uniform praftice of the profeflioa 
5"^ from time immemorial, to this very day." 
'"^ So learned a defence faved the delinquents. 
Tor it would have been unjuft to have made a 
diiLin6lion between them. The majority of 
"the fervants (as I faid) therefore gave it as their 
opinion, that the accufation, ibGugh not filje^ 
■was malicious, frivolous, and unworthy of far- 
ther notice. 
" Thus blew over a florm, in which their 
very friends expelled they v^ouid have lank. 
On 
THE REVERIE. 85 
On the contrary, the lawyer was foon after 
made a juflice of the peace and deputy to the 
fenefchal of the principal manor, the parfoa 
e-ot a better living, and the hobby-horfe-man 
on his pupil's growing too big for his care, was 
prefered by his beft friend the fleward to be his 
head clerk, which places they all enjoy at pre- 
fent ; while the poor informer drew upon him- 
felf fuch univerfal conrempt for his indifcretion, 
that he was never able to fhew his face after." 
CHAP. XVIII. 
Jlaoderfi modejiy and gratitude. Compmiions ai'e 
odious. A good nmnory often t?iakes a bad cojn^ 
pamon. It is prudent to make hay while the Jim 
Jhines. 
'' T T might be imagined that after fuch an af- 
fair their prefent preferment fhould fatisfy 
iheir ambition. But far from it, emboldened by 
that efcape, they think there is nothing which 
they may not do, and the favour that has 
h&cn jfhcwn them fince, inftead of making 
them contented and grateful, has given them 
fuch an high opinion of their own merit, which 
they modeftly judge to have been the reafon far 
it, that they reckon all they have got as nothing 
while there is any thing elfe for them to defire, 
and look upon thcmfclves as ill-treated, if they 
.are refufed whatever they pleafe to afk.— — — 
But foft 1 Their conference at length be- 
gins, Let us attend.- 
2 ^'^ I faj 
86 T FI E REVERIE: 
" I fay, fir (faid the lawyer, firefparkllng in 
his eyes) that I am ill-ufed. Had there been 
any obje6tion to my abilities to fill fuch an 
employment, or could it have been even pre- 
tended that the perfon who is put over my 
head, was fuperior to me in any refpedl, it 
would have been another cafe^ but, to be conti- 
nued a deputy, where I had (o good a right to 
be made principal, is not to be borne. Nor 
will I bear it. No man provokes me with im- 
punity. " 
'^ Really, fir (anfwered the parfon) I can- 
not but own you have fome reafon to com- 
plain. But what would you fay, if you were 
in my place ? To be taken no notice of where 
there were fo many opportunities ! fo many - 
better livings vacant ! it is enough to provoke 
the patience of Job, After all the pains I have 
taken to teach him to read, and my care in 
chufmg out fuch leflbns as were proper for him, 
that he might not receive wrong notions of 
things, to be flighted in this manner; it is too 
much ! He could not have ferved his former 
tutor worfe, who was turned ofF for teaching 
him to fpell in that profane ballad. But there 
is no fuch thing as gratitude, no regard to paft 
fervices, to be found in this world !" 
" Indeed, gentlemen (added the third, while 
his reverence flopped to take a pinch of fnafF, 
and the lawyer was walking about the room in 
a violent chafe) w^e are all extremely ill-ufed. 
But you mult both allow, that I have much 
the greatefl reafon to complain. You have got 
places which aflbrd you a comfortable fubfiflencc, 
and if they are not quite fo good as you could 
wifh, you have this fatisfadion that they can- 
not be. taken from you. " But 
THE REVERIE. Sy 
*' But that is not my cafe. I may be turned 
out of the poor pittance I have got, without a 
moment's warning, as it is moft probable I fhall 
foon find to my forrow, whenever the old flew- 
ard dies. And this is all the reward I have re- 
ceived for the many weary hours I have fpent 
at chuck and pufti-pin with the young heir, 
and teaching him to buckle his fhoes right, and 
put on his hat with an air. Wc have all rea- 
fon to complain, but my cafe is certainly the 
hardefl." 
" Your cafe, (replied the lawyer, with a 
fmile of indignant contempt) pray what is your 
cafe, good fir ? The paultry menial fervices you 
did about his perfon have been fufficiently re- 
warded. Common fervants fhould not aflume 
fuch airs, nor pretend to put themfelves on a 
level with their fuperiors." — 
" Paultry menial fervices ! (interrupted the 
other, kindling into a rage) I'd have you to 
know, fir, that my fervices were not paultry; 
and perhaps they give me abetter right to expe6l 
favour than any which fome others can boaft of, 
highly as they may think of themfelves. But 
I fhould be glad to know in what your great 
merit has confided, that you are fo ready to call 
that of another in queftion." 
'' My merit, fir, (anfwered the lawyer, taking 
fire) my merit, fir, has confifted and does confift, 
in my ability in my profeffion, which has ena- 
bled me to do the moft eilential fervice." 
*^ Service !— To whom ? (interrupted the o- 
ther dryly) to yourfelf only. Your abilities, 
were they ten times greater than they are, have 
been amply rewarded by the place you enjoy, 
and the large fums of money they have brought 
yoii 
88 THE REVERIE. 
you in from your deluded clients. But pray, 
iage fir, what important fervice have your great 
abilities been of to his iordlliip, that he fhould 
be under fuch obligations to you f I fhould be 
glad to know that." 
" What fervice ! (replied the lawyer haftily, 
being almoft put off his guard, by iuch a crofs 
queftion) what fervice do you afl<, fir ! Sir, I 
think, it beneath me to anfwer tt<^ueftion that 
betrays fuch ignorance. But, if you do not 
know, they did who gave me the employments 
1 hold ; and they knew befide that my promo- 
tion fecured my whole family. A'ly countrymen 
always ftick fall by one another." 
" Hah! hah! hah I great fervices ! very 
great fervices, truly (faid the other) I am really 
aihamed to hear a man who fhould know bet- 
ter, mention fuch things. I am indeed. But 
you muft be blinded, quite blinded by your 
opinion of yourfelf, or you would never attempt 
to put them in competition with the fervices I 
have done his lordlhip, in the inftruction of his 
fon's tender youth." — — 
** How, fir \ (interrup>ted the parfon, who 
had hitherto liftcncd to their difpute as unmoved 
as if it had been a vifitation-fermon, where fome 
country curate pretends to teach his betters thei,r 
' -duty) you inftrud his tender youth ! Pray, fir, 
have more regard to truth m what you fay. 
The mftrudtion of his jouth was committed to 
other kind of hands, xhiin yours. It is well 
-knov/n" 
'' That I got you the little {hare you had in 
his education (faid the ether, catciiing the word 
..,,out of his mouth) by mforming of your pre- 
' '^y-.-iieGeflbr's auttin?^ that ballad into his hands.; 
. . . V Y"   and 
THE REVERIE. 89 
and that you pofitively agreed to be guided by 
me, in every thing you fhould attempt to teach 
him, before you were admitted to come near 
him. So that if you have any merit in what 
you did, you owe it all to me. But fome peo- 
ple have very bad memories in things done to 
ferve them. 
" But do you think that teaching him to 
read was fuclr a mighty matter ? The clerk of 
the parifli, though he was good for nothing elfe, 
could have done that much well enough. That 
is the leaft part of a young gentleman's educa- 
tion, the very leaft part, and what many a one 
makes a very good figure without. It is fuffi- 
cicnt for people who have their fortunes to make 
to mind fuch things, gentlemen are above them. 
They can keep fervants to read and write too 
for them, without their taking fuch a trouble ; 
and let me tell you, fir, the world thinks the 
living you got a fufRcient reward for all you 
were able to teach him. 
" But, gentlemen, I muil remind you both 
of fomething which you feem to have forgot. 
There are other material rcafons which *not 
only prevent your getting the preferments you 
look for at prefent, but will alfo moft probably 
prevent your ever getting them, and indeed 
make what you have already gotten be looked 
upon with furprize and difcontent. 
" You muft have forgot the alfair of drink- 
ing thofe difaffeSled toafts certainly, or you 
would never give yourfelves fuch airs as thefc. 
How can you, ftr, expe6l that the real friends of 
his lordlhip, if they think at all about the mat- 
ter, can like to fee the court-rolls ii.trufted in 
iwch hands as yours r Or the parilh-regifters in 
yours,,. 
90 THE REVERIE. 
yours, fir ?— No ! no ! gentlemen ! you may 
both reft fatisfied where you are. You will 
never rife higher, take my word for it. I know 
what defence you made, and how you came 
to efcape fo eafily. But your bufinel's is done, 
take my word for it ; your bufuiefs is done." 
The mention of the toajis was fo unex- 
pe6tcd, that it ftruck them both dumb. They 
hung down their heads, and heard him out as 
convided criminals do their fentence. But the 
lawyer, foon recovering his natural prefence of 
mind, " The toafts, fir ! (faid he) I wonder 
how you can mention that affair to us, in fuch 
a manner ! Were not you as deeply concerned 
in it as we r" 
"; I wifh I had, (replied the other) and then 
1 fhould have been as well rewarded ; for to be 
fure you got a good fee^ and lazvyers may fay 
any thing for their fee Well, it is an old fay- 
ing, that it is good to have a friend in court. 
Your brother brought you off with flying co- 
lours ; and we too had good luck to be in fuch 
good company, or I know not how we fhould 
have efcaped. You brought us off', as well as 
you drew us into the danger. 
'' However, that efcape has not made me fo 
vain as to think I was not in fault. I have not 
the affurance to raife my expectations fo high as 
you do, and am humbly content with what 
they pleafe to give me, confcious that any 
thing is an extraordinary favour, and more than 
I fhould have received in any other lord's fa- 
mily in the kingdom ; for which reafon I fhall 
flrive to make hay while the fun fhines ; and as 
foon as a fhower comes, retire into a fnug cor- 
ner, and enjoy my good fortune with thanks. 
« As 
r* '::. 
THE REVERIE. 91 
*' As for you, gentlemen, who afpire to highe^ 
honours, )^ou will find, perhaps, when it is too 
late, that you had better have followed my ex- 
ample. And fo, mod worfhipful Mr. Senefchal, 
and moil: reverend Mr. Redlor, I wiih you 
both a good morning. Paultry, menial 
fervices ! * 
With thefe words, he flung out of the room, 
leaving his two friends flaring at each ether in 
a fituation whimfical enough. 
CHAP. XIX. 
Signal Injlanas of greatnefs of fpirit. Confijlency 
of charaSfsr maintained, A fcene of uncommon 
tt'ndemefs, 
TH E parfon was the firfl who broke fi- 
lence. " Indeed, my friend, (faid he, 
fnufHng up his pinch, and fhaking his head in. 
a melancholy manner) I fear there is too much 
truth in v/hat he fays, and that v/e ftiall never 
be able entirely to get over the confequences of 
that unlucky difcovery ; for which reafon I will 
e'enftrive to make myfelf eafy, and not lofe the 
enjoyment of what I have, by fruitlefs attempts - 
for more." 
" You are to do as you pleafe, Sir, (anfwer- 
ed the lawyer peeviflily) but I fhall not ftoop 
to be guided by the advice of fuch a mean fpi- 
rited fellow. We fhould never have been for- 
given, had they dared to fliew refcntment 
againft us 5 and the fame motive will make 
theni 
9-2 THE REVERIE. 
them not chiife to provoke us too far by thdi^ 
refufals. I know how to deal with them, I 
will fpeak to all my friends. They are not 
baftifiil in afking, nor eafy to be repulfed; and 
if their intereft fhould be unfuccei'sful, I will 
take another courfe, which feldom fails. I fhall 
not fiibmit tamely, I promife them." 
*' And pray, my dear friend, (replied the 
parfon) may 1 afk what courfe that is?" 
" I will oppofe all the meafures of the lord's 
fervantsin thecourt-leet, ('returned the lawyer) 
and that in fuch a manner, that they fliall not 
be able to make any objections to my condudf, 
but what will add to my confequence in the 
opinion of the people, i have a whimfical 
thought jufl come into my head. What would 
3'ou fa.y, if I fhould turn painct upon the occa- 
fion ? I have precedents enough to juflify me. 
And then the variety of fuch a fcheme will be 
highly entertaining. 1 like the humour of the 
thing much. 
*' As for the Senefchal, I'jl foon make him 
fick of his fuperiority. I'll contradict every fyl- 
lable he fays in the court-leet. My word there 
is as good as his, and my friends will ftand by 
me, right or wrong ; fo that I'll make them 
forry for what they have done for me, if they 
v/ill not do more ; and that will gratify my re- 
fentment at lead-, if my ambition is difappoint- 
ed. *No on'e ever provokes .me wiih impunity." 
.*' N^, far that matter, (replied the parfon, 
fett;ing.his hands a kimbo, and putting on a 
look'of Hni)orta-nce) I do not mean to be quite 
-palliye nellber, I allure you. I feek peace, it 
is true, =-biit' then it muft be on my own terms, 
<?r I .Ih'all not enfue it> I promife them. 
■ ■  ^  ■ - - " Nor 
THE REVERIE. 9g 
'' Nor fhall I long want an opportunity of 
letting them know my mind. The veftry will 
foon meet on fome extraordinary affairs, when 
I will obje£l to every thing the re6lor propofes ; 
and that will vex them all not a little, for to 
my knowledge they have fome things in view, 
which they will not like to be oppofcd in; 
fuch as making fome alterations itt the old fur- 
plice and cajjhcks^ and enlarging the churchy 
and widening the approaches xo the com?nun'i on- 
table ; but I will not confent to the ftir- 
ring a ftick or ftonc, or clipping oiF the moft 
ragged fhred ; all things fhall remain as they 
are, merely to difappoint them ; and then how 
fiily will they look in the eyes of the crowds, 
whom they have promifed to make room for? 
" They {hould not have let me know their 
fecrets, if they defigned to break with me in 
this manner* No ! no ! I do not mean to be 
quite pafiive neither, I affure you. Our cloth 
has never been noted for tamenefs and fubmif- 
fion. I will feel^ peace, but it fliall be on my 
own terms, I can tell them.'* 
The two friends then (hook hands, and ap- 
plauding each other's ''pirit, parted for that 
time, to prepare for putting their virtuous refo- 
lutions in execution. 
*' What fay you now, (faid the Spirit- with a 
fmile) to modern modefty and gratitude ?z-— 
But it is unnecefTary to make any reflexions on 
fuch a fcene as this. They occur. tJiT them- 
felves, with force fuflicient to-^nake ^ rational 
being fick of the world, and aJKits^'way-is jarui 
1 lK)pe you are convinced, that changing the 
fcene makes no efiential change injthe'pro('pe6l. 
P'olly reigns every where alike* 1^\\q palace-is 
no 
^4 THE REVERIE. 
no more exempt from it than the cottage: — — 
But (bft ! — I feelbmething yonder, which will 
be worth attending to. You have hitherto been 
principally engaged in viewing the folly of am- 
bition ; I will now fhew you the efFefts of love, 
its potent rival in the human heart.'* 
Saying this, he direded my eye to a cham- 
ber, where lay a woman languifhing under a 
general decay of nature. Much as fuch a ftat^e 
muft necefTarily weaken the force of beauty, 
there was a fymmetry in her whole figure, 'a 
foftnefs and delicacy in her looks, which even 
thus in ruin charmed the beholder, and fhewed 
how refiftlcfs they muft have been when the 
warm glov/ of health infpired their bloont. 
But ftill an air of debauchery fullied all thefe 
charms ; and her whole appearance befpoke a 
life worn out in vicious pleafures, which had 
taken fuch deep root in her heart, that when- 
ever (he opened her eyes, a feeble glance of 
loofe defire glimmered through all the horrors 
of her prefent ftate. 
Every thing around her fliewed the higheft 
affluence and moft tender care ; and the moft 
elegant accommodations ftrove to make ficknefs 
.tolerable^ and compenfate, as far as poflible, 
for the want of health. 
' But what particularl.y ftruck me was the ten- 
der,;- anxious affiduity with which flie was 
waited? , upon by a pcrfon, whofe appearance 
fhewtd 'Tiim to have been bred to a profefTion, 
/.and on '4n clement, neither of them very re- 
■ riiarkable for foftening the manners, and giving 
the mind fuch a compaflionate humane turn. 
Fie was kneeling at the foot of her bed, 
'chaling her clay- cold feet with his hands, to 
* . try 
THE REVERIE. 95 
try if they could communicate any warmth to 
them. She feemed not infenfible of fuch an 
acSt of tendernefs, and raifmg her head from 
the pillow, '' How fhall I reward my hero, 
(faid fhe, with a feebly- wanton leer) for all 
his care ? Will this poor perfon of mine ever 
be in a condition to repay his pains and trou- 
ble with pleafure?" 
' " Let me but once more fee my deareft girl 
well, (anfwered he, with a look of fondncfs 
and pity) and I fhall think myfelf amply over- 
paid for all. Is there any thing that I can do, 
to give you cafe or fatisfa6lion ? Command my 
fortune; command my life; myklfy and all 
in my pofTeffion, are folely yours." 
" I want nothing, (replied fhe) while I 
have you. Stay but always with me, and I 
have no other wifh. But why fhould I defire 
this ! What pleafure can you find in the com- 
pany of a poor fick creature, who is incapable 
of feeling any herfelf ? I blame you not for 
fecking that fatisfaction elfewhere, which it is 
no longer in my power to give you." 
" Why will my dearefl life (returned he, 
with an air of concern) think fo meanly of 
me, as that I can have pleafure in. any othei* 
company but hers. I never leave you arnb*- 
ment, but when my duty indifpenfibly calls 
me ; and as foon as that is. over, I fly back to- 
you again with all the impatience o£,.a youth- 
ful bridegroom." ■. :":'.' '■ 
" And when will that hateful duty call yba 
again ? (added fhe) Hov/ long may I promife 
myfelf your company now, without^ucb- pain- 
ful interruption ?" . 
^^^ My / 
« 
4^ THE REVERIE. 
** My love, (returned he) I am this very 
moment under a neceflity of waiting on the 
admiral. I have had notice that my fnip is 
ready for fea ; but I will forego all my 
hopes of honour and advantage rather than 
leave my dearcft love, till 1 fee you better. I 
iiave framed an cxcufe to evade my going this 
voyage ; and by that time my fliip returns, I 
promifc myfelf that you will be able to take a 
trip with me in her to Lifbon, where the 
warmth of the climate will eftc6lually reftore 
yo-ur health." 
" And how long will it be (faid file) before 
you return from the admiral ? I infill: upon 
knowing to a minute, that I may not be tor- 
tured by any unexpected delay." 
" I fear, my love, (anfwercd he) that it 
will be impoflible for me to leave him before 
dinner. He has fo often afked me, that it will 
look like dilVepedl to refufe him always. Bc- 
fides, as I go to fue for a favour, it would be 
ill-judged to give him offence. But you may 
be afl'ured I will not flay a moment that 1 can 
avoid. By fevcn at fartheft." 
*' By feven ! (exclaimed flie) and mufl I ! 
Can I live fo long without you ! — Well ! fince 
it mull be fo, go ; but do not be iurprized to 
i^nd me dead, when you come back." 
" My dearcfl: love ! (replied he,cmbracing her 
mod tenderly) thib is the laft time 1 Ihall leave 
you. 1 defign to tell the admiral that I a;ii go- 
ing out of town i fo that nothing fliall inter- 
fere with my care of you. Adieu ! my love: 
Jet me iind you in better fpiilts at my return. 
C H A P. 
THE REVERIE. 
97 
#####-t#**#*#t #####*#**##*#*§# 
CHAP. XX. 
The opening of a neiv fcene gives cccafion for fame 
refcofions, which will probably be leaji agreeahh 
U thofe who have rnoji occafion for the?n. 
I STRESSED as the difconfolate fair 
one feemed at his departure, the moment 
he left the room opened a new fcene. " Now 
is the time ! (faid (he, raifnig hcrfelf up Vi^ith a 
ipirit that could not have been expected from 
her looks) now is the time to put my defign in 
execution ! If I mifs this opportunity, I don't 
deferve to find another." Then turnina; to an 
elderly woman who waited upon her, "' Fly, 
nurfe, (continued fhe) bid my fifter come to 
me inftantly, and obferve the laft directions I 
2;ave her.*' 
The woman obeyed v/ithout delay ; and the 
Udy being left to her meditations, '' Now fhall 
I be happy ! (refumed file in a tranfport) Now 
fhall I be in fome meafure revenged on that ob- 
jeft of my foul's averlion, man ! O ! ttiat I 
could treat the whole perfidious fex in the 
fame manner, expofmg them equally to the ri- 
dicule of the world, and the reproaches of their 
own confcious hearts ! But, as that is impolii- 
ble, let this mean fpirited, doating fool, bear 
the weight for all. If I fall a vidVim to the 
vice of m,an thus in the prime of life, it is 
fome confolation, thatT can wreak my refent- 
ment upon him, who fecms alone to merit 
Vol. I. F better 
98 THE REVERIE. 
better from me. The world will attribute what 
I do to other motives ; but I difclaiin them 
all, and aft only from the principle of re- 
venge." — Saving this, fhe funk back upon her 
pillow, waiting with the utmoll impatience for 
the return of her meiTenger. 
There was fomething fo fuperlatively bale 
and wicked in thefe fentiments, and the hy- 
pocrify which preceded them, that 1 could not 
avoid expreffing the pain, they gave me to my 
guide. As foon as flie had iinifhcd her medi- 
tations therefore, " O gracious fpirit ! (faid J) 
what life muft this vile woman have led, to 
harden her thus againft: every fenfe of virtue and 
humanity ? and what uncommon injuries can 
{he have fuftered, to fire her foul with fuch an 
implacable pafiion for revenge ?" 
^^ Her life (anfvv'eied he) has been thaLof a 
common proflitute ; a life that neceflarily ef- 
jaces every tcndernefs, of nature, as well as 
every principle of virtue : and the injuries 
which ftimiilatc her to thefe more than lavage 
jcntiments have been no other than the ufual 
unavoidable occurrences of her wret-.hed pro- 
tcfiion." 
" flow! (exclaimed I) does proftitution work 
fuch a total change in woman's nature? bad, 
too bad I am fenfible its efFefts are j but 1 
have always thought, that fomc, and thefe not 
the lead amiable of the virtues, were not quite 
inconfillent with it; I thought I had leen in- 
ilances of benevolencee, charity, and filial 
duty, exerted by fome of thofe unhappy crea- 
tures, which would have been an honour to 
the chaftcfi: of the fex. But I find I have been 
in aj.1 error." 
" Charity 
THE R £ V E R I P:. 99 
'' Chaility (replied^ he) is irot the only vir- 
tue of woman j but Hill, it is fo efientially ne- 
cc/TaryJto the pcrfeilion of her nature, that the 
want of it, if it does not abfolutely incapaci- 
tate her from every other, dcbafes any feeble 
inftances flie happens to exert of them." 
" Nor can it be other wiie. The moment a 
woman is known to violate this virtue, fhe is 
looked upon as a diTgrace to her fex, and given 
up to infamy, even by the very perfons who 
firil: feduced her to, and IHII participate in, the 
crime they perfecute." 
" Debarred thus from the benefits of fociety, 
Vi'hcre virtue is confirmed and enforced to 
imitation by example, fhe is ob1i<7ed to con- ' 
fort with her fillers in vice, who to fiJence t'he 
voice of confciencc, and keep up their fpirits to 
purfue th-eir miferable trade, vie with each 
other in wickednefs; and, glorying in their 
fhame, profefs to deny the truth, and ridicule 
the pravitice of thofe principles from which 
they have departed, till they harden each other 
in their iniquity, and become incapable of re- 
formation.'"' 
" In fuch an abandoned ftate of reproba- 
tion, what merit can there be in a fmsile ad of 
virtue, that contradids the conHant tenour of 
their lives, and owes its rife perhaps to acci- 
dent, vanity, or caprice? how light will it be 
found in the balance, when placed oppofite tothc 
innumerable vices among which it llands, and 
which always contaminate it in fome circucii- 
fiance or other? 
" But this even is not all. The moll: pro- 
fligate of the n fees the neceffity of putting 
on the appearance of fome virtues, to palliate 
E 2 the 
100 THE REVERIE. 
the horror of her profefiion. This is the reafon 
of the error in which you may have been. Man 
requires but weak proof to convince him of 
what he wiflies to be true j and therefore rea- 
dily believes the reality of this appearance, 
and receives it as a fufficient atonement for 
the vice which gives him pleafure." 
*' Think me not too fevere in what I fay. 
There may perhaps be fome inftances to the 
contrary; but they are too few, in comparifon 
with the others, to draw a more favourable 
conclufion from : and the dan2:er which would 
attend fuch a conclufion is fufnciently great to 
juftify (o prudential and falutary a fcveritv-" 
" The only fafe rule to direct the judgment 
by, in all fuch cafes, is this, that a petjon wht 
perftjis in the wilful breach of any one moral vir- 
tne^ cannot he fmcere in the prcfeffton of any other ; 
as a proper conviction of the duty of any muft 
iiecetrarily and invariably enforce the practice 
of all J that is, with allowance for the unpre- 
meditated lapl'es of human infirmity. 
" Nor is there a more dangerous error than 
this, of thinking that vice and virtue can be 
fo far reconciled as'to inhabit the fame breafl; 
or, that it is poffihle to compound for the ohjlinat^^^^ 
habitual tranfgrejjion of one cluiy^ by the occa- 
fional perforinance of another \ the mean mercc" 
Jiary motive to fuch a performance taking 
away every fliadow of merit from it, and con- 
tradicling the unalterable eilence of virtue, 
which is pure obedience." 
The fpirit's reflections were interrupted 
here by the return of the nurfe, [;with the 
perfons for whom fhe had been fent. The 
moment they entered the room, the fick lady 
forgot 
THE REVERIE. loi 
forgot her ailments, and raifmg herfelf up, 
" Well, fifter (laid fhe, looking at them witii 
eagcrnefs and delight) I fuppofe thefe gentle- 
men have been informed on what occafion thev 
have been brought here. The moments arc 
precious. Let us therefore do our bufmefs 
without delay ; and thcji we may enjoy our- 
feJvcs." 
As loon as Cm faid this, one of the gen- 
tlemen drtw out pen, ink, and paper, and i'^t 
down directly to write her will, which flie 
didated v/ith a readinefs, that fhewed fhe had 
long ftudied it. "When he had finifhed, flie 
read it over carefully, and fi^-ned it, inthedut3 
form of law, before the other gentlemen, who 
were brought on purpofe to atteft this extra- 
ordinary tranfaction. 
The moment this important affair was end- 
ed, the lawyer received his hire, and then he 
and th(5 witnefles departed, to prevent furprize; 
when fhe immediately funk- into a ilate of 
weakncfs, that fhewed her end -was approach- 
ing very fafl, the extraordinary effort (lie had 
made on this ocafion having quite exhaufled 
her ftrength and fpirits. 
"^^ Dreadful as fuch an alarm mufl naturally be, 
it fhook not her refolution. On notice of her 
friend's return, fhe difmifled her fifler, without 
the leaft mark of tendernefs or reo-ret, thou-ih 
the only relation fhe had in the v/orld, and 
prepared to go through with her defigri with a 
fonitancy worthy of a better caufe. 
CHAP, 
102 THE REVERIE. 
C H A P. XXI. 
A life concluded in chara^er. An uncommon legaci 
of love mid gratitude, A f articular c'lrcuynflanc^ 
neccjjary to he attended to through the courfe of 
this curious work^ is explained, 
AS foon as he entered the room, he ran to 
her bedhde with the .utmoil: inipatiencc, 
where he found her lanrniiiliin]:* in the arCiS of 
o o 
death. 
ivach a fiiiht awoke his tendcrnefs. He fell 
upon her neck, and wept over her in bitter- 
iici's of heart. So genuine an expreflion of 
■eve operated as it were mechanically upon 
}ier, Vv^ho had ]oii.{ been accuftomed to return 
the cr.rclFes flis received, however infipid or 
loathfomcto her. She opened her eyes; and, 
forcing a faint frnile of fondnef*^, " How could 
ycu think ('faid Hie) that i could live fo many 
tedious hours without you? It is v/ell, that 
you are come at lengih, to blefs my eyes with 
one view more of all that thty delight in. Take 
care of this poor body ; fee, that it is laid with 
decency in the grave ; and fomctimes beftow 
a thought on one whofe heart's laft wifli was 
to give you pleafurc. I have a fifter Vv'ho 
would perform that melancholy duty ; but I 
have long broke all connection witii her for 
your fake. You are the world to me ; and 
every tender tie of nature is fummed up in 
TOur love." — With thefe words, flie fainted in 
his 
THE REVERIE. 103 
his arms : nor ever recovered ftrength to utter 
another. 
As loon as her difconfolate lover recovered 
from the firfl tranfports of his grief, he gave 
orders for h^r burial, with a magnificence that 
far exceeded the prefent llnte of his own affairs ; 
but this he thou^rht liimlelF under an obliiration 
to do, in return for her whole fortune, v/hicK 
Ihe bad bequeathed to him, by a will made in 
the beginning of her Dlnefs; and which nmouiit- 
ed to avery confiderable fum, though all earned 
by vice and infamy. 
The next morning, after this laft token or 
his regard was paid, he was furprifed at ic- 
ceiying a vifit from a perfon to whom he was an 
utter ftranger. After the common compliments 
of mcciing, the gentleman told him, that he 
v/as come from the filter of the deceafed lady, 
totakepofleffion of fuch effects of her*s as might 
be in his hands. 
" I am forry, fir, (anfwered the widowed 
lover, with a fmile) that (he fhould have given 
you this unnecefiary trouble. My dcareft girl's 
efFecfis and fortune are all in my pofieiiion 5 nor 
fhall I part with them to any one." 
" How, fir ! (replied the ftranger) Not part: 
with them to the heir at law ! Pray by what 
right do you claim to keep them :" 
"And pray, fir, (returned the captain, fone- 
what offended at the manner in v^-hicli the other 
fpoke) bv what rio;ht do you afk me that aue- 
ftion ? " ' ^ 
" Sir, (faid the ftranger) I am employed by 
her fifter, to make a legal demand of her un- 
doubted right ; and if you do not chufe to com- 
ply with it in this amicable manner, I know 
F 4 how 
104 THE REVERIE. 
how to apply in another, that may be more cf- 
fec):ual, though perhaps not quite fb agreeable." 
" That is to lay, (retorted the captain) you 
are the lady's lawyer. Well then, good Mr. 
lawyer, as I defire to have as little converfation 
as pofTible with you, and all the worthy gentle- 
men of your profelTion, I will fliew you my 
right." -Saying this, he unlocked a bureau, 
and taking out a paper, " Here, fiv, ((aid he) 
is the lady's will, by v/hich fne has bequeathed 
to me every thing in her pofieiEon, If you 
pleafe, I will read it to you." 
" Very poilible, fir,- (anfwered the lawyer, 
with a fignificant fmile) I do not doubt but it 
may be a will of her's ; and therefore dial] not 
give you that trouble. But, pray fir, v.'ill you 
give me leave only juft to look at the date of 
tiiatwill?" 
*' The date ! Yes, fir, (replied the captain) 
here it is. It bears date about a year ago, yAl 
in the beginning of her illnefs." 
" i fee, fir j (added the lawyer) and In re- 
turn for your readinefs to fhew me that, will 
now fliew you my client's title for making her 
demand. Here, fir, is a will made the very day 
before the lady died, by which fhe cancels that, 
and every other wilHhe may have made, and leaves 
her whole fortune, real and perfonaI,to her fiiler, 
charged only with a few legacies to her particu- 
lar friends : and though you may not be much 
converfant with fuch affairs, you muft certain- 
ly know, fir, that the laft will takes place. As 
you are one of the principal legatees, I will 
read it over to you, if you pleafe ; at leaft that 
part in which your legacy is mentioned." 
The 
THE REVERIE. lo^ 
The captain's furprize at this piece of news 
was fo great, that he liad not power immediate- 
ly to make any reply ; accordingly the Javvyer, 
taking his filencc for an afient to his propofal, 
opened the will with great deliberation, and 
clearing his voice, with an hem or two, pro- 
ceeded to read : " Item, in return for the great 
" expencc and trouble which my dearly be- 
" loved friend captain Lovcjacle has been at,^ in 
" taking care of me, during this painful and 
*' tedious illnefs, I give and bequeath to him 
" a lock of my hair, which I deiire he will have 
" put into a locket, and v/ear next his hearty 
" for my fake." 
" Holvl, fir! (interrupted the captain, rouzed 
by Aich a cutting infult) let me fee that will. 
Why, villain, this is not her hand ! I knew 
it was not poirible. This is a bafc and impu- 
dent forgery, for which you fliall all be punilhed 
with the utmoft feverity." 
" Pray, fir, ( anfwered the lawyer coolly) 
fufpend fuch an injurious opinion for a mo- 
ment. Look at.-the paper again, and you will 
fee that it is not an original will, but an at- 
teiled copy of one, regularly proved this very 
morning in the Commons, v/here you may 
fee the original any time you pleafe. As you 
may think proper to take advice in a matter of 
this confequencc, I (hall wait for your anfv/er 
to my client's demand till to-morrow morning, 
when I will call upon you for it; if you do noc 
chufe to fave us both that trouble, by fending 
all the lady's efFc(5ls to her filler's houfe this 
evening; to prevent any miftake in which, here 
is a copy of a fchedule of them, which v/e have 
figncd by the deceafed, and bearing equal date 
F 5.;. . ' . with 
io6 THE REVERIE. 
with her will : and To, fir, I wifli you a good 
iTiorning.'* 
" Pray flay a moment, fir, (faid the cap- 
tain, a good deal cooled by fuch an unexpected 
flroke) and give me leave to afk you a few 
qucftions. Though file has played me Tuch a 
bafe trick, I prefume 1 have a right to demand 
a reimburfement of the very great expences 
which her long illnefs and buiial have coll: me ; 
and for which, you muft be fenfible I have re- 
ceived no confideration. You appear to be a 
perfon of character, and as fuch I expert a direct 
and candid anfwer from you." 
'^ I am glad, fir, (anfwered the lawyer) 
that you lee rcafcn to entertain a better ©pinion 
of me, than you were pleafed to exprefs a- little 
while' ago ; but I cannot give you fuch an an- 
fwer as will be very plcafmg to you. You fay 
you have received no. confideration ; pray, fir, 
did not the lady cohabit with you, both before 
andduring her illnefs? Now, fir, light as you 
jTjay "rnake of < fuch a matter, the law^ admits 
(if fuch cpbabitation as a valuable confidera- 
tion;. not oiily for whatever expences a man 
.raaybe. at while it continues, but alfo for the 
Tf^cdyei'y -af. a promiftd maintenance, after it 
tcif^p.;*:" and therefore you can have no right to 
t'>ipe(^ .fayirfent, cfpeciaMy as'you buried her of 
ydui' owk*^'t^..VviH'r-snd. without confulting her 
iiWiji'-llf ypuVfi<t^e any farther commands, I 
.wi}];iW.a'lt..U[»on ^?0\i when you pleafe;. but at 
pi'cTen't-J- a'm-i3 mvjftiN "A* gentleman waits. far 
me ut^'tKt'^^ eoilee-hpufe. Sirj your fervant." 
It xs^iiflpofiible to<lefcribe the captain's frtua- 
ition. iat; -"the ' difcpvery of fuch a bafe de- 
54»;fii.  Hs railed at the whole fex in the grof- 
.^;;ll .'(enpSo ..^nd*. curfed his own credulity for 
Jv';"^:/: -'■-■- . ■ ' -. being 
THE REVERIE. 107 
being made a dupe to one of the moft: infamous 
of them. 
When he had vented the firfl tranfports of 
his rage in this manner, it occurred to him, 
that the whole might poiiibly be a contrivance 
of the fifter's and her lawyer, who having 
fome way learned that he was out that dav, 
fixed upon it as a proper time to date their 
pretended will. 
But this conjecture was foon overturned, up- 
on examining his fervants, who all informed 
him of the nurfc's havinjr ^one out immediate- 
ly after him, and brought their miflrefs's filter, 
with that very perfon, and three more whom 
they did not know, who weie (hut up in her 
room a confiderable time, and went av/ay but 
juft before he returned. 
Difappointed in this hope, he went directly 
to an attorney of his acquaintance, in whofe 
judgment he had a confidence, to try if there 
was not Ibme redrefs in the law for io grofs an 
abufe as he had fufFered ; but he had the mortiii- 
cation to find, that hemufl fubmit to the whole, 
and be fatisfied with the lock of hi^ hehvcd-s 
huir^ though he wanted not thaflegacy to keep 
her eternally. in his remdmbrai^.ce. . ■ ■ '. . 
*' Well, (faid my guide, as fooh as this €?c- . 
traordinaiy fcenev/as ended), wh?.t if yp.ur.6p-- 
nion now of the virtues of a proftlcutf ? - -Their .. 
profefTion is, to pjetend regards. tlfcy.licVer feel ^. , 
and you fee (he has prefer ve4,*lt'peifcS jJni 
mity of charader to the end-^bf ;her'iife >5,. aj^'d ." 
yet (lie was one of the nio{Vrerna.!:kableVf,,lhcm , 
all for the virtues you mc^ntipne^i ^"iAs,. to 
her lover, bafe as her treatment- of j^ii1i'wAs,'he^,  
drew it upon himfelf, by liisinfal"u;^ted dot?.^y.%^ 
F 6 .,aM^ 
ic« T HE REVERIE. 
and deferved to be deceived tor placing confi- 
dence in a woman whoi'c whole life he knew to 
have been a feries of deceit. What is the mat- 
ter ? You feem fuiprifed at fomething.'* 
" O gracious fpirit, (anlvvercd I) what can 
this mean ? We have attended the progrefs of 
this laft fcene through a feries of many days ; 
and yet I fee all the other obje6ls round me 
exactly in the fame fituation as when it began. 
How can this be? Have their aftions been fuf- 
pended, till wc fliould hz at leifure to attend to 
them ?" 
" Your fur^rize (replied he) is natural. You 
judge according to the mode of man's concep- 
tion, whofe limited faculties are incapable of 
comprehending things at, once ; and therefore 
are obliged to receive them in a flow fuccefHon, 
which you call time. But beings of a fuperior 
nature are not under that dii'ad vantage. Our 
powers arc more extenfive ; and the Ihdrteft 
glance fnews us the whole progrefs of the moft 
complicated tranfa6tion, bringing all its parts 
together in one view before us* This power I 
have for the prefent communicated to you, as 
I could, not otherwife attend to give you the 
information vou defire in the tedious courfe of 
-human comprehenfion. But you will under- 
lland this better, when I tell you, that what 
,. ieemed to you a 'eries of many days, in reality 
was not a minute^ according to your manner 
of fpcaking. Attention to this will prevent a 
like fu'-Driz-c on future occafions." 
C H A P. 
THE REVERIE. 109 
CHAP. XXII. 
An account of an univerfal genius, Sofne curious 
farets in the trade of an author ; ijuith a new 
way of replying to impertinent remarks, 
WHILE I was refl'ecling on what my 
guide had juft faid, " Turn your eye 
this way, (confined he) and obferve that perfon 
yonder. He is one of the ftrongeft inftances of 
the danger of indulging an indiscriminate defire 
of praife j and being feduced by the firfl fmiles of 
fuccefs to form Ichemes for acquiring even 
the moft imaginary pre-eminence over the reft 
of mankind. 
" To underftand the nature of the dirtrefs,' 
which, as you fee, corrodes his heart, and 
makes him incapable of enjoying the favours 
fortune has heaped upon him, it will be ne- 
cefiiuy to take a fhort viev/ of his life. 
**- He was born in one of the lower ranks of 
the people, where neceffity iilcnces thevoice 
'of aiTibiii n,. and obliges men to have recourfe: ' 
to the more immediately ufeful arts, of induflry.v 
and labour, to fupply their ov/n wants, and mi*- 
nifler to the ccnvenience of thofe above them^ 
But though the poverty of his parents pre-. 
vented their extending their views beyond their 
own fphere, in the way of life they propofed for 
him, a. dawn of genius, which marked the 
opening of his youth, prompted them to exert 
the utrroil of their abilities in giving him the 
firl} rudiments of a good" educatioa. 
"Such 
no THE REVERIE. 
" Such care, when didlated by prudence, and 
not the fond refult of injudicious partial vani- 
ty, is feldom unfuccefsful ; thoun-h for a while 
it feemed to counter-a6t their principal defign, 
by leading him into purfuits of a different na- 
ture from thoTe marked out for him, and mak- 
ing him defpife and negle6l the low illiberal 
profefiion he was bred to. 
" But one of thofe lucky accidents which 
govern life, and (liew the infignificancy of hu- 
man forecaft and vvifdom, effected what their 
moft fanguine fondnefs could never have fug- 
gefted the remoteft hope of. 
" After he had languifhcd for fome years in 
obfcurity and indignant d/f'content at the fe- 
verity of his fate, he happened one day, in a 
mixed company, which had met upon fome 
public occafion, to fit next to one of the mofl 
ingenious perfons of the age. 
*' Trie converfation in fuch places general- 
ly turns on fubjedts the leai'l agreeable to men 
of reafon j and is carried on with fuch noife and 
confufion, that; in their own defence, they are 
obliged to enter into private chat with thofe 
next them, to avoid being applied to, if they 
appeared difengaged. 
" Accordingly, the gentleman afl^ied hlai 
fome of the common queilions which lead in- 
to difcourfe, defigned only to confume time ; 
but he, ambitious of appearing to advantage in 
the eyes of a perfon of his chara61:er, foon took 
an opportunity to divert the converfation to 
thofe fubje£ls which he knew would be moft 
pleafmg to him; in which he difplayed fuch ex- 
tenfive reading, fuch delicacy of taftc, and' 
depth of judgment, with fo modeft a diffidence 
in 
T H E R E V E R I E. m 
in his own, and fubmiflive deference for the 
opinion of the other, that he politely invited 
him to his houfe, for the pleafure of improving 
their acquaintance. 
" From that day, his profpecSls began to 
brighten. The gentleman, pleafed with the 
thought of having refcued a man of fuch abili- 
ties from obfcurity, not only received him in- 
to the clofeft intimacy, but alfo introduced him 
to the knowledge of i'uch of the great as were 
inoft eminent tor patronizing literary merit, 
whofe favours in a manner prevented his very 
wifhcs. 
*' The firfl advantage he took of this happy 
change was to quit the mean profeflion he had 
been educated in, and enter into the moft re- 
putable in which the abilities of the human 
mind can be exerted j where the intereft of his 
new friends foon crov/ned his fame with the 
folid reward of an honourable and afHuent efl:a- 
blifliment.- 
*' During the life of his friend he preferved 
his efteem by the moft artful and delicate ad- 
drefi. Senfible of the implacability of Jite- 
ra-y rivalfliip, he carefully avoided the -par- 
ticular paths the other had advanced in to that 
envied eminence he now enjoyed, and to which 
he afTertcd a kind of exclufive ri?ht, diredlina: 
his ftudies fo diikrent a way, that far from 
being jealous of an emulation, his friend gave 
the fandlion of his own moft fanguine appro- 
bation, toeftablifh his fame; and at his death 
gave the ftrongeft proof of his confidence in 
his abilities and integrity, by entrufting him 
with the Care of Ibme of hisvYorks, which were 
nut \et publiihcd. 
'* So 
112 THE REVERIE. 
*' So honourable a teftimony eftabliflied hi's 
reputation in the higheft efteem ; but a vain 
ambition of appearing in the abfurd character of 
an imiverjal genius foon precipitated him from 
this envied height. 
" For the reafon of the rcferve v^^hich had 
hitherto kept him within his proper bounds 
being now removed, he refolved to give his 
parts their full fcope ; and to fliew that his tafte 
for the works of imagination was equal to his 
judgment in the abftrufer purfults of fciencc, he 
publiflied a colle<5lion of old ballads^ with yiotes 
end emendaticns^ criticnl and explanatory ; in the 
courfe of which he difcovered fuch a contempt 
for the opinions of all other writers, and ob- 
truded his own with fuch an air of authority, 
without deigning even to give any reafons in 
their fupport,- that he provoked the univerfal 
indignation of that irritable race ; one of whom, 
in particular, levelled the canons of ridicule 
againft his work, in fuch a fpirited, .poi2;nant 
manner, that, in defpite of his confidence in his 
own opinion, and contempt for that of others, 
he was obliged to fupprefs it, at a very confi- 
derable expence. 
" The leaft flip on the fummit of a precipice 
is dangerous. The firlt difgriice he met in this 
affair gave his reputation^i deep wound ; and 
another work, publilhed foon after, in which 
he advanced opinions contrary to the general 
fenfe of mankind, and undertook to fupport 
thcrn, by arguments either trifling, or evident- 
ly fubverfive of them, entirely ruined it for 
ever ; and he became of no more confequence 
in the literary world than if he was adually 
dead. 
«< How- 
THE REVERIE. 113 
" However, that very opinionated confidence 
which drew him into this difgrace, prevented 
his finking under the weight of it ; and enables 
him to look down with dildain upon all who 
prefume to differ with him, without even 
vouchfafing to take the leaft notice of their ob- 
jections. 
" But under this appearance of unconcern, 
his heart is a conftant prey to the pangs of dif- 
appointed ambition, and the moll rancorous 
envy ; and he fecretly defcends to the meaneil 
artifices, to reflore his loll credit, and deflroy 
that of his hated rivals." 
. Juft as my guide had concluded his ac- 
count of this extraordinary perfonage, a man 
entered to him, whom he Teemed to have ex - 
peeled for fome time. " I fuppofe, fir, (faid 
he, without deigning to take the leall notice of 
the profound refpedt with which the other ap- 
proached him) you miflook the time when I 
let you know I (liould be at leifure to fee you ; 
or you would not have made me wait this half 
hour,'"' 
" I mofl humbly beg your pardon, fir, (an- 
fw^rcd the other) but I was delayed by an un- 
expeiled affair. A particular friend of mine 
called at my fhop, juft as I was coming to wait 
upon you, to inform me, 'that there was a very 
fmart pamphlet to come out in a day or two 
againft your laft book. As I happen to have 
connections with the printer, I went to him di- 
rectly, and by much intreaty prevailed upon 
him to let me have one of them in fheets, 
which I have here brought with me, in or- 
der that you may have an anfwer to it ready, 
be[ore it can have done us much mifchief. 
Here 
114 THE REVERIE. 
Here it is ! — Will you pleafe to look in^o 
it?" 
'* No, fir ! not I ! (replied he) I am not at 
leifure to read Jmart pamphlets at this time'' 
"But, fir, (returned the other) confider 
what a prejudice it may do your book." — 
" A prejudice ! — No, fir, that is impoffible ; 
(interrupted he peeviflily) quite impoiTible, 
that a thoufand pamphlets, though never fo 
fmart^ in your e.xprcfTive phrafe, fhould do any 
prejudice to that book. Nothing can do a pre- 
judice to that book in the opinion of the 
learned and judicious." 
" If they cannot do the book a prejudice, 
fir (faid the bookfeller, as he nowsppearcd to 
b^) I know to my cod, that they can prejudice 
the Tale of it; which is fo heavy alreadv, that 
I am like to be at a confiderable lofs, if fome- 
thing cannot be don£ to pufh it on. And for 
this purpofe, 1 have here brought, you all the 
books and pamphlets Vv'hich have been writ- 
ten againft it ; and fhall take it as a favour, if 
you Vv'ill write a general anfwcrto them all to- 
gether; in which it will not be amifs, to throw 
in fome perfonal reflecffions a'gainft the au- 
thors, that may provoke them to reply; by 
which means a controvcrfy may be fet on foot, 
that may raife a curiofity to read the book. 
" Many a book is helped ofFthis way, that 
t\{Q, would have lain long enough upon hands. 
Nay, I know an author of eminence who al- 
ways anfwers his own books, and then replies 
to the anfwers again, and both with fuch ani- 
mofity, fuch ripping and tearing, thaf one- 
would fwear they were written by the bittcrefl: 
enemies .j by which management, he not only 
fells 
THE REVERIE. 115 
fells his book, but alfo makes a good penny 
orthe controverfy too." 
" Well, and pray good fir (anfwered the 
author, who had liftened to him all this while 
with the greateft appearance of indifference) 
what do you tell me this fine ilory for ? do 
you want me to imitate the practice of your 
eminent authors?" 
*' Pardon me, fir! (replied the bookfeller) I 
would by no means give you that trouble. I 
am fenfible your time is too valuable to be 
fpent that way. But I hope you will think 
proper to anfwer the objections which h?.ve 
been made by others. Your own reputation, 
as well as my intercft are concerned. You 
knew I paid you an high price for the copy, 
and have printed the book in the moll: ele- 
gant and expenfive manner, and it would be 
hard to let me lofe by it now." 
*' I have told you often, (returned the au- 
thor haughtily) there can be no danger of 
your Iofin2;. Such a book muft necefiarily fell; 
and the attacks of thofe infignlhcant fcribblers 
only prove its merit, ' Envy is always the fha- 
dow of excellence. However, as you feem to 
be alarmed at thefe anfwers, or whatever they 
are called, to fatisfy you I will reply to 
them." 
" Sir, I am much obliged to you (faid the 
b okf>:;ller, putting a parcel of books and pam- 
phlets out of his bofom and pockets) here 
they are. You fee there have been a good 
many nibbling at you." 
" Pray, fir, (faid the author, with an air of 
difguft) do not give yourfelf the trouble of 
taking them out. I have no manner of occa- 
iion ior them. "I 
ii6 THE REVERIE. 
" I beg pardon, fir, (anfwered the bookfeller) 
I did not know you had them. Then I will 
only leave this laf}, which you have not 
feen." 
" Sir, I have not feen any of them (replied 
the author) nor do I dcfire to fee them. Pray 
be fo good as to take them all away together." 
— " Plow, fir ! I thoujrht you faid you would 
anlwer them." — '* True, fir. But I did not fay 
alio that I would read them, I hope."' — <'Sir,— 1 
do not underftand you, fir. How can you an- 
fvver books, without reading them?" 
" Sir, you ailc a great many queftions.Why, 
fir, I know that any thing written againft that 
book muft be nonfenfe, which I will lay in the 
preface to another book I am now ''A\M-iting : 
and this will be a fufHcient anlwer." — " And 
in the mean time, before that book comes out, 
they will have damned the other eternally. Sir, 
— Sir, — ■! beg pardon; but I cannot help fpeak- 
ing. I am much afraid that luch an anfwer 
will not be fufHcient. That — that— -that is 
only giving your opinion of } our own book," 
— " And pray, fir, whofe opinion is better ? 
who is a better judge?" — *' 1 do not fay any 
die is a better judge, fir. But, fir, the public 
may require a — a — a more particular anfwer. 
If that v/ould do, any author would fay fo 
much in defence of the worfl book that ever 
■was written," 
" Well, fir, (faid the author, putting on a 
look of offended dignity) as I do not think 
that book the worfl that ever was written, I 
fhall not fay any more in defence of it, let 
the public expe6t what they will. I am pofi- 
tive it rnuft work its way, in fpite of a thou- 
fand 
THE REVERIE. 
117 
fand fuch ignorant cavillers. But, to make you 
cafy, if it fliould not fell, I will make good 
the lofs to you. You fhall not fufFer by it." 
'' I am much obliged to you, fir (anfwercd 
the bookfeller, making a moft profound re- 
verence) That is fufficient, full fufficient. I 
hope you are not ofFended at, my anxiety. I 
would by no means." — 
'* Pray, fir, (replied the author) let me hear 
no more of it. If you are fatisfied, I hope 
that is enough." 
CHAP. XXIII. 
Extraordinary inftances of one author s regard for 
t^oe reputation of another ; with a Jhort method^ 
of fikncing competitors for literary fatne. 
TH E adjufting of this delicate affair dif- 
pelled the cloud that hung upon their 
brows, and reftored their mutual complaifancy 
and good humour. 
"T imagined, fir ('faid the author, reaching 
the bookfeller his fnuff-box, as a pledge of 
perfect amity) you muft have had fome parti- 
cular bufmefs with me, by the earneftnefs with 
. which you defired to fee me." 
" Sir (anfwered hej I wanted to beg your 
opinion of that manufcript which I took the 
liberty to fend you laft week. The author 
called upon me ycfterday ; and infifts upon 
having my definitive anfwer this afternoon." 
— " And pray what does he aft^: for that fine 
arFair?" — *' Sir, he fays he will not ^bate of 
3 the 
ii8 THE REVERIE. 
the price I wrote you word ; which, high as it 
is, I think I had better give him, as his name 
will not fail to fell the book." 
" Sir, you know your own bufmefs bcfl ; 
but I am fatisfied it can never fell, and vvill 
certainly ruin the gentleman's reputation : to 
prevent which, as I have a great regard for 
him, if I thought my interfering in it could 
never come to his knowledge, I would even 
buy it myfelf, and burn it i by which means 
his neceffities would he fupplied, and his cha- 
rafter favcd." 
" You are very good, fir. There are few 
who would be at fuch an ex pence, to ferve a 
friend now a-days. As to h-is.knowii^g any 
thing of the matter, I hope you a.re fenfible 
you can depend upon me." 
" Then, fir, here is the rnDneytQ'.giv.e him." 
— " The money, fir I yes, fir^ th^t js. juft the 
author's money. But pray what' Jdo }'ou defign 
to let me have, for my profit on it. You 
cannot expect that I fhould buy and fell, with- 
out fome profit :" 
" Profit, fir ! I did. not imagine you could 
defire profit in fuch/an afl^iir as this, where you 
have no trouble, nor run any rifk of lofs." 
" No trouble, fir ! Dear fir, you little think 
what trouble I fhall have with this gentleman 
about the publication of this book ; nor how 
many evafions and lying cxcufes I muft invent, 
to put him, off. The generality of authors, it is 
true, give themfelves no farther trouble about a 
book the 'moment they receive tlieir copy- mo- 
ney. It is eq;ual to them, whether it is burned 
or publifllcd. Butthis is a difFerent cafe. This 
gentlctnan CApCiSls to efiablilh a charader bv his 
wprics." ' .  ■ " Well, 
THE REVERIE. 119 
<' Well, fir, and what profit do you ex- 
pea ? " 
«' Why, fir, every thing being confidered, I 
cannot pofTibly let you have it for lefs than as 
much more as the author gets." 
*' How, fir ! as much more as the author 
gets ! is not that a very unreafonable de- 
mand ?" 
" Not at all, fir. Not in the lead. But if 
you think, it is, I am far from preiling you to 
give it. It is paying very dear, to be fure, for 
doing a man a piece of fervicc; and I fhall 
lofe confiderably alfo, by obliging you. Whv> 
fir, there is fuch an expecSlation of this book, 
that the. common number of a firft edition is 
befpoke by the trade already. In fliort, I do 
not know xvhat r may lofe by parting with it. 
As to. its being double what the author gets, 
that; is no rule.' , What authors get is but a 
trifle^'in* c?6fr>]iapifon of the profits of a good 
book. Th? gentleman had but an hundred forthat 
atheiftical book you -anfvycred ; but the book- 
feller madca good- thoufand of it; I was very 
unlucky in miffing, that book.** 
" I hope, fir, the.anfwer made you amends. 
You paid no fuch price for that ; and chriftian 
charity will not let me doubt its felling better 
than fuch a vile book. The age, bad as it is, 
cannot be fo depra\'ed as to prefer that book to 
the anfwer." 
" Alack a day, my dear fir. The anfwer 
was quite another fort of things It never fold 
at all. *No body bad the leaft defire to read the-, 
anfv/er." 
" That is very odd! very odd indeed! Well,-, 
fir, I fliall not difputc with. .-y.ou. Here is the , 
money." '",.'<■'' '^'Sirjn-^ 
/.-.■'lA 
T20 THE REVERIE. 
*' Sir, I thank you. But that is right ! Have 
you heard, fir, that the gentleman who wrote 
that other book, the iirft edition of which I 
bought up for you, along with the right of co- 
py, from the publifhcr, and fold again for 
your account, to the paftry-cooks and chand- 
lers fhops as wafte paper, has written ano- 
ther on one of the moft interefling fubjetS^s that 
can be conceived, which he defigns to publifh 
himfelf ; as the trade, prejudiced by the fup- 
pofed mifcarriage of the former, have refufed to 
give him his price for it." 
" Obftinate, fhamelefs wretch ! To write 
again, after fufi'ering fuch a difgrace ! But is 
there no way to prevent his expofing himfelf in 
this manner ?" 
*' No, fir, but by buying his books from 
hiin, which, as I faid before, is a very dear way 
of doing him fervice ; elpecially as his pride - 
makes him hold it at a very high price, to 
fhew that he is not confcious of any demerit to 
have deferved the former difgrace." 
" Opiniated coxcomb ! However, I will dif- 
appoint his vanity, at leaft for this time ; fo 
even buy it for me as cheap as you can : and 
I hope you will not defire any profit in this 
affair." 
'* Only, the allowed profit of the trade. Ten 
per cent, no more ; though you muft be fen- 
lible, that as the failure of the former book pro- 
ceeded not from any want of merit in it, I 
might reafonably cxpecSl: to make much ^more 
by publifhing this myfelf. There is another' 
affair, that gives me a great deal of uncafinefs, . 
The author of that book in which you made, 
the alterations called at my (hop yellerday, and 
abufed 
. . T H E R E V E R I E. 121 
abufed me in the grofTeft manner, charging the 
mifcarriage of the book entirely on them, and 
threatening to take perfonal revenge of me, if I 
did not difcover who had fcrved him in fo bafe 
a manner. I put him off for that time as well 
as I could, by declaring that I knew nothing of 
the matter, and would make the ftriiSlefi: en- 
quiry about it ; but what to fay to him when 
he calls next I know not, as I imagine you 
would not have your name mentioned." 
" Ignorant blockhead ! The only merit in 
the book is in thofe alterations. No ! my 
name mufl not be mentioned by any means ; 
and your beft way is to infift that you know 
nothing of the matter ; and if he gives you any 
abufe, or offers to threaten you, put him into 
the hands of a lawyer, and he will foon make 
*" him quiet." 
" Indeed, I believe that is the only method 
of getting rid of him. Sir, I v/ifh you a good 
morning. I fhall obferve every thing you have 
faid to me." 
As foon as he was gone, the other began t > 
refle<5l upon the trania6tions of the morning. 
^* Well, (faid he, after mufing for fome mo- 
ments) if [ do pay fomething dear for thofc 
■ . books, I remove two formidable rivals with- 
.'■out any more trouble; and n.)t that only, 1 
r- -.can alfo take what I like out of them, and in- 
V fcrt it in my own works ; in doing which there 
is Jiothing unfair, as my buying them has made 
them abfolutely my own property. As to an- 
swering thofe pamphlets, it is bv no means 
worth my v/hile. I will not imir.*:)rta]ize fuch 
'-Vpaulcry Icriblei's, by taking any notice of them, 
^.ad Virgil treated Bavius and M^vvius with 
Vol. 1. . G . proper 
122 THE R EV E R I E. 
proper contempt, their names had periflicd with 
themfclves, and not been handed down to lateft 
pofterity, in his woiks." 
CHAP. XXIV. 
A rare example of modcjly and refpeSiy on a mofi 
trying occajion. A fure way of getting a good 
character j voith fo?ne JJjort refc£iions on literary 
ambition^ and other ?nore feriaus matters. 
AS he was in the midft of this modefl me- 
ditation, a fervant came to let him know 
that a particular gentleman was come to wait 
upon him. " Shew him into the parlour (faid 
he) I am engaged at prefent. When I am at 
leiiure to fee him, I will ring." 
*' He is come (continued Jhe, as foon as he 
was alone) to infult me with the fuccefs of his 
infignificant, trifling book. But, 1 will mor- 
tify his pride ; he fhall fee that I am not in the 
number of his foolilh admirers.^' 
Saying this, he fell Into a filent conte/npla- 
tion of his own confequcnce, which he in- 
dulged fo lonp^, that his vifitorfkcwed the heiQ;ht 
of complaifance, in waiting for him. 
At Icjigth, however, the important bell rung, 
and he was admitted ; when advancing with a 
profound reverence, *'l have made bold to wait 
upon you, fir, (faid he) to impart an affair 
that 1 hope wilj not be unpleafing." 
" Pray^ firl, v.hat may that be r' (anfwered the 
plher, without defccnding from his dignity, by 
niaking any return to his falute.) 
'* Sir, 
tHE REVERIE. 123 
■" Sir, (replied he, rubbing his handsj and 
looking at them, as if to admire their white- 
nefs) 1 have a very advantageous o/ler made 
me, to write a fecond part to my laft book. ; I 
fhould be glad to know in what particular 
manner you would have memention you in it.'* 
— " Mention me, Sir ! I do not undcrftand you." 
" 1 mean, Sir, what you would have me fay 
of your v/orks, as I defign to take notice of all 
the eminent writers of the times.'* 
" Sir, I am obliged to you for your inten- 
tion to pay me a compliment ; but I had much 
rather you would let it alone. I have no am- 
bition to be clafTcd among your embunt writers^ 
nor even mentioned in their works. 1 would 
gladly have excufed it before." 
" I hope you do not think it a difcredit, fir, 
to be fpoken of in a work that has ran through 
"fifteen edition's V 
" The number of editions is moil: certainly 
an excellent proof of the merit of a book ; wit- 
nefs Onania^ and the Filgrhn\ Progrefs. In- 
deed, my friend, I muft be candid v/ith you. I 
had much rather that boo-k had never been pub- 
liflied, for your own fake. I know the breath 
of prpfent approbation is apt to intoxicate i but 
if you will make anejlhnate of the 77ianners and 
principles of the times, you will own that it 
implies a difcredit to pleafe fuch an effeminate 
-debauched tafte as reigns at prefent ; and that 
no work which fucceeds now can poilibly meet 
the approbation of pofterity. And who would 
be at the pains of writing, if it vi'ere not for 
the hope of making his name immortal ?'* 
" All, fir, have not the fame fublime way 
of thinking) nor the abilities to execute it, 
G 2 which 
124- THE REVERIE. 
which you arc blefl'ed with ; but that mufl not 
make us jiegledl to improve the talent given us. 
Prefent fame in fuch matters as thefe is prefent 
profit J and that is the firft ohje6l to be defired 
in my humble flate. For the opinion of pofte- 
rity, I muft rely upon the manner in which you 
fhall pleaie to mention me in your works: but 
there is one thing in which I mufl have ex- 
prefTed myfelf imperfc6lly, as you fcem to have 
miftaken my meaning. When I mentioned 
eminent writers, I was far from defigning to 
rank you in a clafs with any other. There are 
degrees in eminence; the firft of which, I am 
I'enfible, you poficls alone, and that in fo dif- 
tinguiihed a maimer, that your writings only 
are fufEcicnt to vindicate the age from the re- 
proach of ignorance and barbariim. The emi- 
nence of other writers is only in comparifon to 
the common herd of mankind, and raifes them 
not to a level with you, " there fitting where 
they dare not foar." 
" Well, fir, if you think my name will be of 
Jervice to your book, I am laiisfied that you 
Ihould infert it ; and, to fave you, trouble will 
write that part myfeif, as I did on the former 
occafion. But, pray fir, do you not think it 
iieccifary to anfwer the objections made to your 
Jail book before you write another on the lame 
lubject ?" 
*' No, fir, not in the leaft ; I intend to fol- 
low your example, and take no notice of them." 
" But — fn— )our cafe and mine are quite 
tliiferent. My works are dcfigncd for future 
ages, and therefore cannot be affctlted by fuch 
feeble attacks. But yours, which are but the 
blollbms of a day, are liable to be blafled by 
by 
THE REVERIE. 125 
every breath of wind. The deep-rooted oak 
feels not the breeze that overturns the gawdy 
tulip." 
*' Pardon me, fir, I prefume not to make 
any comparifon. I am juftly fenfible of the dif- 
ference. Plowever, as I do not find that thev 
have been able to do me any prejudice, 1 fliafl 
take no trouble about them. You vi'ill oleafc 
V 
to let me have 3'our account of vour own 
works as foon as vou can, as I ihall fend the book 
to preis directly. Sir, your moft humble fervant.'* 
There was fomething fo defpicably mean and 
difrngenuous in thefe lall: fcenes, that 1 was 
really glad when they were ended. 
" You fee (faid my guide fmiling) how low 
ambition can ftoop. Of all the palfions which 
actuate the human heart, the ftrongcft and moft 
univerfal is the love of fame, next to thofe of 
felf-prefervation and continuing the fpecles j 
both of which even it often furmounts. 
'* To this in fome, however miftaken {qvx^q^ 
may every purfuit of man be traced. The fe- 
lon who fired the temple had the fame defire of 
an immortal name with him whofe better ge- 
nius prompted him to build it ; and moft of the 
atrocious crimes which difgrace the hiftory of 
mankind, may in fome meafure be deduced 
from the fame principle. 
" But of all the inftances of the tyranny of 
this paflion, the moft violent and at the faine 
time the moft abfurd in its effe6is, is literary 
ambition. 
" The obvious motive of a perfon's under- 
taking the laborious talT<: of writing to the pub- 
lick, is a benevolent defire to promote their 
happinefs, either by informing the underftand- 
^ 3 i"g^ 
126 THE REVERIE; 
ing, or alleviating the cares and anxiety of life 
by rational entertainment. — I mention not thofe 
whom neceflity drives to this n:iethod of lupply* 
ino; their wants. 
*' But there are very few who write from this 
motive alone ; and even of thofe who may hiive 
originally fet out with it, fcarce one perfevercs, 
without yielding to biafl'es of a nature directly 
contrary, and facrificing the moft facred prin- 
ciples of ftri6t and moral virtue to a vain luft of 
popular admiration, and a jealous envy of his 
competitors ; the virulence of which not only 
poifons the enjoyment of that fame which ho 
has already acquired, but alfo precipitates hira 
into fchemes for engroffing more, which dif- 
appoint his defign, and deprive him of what 
he really deferves." 
" Of the juftice of tliefe obfervations (faid I) 
tills perfon is a fufficient proof; but there is 
one thing 'the rcafon of which I cannot com- 
prehend, and that is the fervile complaifance 
with which the other author bore his haughti- 
ncfs, and the fulfome adulation he paid him in 
return ofhisinfults and cont<?mpt." 
" You may remember (anfwered he) I told 
you he was advanced to an honourable elfablifh- 
FTJcnt in his. profeflion. In virtue of that efta- 
blifhment he has many opportunities of pre- 
ferring others to very lucrative employments 
under him. This is the fecret motive of that 
behaviour in them both, which gave you fuch 
juft offence. 
'* Of all the profefnons of men, there Is not 
one vvhofe principles are fo pure from every 
reproach of this kind ay this ; yet fuch is the 
fuxce of hgqfian perverfion, that there is none /n. 
which 
THE REVERIE. 127 
whlchthofe vices of fervility and pride are fo uni-^ 
verfally pratf^ifed ; and that with ib little difguife, 
that, as if the very inliitution was inverted, the 
former is become the general means of rifing in 
it, while the latter is looked upon as the firfh 
prerogative of povi^er, and borne wrth patience, 
from an hope of exerting it on that exaltation 
which all al'pire to ; for, however ftrangc it 
may found in fpeculation, experience invaria- 
bly (hev/s that meannefs and pride fprins; from, 
the fame bafc principle, and always fucceed 
each other on a change of circumftances." 
G H A P. XXV. 
The pJeafwes of being a great 77ian, Myjleries in 
pQliiicks, One drawn-battle leaves roo7n for ans- 
tber. Children and fools fall out at play. 
" 'TT^URN your eye now (continued my 
A guide) to yonder little village, and be- 
hold a fhadow of human, grandeur, that may 
enable you to form a juft eftimate of the fub- 
flance. That perfon whom you fee embarraf- 
fed with the enfigns of ftate, and finking under 
the weight of his imaginary importance, was 
one of the principal fervants in his mafter's houfe. 
"So near a view of power fired him with an 
jimbition to exert it himfelf, though in the m oft 
limited delegation. Accord ingly,"" he prevailed 
with his niafter to make him fteward of that 
manor where he now is ; r.:>me particular cir- 
cumftances in the tenure of which oblige him 
to indulge the tenants with all the pagea7ury of 
G 4 power, 
/ 
128 T H K REVERIE. 
power, all the formalities of liberty, though 
without any of the real advantages of either. 
" Nor is the power entruftcd to their tem- 
porary governors more folid. 7 lie fcrvant of 
the fuperior fervants of his mafter, he goes 
with his hands tied up ; and aOs a part prc- 
fcribed for him, in which the lealf departure 
from his orders is immediately over-ruled, and 
hi? prefumption cheeked with a leverc repri- 
mand. 
" Such a mockery of command is the moft 
painful aggravation of fervitude. It is an in- 
fult that makes even wretchednefs more wretch- 
ed. Yet fo llrong is the vanity of the human 
heart, that the ineftimable advantages of inde- 
pendence are daily facriHced to this wcrthJers, 
empty fliew. 
*'How this mimic flate is fupported by thofc 
monarchs of a day, and what pleafure it af- 
fords to balance the pain of fuch a tantalizing 
iituatlon, you will foon fee. But that you may 
mere dillin(5ily underftand the fcene, which is 
juft ready to open, it is necefTary to give you 
a general flcetch of the principal things upon 
which it turns. 
" I obferved to you, that there are fome 
particular circumftances in the tenure of this 
manor. The chief of thefe, and that on 
which all the reft depend is, that " though 
^'' fubordinate to^ and dependent on the principal 
** manor y in ivhich the lord rrfides^ it is Jl ill a di- 
^^ JlinSl manor in itfelf, with a right to hold 
* courts^ and make laws, for its oiun government \ 
*' but that thefe laws are not to be of force y till 
'' they are approved of by the courts of the prin-r 
'' cipal 
THE REVERIE, 129 
" c'lpal inanor^ which courts have alfo a right to 
'* make laws to hind this^ 
" The perplexity and contradifllons in this 
complicated affairare too evident to require being 
pointed out ; yet, far from ftriving to remove 
them, in the proper management of this very 
perplexity confifts the w^hole myftery of the po- 
liticks of this manor. 
" For the ftewards, and thofe whom they 
can attach to their party by lucrative employ- 
ments, always make a pretext of the articles of 
fubordination and dependence^ to oppofe every at-- 
tcmpt made in the court-leet by the apparent 
friends of the manor, to promote its feparar.e 
intereft ; as, on the other hand, thofe friends 
eagerly catch at and infifl on the oppoiite ones, 
of its being a diJiiuSi manor ^ and having a right 
of making its own laws, to embarrafs the ordi- 
nary courfe of the government, and embroil the 
ftewards with the people, bypropofing laws in 
their confequences deilructive of that depen- 
dence ; 'till, wearied out by finding that their 
labour is in vain, or ("as is much oftener the 
cafe) obtaining fome place or penfion, the real 
objects which they had in view, they at length 
drop their oppolition, juft in the critical mo- 
ment when it might have been expelled to pro- 
duce fome important confequences. 
" Thus all thhigs remain in their former 
flate of uncertainty and confufioii ; each party 
thinking they have done enough in baffling the 
attempts of the other, and not abfolutely givinii; 
up the caufe of contention, but leaving the field 
open for future difputants, to try their fortunes 
on a more favourable occalion." 
G 5 "It 
130 THE REVERIE. 
" It muft appear ftr.inge to you, that the 
fteward fhould be ordered to obftfuiSl the in- 
tereft of a manor belonging to his lord. The 
whole fyftem of human politicks is incompre- 
henfible. The reafon for this conduft is this : 
The fituation of that manor is fo convenient 
for commerce, and the other natural advantages 
of it fo many, that they apprehend if it was not 
kept under by every difcouragcment and reflric- 
tion pofTibly reconcilable with the fainteft fha- 
dow of liberty, it would foon rival, if not run 
away with the trade of the principal manor, in. 
which its wealth almoft wholly confifts ; and 
confequently, as wealth- is the foundation of 
power, in time arife above its fubordination^^ 
and perhaps fhake ofF its dependence." 
'* One thing, by the way, I muft obferve to 
you, which makes this conteft ftill more ex- 
oradinary ; this is, that it fubfilKs entirely be- 
tween the manors themfelves, the inhabitants. 
being all connecflcd by every tie of nature, 
thofc of this manor, or their anccftors, having 
all removed from the principal one thither. 
" Such difcouragements and reftritflions are 
not fubmitted to without great relu6tancebythe 
inhabitants, who cannot fee themfelves cut oiT 
from making the proper advantages of the blcf- 
fings of nature, and languifliing in unneceflary 
poverty without repining, and indignation at a 
treatment vvhich appears to them equally in-' 
grateful andunjult; as they have always pre- 
ferved theii fdial duty to their mother-country 
untainted, and on all occafions difpla\ed the 
ileadiefl: attachment to its general intereft, and 
to the family of the prefent lord." 
^' Thefe 
THE REVERIE. j^t 
*' Thefe natural fentiments of the people are 
on every occafion inflamed to a degree of niad- 
iiefs, by a fet of men for that time called pa- 
triots, (I have told you the import of this 
word as it is ufed at prefenr) who, by pathetick- 
harar.gues on fo favourite a fubjcdt and pro- 
mifes of redrefTing thofe grievances, gain their 
confidence fo far as to be put at the head of a 
plaufible oppofiuon to the raeafurcsof the ftcw- 
ard, which they perfift in 'till their zeal is 
cured by a prcper application, and they obtain 
the objeds which they had all along in view. 
^ " Thus, you fee, 'the whole fecret of thefe 
difputes confifts in pelting each other with a fet 
of words which have no determinate meaning, 
and are therefore ufed in different fenfes by the 
oppofite parties, as occafion requires ; and that 
the controverfy may not be improperly be com- 
pared to a game of draughts, where a number of 
men are facrificed to raife one to power ; and 
when the game is ended all are promifcuoufiy 
throv^n by, and the antagoniiii, part as good 
friends as ever. 
*' But there is nothing in thefe difputes more 
unaccountable to inexperienced rcafon, than 
the manner in which they are carried on. As 
the event of the game is always forefeen, it 
fhould be imagined that they might play their 
cards coolly, and without wrangling about 
tricks which can make no alteration in the fuc- 
cefs. But the connary is always the cafe ,- 
and no fooner are they engaged, than, forget- 
ting that they are only playing booty on both 
fides, they fall together by the ears with "the 
moll virulent animoiity ; and dropping the mat-  
ter originally in difpute, break out into the 
G 6 groflcH; 
132 THE REVERIE. 
groffeft outrages of pcrfonal refledlion and 
abufe, as if the folc point to be gained was only 
who fhould make their antagonifts appear in 
the blackeft light. 
" Horrid as this more than brutal ferocity 
appears, it arifes from that fource of all evils, 
jnterefted defign. The worthy patriots are fen- 
lible that every ftroke they give the fuppofed 
opprelFors, affords the malignant pleafure of re- 
venge to thofe who think themfelves opprefied ; 
witn whom it alfo confirms their intereft, by 
lefiening their fears of a reconciliation, which 
they know by fad experience is always made at 
iheir cypence; as the oppofite party retort the 
ibufe thrown upon them with equal eagernefs.^ 
to obviate the defign of the others, and gratify 
a natural defire of revenge, and all without the 
lead regard to truth or juftice. 
'* Thus jfre the moft facrcd bands of fociety 
broken, to ferve a deteftable purpofe ; and 
wounds given often to the pureft charadters 
impoflible ever to be healed. 
" You now fee what a defirable obje£^ this 
fliadow of power is. Indeed the difagreeable 
circumrtances which attend it arc fo many, and 
fo foon diiTipate the intoxication of vanity, that 
very few would groan under them for the ap- 
pointed time, if their refolution v/r.s not fup- 
riorted by a profpcdt of gain, of which, though 
none ever ftood in lefs need, not one ever was 
more greedy than this perfon before us, whofe 
<->wn private condu6l has alfo aggravated all the 
unavoidable inconveniences of hi-i fituation, and 
made it many times more difagreeable than it 
need to be. 
(( 
For 
THE REVERIE. 133 
*' For as the nature of his office neceflarily 
embroiled him with the greater part of the te- 
nants, fo the haughtinef's of his behaviour has 
given fuch offence even to thofe whofe intereft 
it is to be upon good terms w^ith him, that moft 
of them have dropt all friendly intercourfe. 
Nay, fome have gone ftill farther, and, in the 
warmth of their refentment, threatened to call 
him to a fevere account for fome flights < they 
apprehend he has offered to their privileges, 
of the honour of which they are jealous to a 
degree of madnefs, as foon as he ihall be di- 
verted of his aflumed character, and defcend in- 
to his own : a threat equally difagreeable to 
the delicacy of his honour and his conftitu- 
tion." 
@0@€*®^^#®©<J*^€*@®^1J@@€^@® 
CHAP. XXVI. 
A good zvay to make up for a had market, Myjle- 
ries of Jiate-'pre ferment. Servants inuji not ad- 
vife their majiers. The comfortable effeds of mo- 
dern honour. An heavy cloud gatherings 
AS foon as my guide had concluded this ac- 
count, I turned my eyes to the pcrfon 
who had given occaficn to it. He was fitting, 
in a fumptuous apartment, and by the anxiety 
in his looks feemed to be waiting for fome body 
on bufinefs of importance. 
I had not obferved him long when the one 
he expelled entered, and advancing to him 
with an air of familiarity, which ieemed to 
a.^ree 
134 THE REVERIE. 
agree but badly with the difference in their ap- 
pearances, " Well, fir, (faid he) I have feen. 
thofe people, but do not find that any of them 
care to deal with us, though 1 oiiercd them 
Jumping pcnny-wortjis; for. 1 never liked ta 
ftand higgling lor a trifle one Vv:ay. or the 
other." 
" What can be the meaning of this ? (anr 
fwered the fteward) 1 thought thofe things werts 
always ready money ; none of my predeceflbrs 
ever miffed felling them." 
'* Very true, fir; f replied the other) but 
they had better times ; better times to make 
their markets in. At prefent every one is fo 
t^ken . up with the disputes in the court-leet, 
that they can mind nothing elfe. Iwifli.all 
thofe patriots^ and all the patriots that ever were, 
or ever will be, were at the devil. They do 
nothing but make difturbances wherever they 
are. The brokers, who ufed to find out cuf- 
torners for your predeceffors, imagine that thofe 
fellows will carry every thing before them this 
time..; and therefore do not care to meddle with 
the affair, for fear of being brought, into a 
fcrape with fuch a fpiteful crew ; and even the 
mob is fo ftrongly feized with this fame fpirit 
of patriotijm^ that the very toll-gatherers have 
refufed to buy a clerk-il:iip of the market ; nar 
has one of the militia men bid a fmglc penny 
for that vacant halbertj. fo that if it were not 
for what we goij by the fale of ihofe vicarages, 
we ihould have. made a damned bad. hand of- it 
indeed." 
" This is bad luck ; (returned the fteward, 
fhrugging up his ihoulders) damned bad luck ; 
buit we muft try to bring it up fome other way. 
My 
THE REVERIE. 135 
I^y wife was fpealcing to me this morning about 
a fcheme fhe has got in her head, of inviting 
all her female acquaintances to make a party at 
Loo every funday evening, when fhe does not 
fear Gripping them of every penny in their 
pockets, by her dexterity at packing the cardr, 
and flipping P^;«. Now, I think it would be 
no bad addition to her fcheme for me to get 
the men together at the fame time at dice, 
when your old trick of cogging might be of 
rare ufej efpeciallyas I fhould be ready to wit^ 
nefs for you upon all occafions, and even bear 
you through by my authority, fhould you be fo 
unlucky as to be caught. Eh I what do you 
think of this ?" 
" Why, faith, (faid the other) very well. It 
may do very well. As to my being catched, let 
me take care of that. I have not pradif.d fo 
long among the expertcfl: hands in the county- 
town, to be catched now by a parcel of coun- 
try-bumpkins. Or, even if any of theiri fhouid 
fufpecSt me, I know how to bring myfelfofF. 
It is but pretending to be affronted, il-rippino- 
directly, challenging him to fight, and beiore he 
can be on his guard, hitting him a plump in the 
bread-bafket, that fliall make him throw up his 
accounts \ and I'll engage he will have but 
very little flomach to accufe me after. Many 
a fcrape of the kind have I bufikd through in 
this manner, vv'here a faint-hearted fellow would 
have confeiled the fa6t, and been dipped in an, 
horfe-pond. No ! No ! Let me deal with iheni. 
Nay, for that matter, you know I can brirVg 
others off too, belides myfelf. You would not 
h.^ve efcaped with a little dry drubbing that day, 
!£;■ 
3.. 
136 THE REVERIE. 
if I had not played a good ftick in your de- 
- fence. Never fear me; I can fight.'* 
" Well, (interrupted the fleward, who did 
not feem much pleafed with the latter part of 
his fpeech) but muft we let thofe fellows, thofe 
patriots^ go on thus, without oppofition ? Is 
there nothing to be done to flop them ?" 
*< Why, aye ! (faid the other) that is juft 
what I was going to mention. I think the befl 
way is for me to go down dire£^]y to the court* 
Jeet, which is now fitting, and try what a little 
bullying will do, fince fair words have failed. 
I have known a kick and a cufF prevail more 
than an hundred fine fpceches before now. If 
they fhould run reftive, 1 am not afraid to take 
a bout with the beft man among them. I have 
not forgot my old knack at a crofs-buttockyet ; 
that I have not. But, that's right ! IVhat 
do you defign to do about that place of keeper 
of the court-rolls ? I have a thought jufl come 
into my head, that may perhaps be better than 
giving it to any of thofe fellov/s. What do you 
think of giving it to me, and I will return you 
half the profits ; or, if I can fell it, half the 
purchafe-money ?" 
^' Give it to you ! (anfwered the flewardj 
How can that be ? You are no lawyer ; and 
you know that place has always been in the 
hands of one of that profeffion. The lafl was 
reckoned the ablefl attorney in the whole 
country." 
" If the lafl was an able attorney, (replied 
the other) his predecefTor knew no more of the 
matter than myfelf ; fo that we can eafily get 
over that objection." 
"But 
THE REVERIE. 137 
" But then, your offer is quite too low ; (ad- 
ded the fteward) half the profit, or half the 
purchafe- money ! No! no! That will never 
do. But if you have a mind to take it at one 
fourth of the profit, or purchafe, you fhall even 
have it ; and you (hould confider that this is 
jufl fo much for nothing ; all clear gains." 
'< With all my heart, (faid the other) be 
that as you pleafe. I mentioned it folely for 
your advantage, as you are not likely to make 
any thing of it, as matters go. I had no view 
to myfelf at all in propofing it. Well j now 
if you have nothing elfe to fay to me, I will go 
and fee what I can do at the court-leet." 
** Nothing (anfwered the fleward) but to 
u'ifh you fuccefs : and, do you hear ! let me 
fee you as foon as you return. I fhall be im- 
patient to know what pall'es." 
As foon as this neccflary perfon was gone, 
the fteward began to prepare for the reception 
of a vifitor, who was to be treated with a little 
more ceremony. 
This was one of the principal gentlemen in 
the manor, in whom age had cooled every paf- 
fion but that of attachment to his intereft, in 
which he was now fo clofely connected with 
the fteward for the time, though he had long 
been one of their warmeft oppofers, that, with- 
out the leaft attention to their perfons or private 
chara(Sfers he aflifted to carry on the bufinefs of 
his office with all his power. 
The pains which the fteward took upon this 
important occafion were fufticient to have made . 
laughter burft his fides. He placed himfelf be- 
fore a large glafs, where he adjufted his drefs, 
moulded his vifage into due dignity, and prac- 
tifed 
13? THE R E V E R I E. 
tifed the nod of ftate with a proper mixture of 
condefcenfion and pride. 
Juft as he had finifhed conning over hi.s lef- 
fon, the gentleman entered, and paying his 
compliments to him in a polite and rei'pecirul 
manner, which the other returned with more 
than Spaniih gravity and pride, ** I am come^ 
fir, (faid he) to talk to you about thofc people 
who have given you fo much trouble ever 
fmce you have been in your prefent office. I 
am afraid you have not taken the proper me- 
thod of treatino- them. I am well acouainted 
with their tempers, and know what way they 
are to be managed. It is better to comply a 
little with a let of wrong-headed men, than be 
continually involved in broils, which at beft 
can bring nothing but vexation.'' 
" Comply with them, fir! (anfwered the 
fteward, putting on an air of importance) No, 
fir ; that I fhall not. I know the dignity of 
my ftation, and fhall never debafe it by making 
compliances with a beggarly mob." 
" Sir ! fir ! (replied the other) this way of 
fpeaking may do you much harm. In this fame 
beggarly mob are many perfons upoi;i a level 
with any man in his private capacity, and who 
are fo far from begging from others, that all 
they defire is to keep their ovi'n. 1 have (een: 
too much of th fe di.'putes, and know by ex- 
perience that nothing is to be done with thefe 
people but by fair means. You may buy, 
but can never bully tlu^m into any thing. In 
a word, fir, you are fent to do your lord's bu- 
{rnefs; which you mud be.content to do in the 
l^eit manner you can," 
THE REVERIE. 13^ 
" I believe, fir (returned the ftevvard, fwell- 
mg his nofe like an angry turkey-cock) you 
forget whom you fpeak to, or you would not 
prefume to talk in fuch a manner. The bufi-. 
nefs muft be done by thofc who are hired to 
d.o it, who muft work for their wages as they 
are ordered, whether they like it or not. Now, 
i;r, as you are one of thofe,! tell you that I want 
your obedience and not your advice; and that 
if any thing mifcarries, 1 fhall impute the fault 
to you, and Jit ike you off the liji. I fuppofe 
you have a private underftanding with thofe 
fallows, that makes you fo fanguine in their 
behalf; but you muft remember that you are 
not at the head of your mob now ; and there- 
fore muft not think to parly with your mafters,. 
and make conditions as you did then. The 
mo7mnt you capitulated you lojl your confequence ;. 
and now are no more than any common hire- 
ling." 
' It is impoflible to defcribe the condition- 
into which this fpeech threvy the perfon to 
whom it was addrefed. Confcious of the juftice 
of what he faid, the bafe and defpicable ftate 
to which he was fallen ftruck him with the 
fevereft remorfe and anguifti of foul. He ftood 
for fome moments in a confli^l of paffions, 
which deprived him of the power of making an; 
anfwer ; till, iqnpalience at the imputation of 
guilt, however juft, by the falfe pride of man, 
called honour^ rifing fupcrior to all the reft, 
and taking pofteflion of his whole foul, he re-, 
folved to do himfelf immediate jiy^ice, (or (or 
grofs an aff'ront. 
C H A l\ 
I40 THE REVERIE. 
CHAP. XXVII. 
AJirange apparition difperfes the chud. A new me- 
ihod of making a goodjiezuard. The perilous ad- 
ventures of the knight of the halter^ with other 
favoury matters. 
JUST as he was going to execute this re- 
folution, open flew the door, and in rufh- 
ed a perfon with an halter about his neck, and 
every fign of the moft violent fear in his whole 
appearance. His lengthened vifage was as pale 
as death. His eyes rolled wildly round the 
room, and his knees knocked together, as he 
ran and threw himfelf at the fteward's feet, un- 
able to fpeak a word. 
The Iteward, whofe delicate nerves were 
inftantly fufceptiblc of the leaft affright, ftarted 
back in horror from fo terrible an object ; and 
would certainly have fallen to the ground, had 
not the gentleman who was with him, forget- 
ting his refentment, or thinking him beneath it, 
ran to his fupport ; at whofe repeated defire he 
ventured to lift up his eyes, when he made 
a fhift to recognize his valiant friend, who had 
left him not long before to go and bully the 
court-leet. 
While he was gazing in aftonifhmcnt at fo 
llrange a fight, the terrified trembling wretch, 
though ftill under the illufion of his fears, re- 
covered ftrength enough to cry out, " O fave 
me ! fave me ! They are coming ! they are 
coming.'* 
«« Such 
THE REVERIE. 141 
Such an exclamation awoke the fteward 
from his ftupefacStion. He took the alarm, 
and throwing his haggard eyes around the room, 
returned at the fame inftant, in a feeble faul- 
tering voice, " Wh — wh — who are coming?" 
There was fomething fo extraordinary in this 
fcene, that the other gentleman, who was ready 
to burft with laughter at the droll fiaure 
which the fteward and his friend cut, ftaring 
and ftammering at each other, could not tell 
what to make of it. 
When he had enjoyed the fight for fome 
time, he fpoke to the Knight of the HaU 
ter^ who was ftill upon his knees with his 
hands joined together, and lifted up in a fup- 
pliant pofture, and telling him his danger was 
over, be it what it would, he ftooped to take ofF 
that apparent caufe of his fear. 
But no fooner did he touch it, than the other, 
whofe imagination was ftill full of the fcene he 
had juft gone through, miftaking him for one 
of his purfuers, fell at length upon the floor, for 
he was unable to rife, and roared out with all 
his might, " O fpare me ! murder ! mercy ! 
fpare me ! fpare me ! I never will attempt the 
like again ! never fay or do any thing oilenfive 
to the people, or prejudicial to the intereft of 
this manor, while 1 live ! O fpare me ! fpare 
me" 
l^his exclamation, while it feemed to di- 
re(St the gentleman's conjectures to the caufe of 
the wretch's fright, made him ftill more ear- 
neftly curious to learn the particulars of it. 
For this purpofe he raifed him from the ground, 
and by many foothing and encouraging expref- 
fions, at length reftored him to his fenfes. 
As 
142 THE R E V E R I E. 
As foon as he had recovered himfelffo as t6 
be able to fpeak, " O, fir, (faid he to theftew- 
ard, who had ftood all this while {taring at him 
without power to utter a word) what have I 
undergone fince I faw you ? never will I enter 
that court-leet again, while 1 live. I hope the 
doors of this houfe are fhut, and that there is 
no danger of their purfuing me, even here." 
'' Who jQiould purfue you, fir? (anfwered the 
gentleman, for the fleward had not yet opened 
his mouth, and this fpeech was far from reftor- 
mg his fpirits) or what have you undergone to 
put you in fuch a fright ? vou fee you are fafe 
here : no one dares to enter this place in pur- 
fuit of you. Compofe yourfelf then, dear fir> 
and tell us what has happened to you." 
The knight of the halter at this went to the 
door, and clapping his ear to the key-hole, to 
liften whether there was any noife, bolted it laft, 
and then returned to the fteward, who had by 
this time recovered himfelf i-o far, as to make 
a fliift to repeat the defire of the other gen'tle- 
man, that he fhould tell what had happened. 
'' As foon as I left you, fir (fiudhe, throw- 
ing his eye every moment towards the door) I 
went diredly to the court-leet, where I took 
the firft opportunity to do as I had faid ; for one 
of the jury-men happening juft then to drop 
fome expreffions of diflike at your manner of 
doing bufmefs, I took him up fliort j and faid, 
that he deferved to be well drubbed for his in- 
folence, in prefunjing to find fault with his 
mailer; and that if they did not do their duty 
they {hould be made to do it; or their courts 
ihould be taken away from them* and their 
manor 
THE REVERIE. 143 
manor governed by the laws of the principiU 
manor, without all this fufs and trouble. 
" At thefe words the whole court took fire, 
every one calling out to me at the fame in- 
ftant for fatisfadb'on. But I was prepared for 
this, and therefore, to go through with my 
I'cheme, I roared out as loud as they, that 1 
was ready to fight the beft man among them, 
in fupport of what I had faid, and for a guinea 
by, if they pleaied, and inftantly began to 
ftrip. 
'* But they foon let me know that this was 
not the way of fighting they chofej for, like a 
parcel of blood-thiifly villains, they in^lantly 
clapped their hands to their fwords, faying, 
they fcorncd that vulgar manner, and expelled 
the fatisfa<5lion due to a gentleman, which I 
might take my choice of fword or piflol, to 
give, as I liked. 
" But I begged their excufc there. I liked 
neither: for, though I could give and take 
as hard knocks as the befi: of them, I knew 
nothing of their damne<i fwords and piflols ; I 
had never beenufed to them; and did not chufe 
to run the hazard of lofing my life to learn 
now. I therefore thought it beft to try if I 
could not fatisfy them fome other way ; and 
accordingly as foon as I could be heard, begged 
their pardon if I had faid any thing to give 
them offence, and promifed to take better care 
for the future. 
" The reafon of this fudden change in my 
manner of fpeaking was too evident. 7^hey 
intiantly turned from me with a contempt 
worfe than any thing but their anger; and 1 
began to hope that 1 fhould come off with a 
' fpic 
144 THE REVERIE. 
fpit in the face, or a kick on the breech at 
worft. 
" But unfortunately the affair had taken 
wind, and juft as I was going to fteal away, in 
broke the mob in the moft violent fury ; and 
while fome of them laid hold of me, the reft 
behaved in the moft outrageous manner, railing 
at you and all your friends, and breaking open 
every room in the houfe in fearch of you. 
" As they were at this work, fome of them 
happening to find your fteward's gown and cap, 
one unlucky dog ran out, and in an inftant re- 
turning with the great %uooden-?nan that you 
have feen ftanding as a fign at the ale-houfe 
door in the next ftreet, they dire<Si:ly clapped 
your gown and cap upon it, and placing it in 
your chair at the upper end of the hall, called 
it by your name and faid, it was juft as good a 
fteward as your honour. 
" There was fomething fo droll and ridicu- 
lous in the figure you cut (I mean the wooden- 
man in your gown and cap) that provoked and 
terrified as I was, I could fcarce refrain from 
laughing along with the reft ; efpecially when 
one of them ftooping behind the chair, made 
a fpeech for you, that feemed to come from 
the wooden-man, and took off" your voice and 
manner to the life. 
" But this was all a joke to what followed. 
For no fooner were they tired with ridiculing 
and abufing you in this manner, than turning 
all their rage upon me, they threw that halter 
about my neck, and led me away to hang me on 
thatgreat high fign- poft before your door, where 
fome of them had even the aflurance to talk of 
hangi.ng 
THE REVERIE. 145 
hanging you alfo, if ever they fhould lay hands 
upon you." 
" But, luckily, juft as we came to the fatal 
poft, one of the jurymen, more moderate than 
the reft, and a great favourite of the mob, hap- 
pened to meet us, and, laying before them the 
confequence of fuch an acStion, by much a do 
procured me an opportunity to make my 
efcape in hither; which I did in the manner 
you faw, without even flopping to take off the 
haFter from about my neck, as I imagined they 
were all at my heels. And I heartily wifh, 
that [we were well out of this damn'd riotous 
place ; for I am very much afraid that now the 
mob is rifen, they will break into the houfe, 
and hang us all up." 
It is impoffible to defcribe the different ex- 
preflions of fear which fuccelTively appeared in 
the fteward's face, while the other was telling 
this ftory : jaft: at the terrible conclufion of 
which, a cat happening to darta-crofs the room 
after a moufe, his apprehenfions immediately 
took the alarm, and imagining the mob was 
breaking in, he gave a loud fhriek, and fell 
down in a fwoon. 
The gentleman inftantly ran to his afliffance ; 
but the moment he ftooped over him, he re- 
ceived fuch a favour from the effects of the poor 
man's fright, that he ftarted back, and clappinp- 
his handkerchief to his nofe, ran to the other 
fide of the room. 
The knight of the halter, who was now pret- 
ty well recovered, perceived what had hap- 
pened, and calling -the fervants, gave their 
mafter into their care. 
Vol. L H CHAP. 
146 T H E R E V E R I E. 
CHAP. XXVill; 
An appearance of danger the mofl convincing ar- 
gument, A flrange chara5ier of a Ji range fori 
of people. The bcjl fou7iclaiion for popularity^ 
T'he myflery of patriotifyn^ with jorne low preju- 
dices of education. 
THE firft thing the fteward did, as foon 
as he came a little to himfelf, and had 
got over Tome of the various efFe£ts of his fright, 
was, to fend for the gentleman, and tell him, 
that his confidence in his friendfhip was fo 
great, he was refolved to be guided entire- 
ly by his advice for the future ; and ac- 
cordingly he gave him power to make what 
terms he thought proper, with thofe whom he 
had held in fuch contempt but a few hours be- 
fore. 
The gentleman had now an opportunity of 
returning the haughtinefs with which the 
fteward had treated him in the morning ; but 
thinking that fuch a manifold humiliation as 
he had undergone funk him beneath his refent- 
ment, he fcorned to take any farther advantage of 
it, than jufl: to give him fome advice, how to 
carry on the bufmefs of his ofEce with lefs 
difgrace to himfelf, and lefs trouble to thofe 
concerned with him, than he had hitherto 
done. 
2 Ac- 
THE REVERIE. 147 
Accordingly, " How, fir, (faid he) can you 
Condefcend to take advice from me? and 
make compliances with a beggarly mob ?" 
*'Dear Sir, (interrupted the lleward, alarmed 
at his mentioning things which tended only to 
make matters worfe) do not think of any thing 
that is paft ! I am forry, very forry ! — and beg 
your pardon moft fmcerely." 
" You defire me, fir, (replied the gentle- 
man, without deigning to take any notice of 
his apology) to bring about a reconciliation 
between you and thofe gentlemen, on what- 
ever terms I think proper. Before any terms 
are offered, it will be necefTary to alter fome 
things at which they have taken juft offence. 
Till this is done, it is in vain to attempt a 
reconciliation ; or even fhould a kind of one be 
patched up for the prefent, it is impoflible it 
Ihould be fmcere, or lafling ; and then, the 
fecond difagreement will be worfe than the 
firft. 
" Now, fir, if you are willing that I fhould 
point out thefe things with freedom and can- 
dour, and will promife to alter them, in cafe I 
Ihcw juft reafon for it, I fhall moft readily un- 
dertake to reftore harmony between you and 
them yet ; and am not in any doubt, but I ihall 
be able to accomplifh it." 
" My dear friend, (returned the fteward, 
overjoyed at thefe words) I fhall hear any thing 
you fay with the greateft pleafure, and will 
pun£tually follow your advice in every parti- 
cular." 
" I muft inform you then, fir, (faid the 
gentleman) that you fet out upon a wrong 
principle in your behaviour to the tenants of 
H 2 this 
148 THE REVERIE. 
this manor, on your firfl coming among 
them ; and this laid the foundation of all the 
uneafmefTes which have arifen between you 
fince. 
" The charadlerifticks of thefe people are 
pride ^ hofpitalityy and courage ; all which a 
iiatural impetuofity of temper makes them apt 
to carry into extreams." 
"As moft of them are defcended from, or 
allied to the beft families in the whole country, 
and as they enjoy, in appearance at leaft, the 
fame honours and privileges here as the tenants 
of the principal manor do, though they are fen- 
fible that thej want the effential part of them, 
"which is power, they look upon themfelves as 
on a level with any of their lord's tenants, and 
are ready to take fire at the leaft flight which 
they apprehend to be offered, either to them- 
selves or their darling privileges. 
" As to their hofpitality, it is acknowledged 
In terms of the higheft refpe6l, by all who have 
ever happened to come among them ; and 
though they have not equal fortunes with you 
of the principal manor, the cheapnefs of their 
country, or their wanting opportunity to gra- 
tify many of the moft expenfive artificial wants, 
"which dillipate the wealth of the others, en- 
ables them to indulge the generofity of their 
tempers in a manner which very few other peo- 
ple have any notion of; and for their courage, 
it is too well known all over the country, to 
require any proof. 
'' Do not think, fir, that I am labouring an 
unmerited panegyrick on people, becaufe we 
happen to be of the fame country. I am above 
fuqh a vain, weak prejudice, and fpeak my - 
opinion 
THE REVERIE. 149 
opinion as difpaflionatcly as I fhould on any 
point of meer fpcculation. 
*' Far from being inclined to flatter them, l- 
am fenfible that thefe qualities are too often 
carried, as I have faid before, into an extream, 
which makes them ceafe to be virtues. Their 
pride hurries them into violations of the moft 
amiable of the focial virtues ; their hofpitality 
fwells into profufion, and ends in intemperance ; 
and their courage, by being made fubfervient to 
miftalcen notions of honour, on every trifling 
occafion degenerates into a favage fiercenels 
that is a difgrace to humanity. 
" Now, fir, in^cad of paying attention to 
thefe foibles, (to call them no better) and at- 
taching them to you by a proper addrcfs, as a 
moment's cool refledlion would have fugj^efled, 
by an unlucky miftake you either overlooked 
them quite, or thought them not worth fhev/"- 
ing any regard. 
'' Thus you treated themfelves with haugh- 
tinefs, and fhewed an open contempt for their 
idolized privileges. You exprefled a difap- 
probation of the hofpitality with which they 
entertained you, and ran into the oppofitci 
extream yourfelf to a fhameful decree ; and 
you afFeiSied to inveigh againft the vicious ex- 
cefs of courage, with an indifcrlminate afpeiity 
that feemed to betray a general want of it. 
'' Confider a moment, ^and you will confcfs 
that the confequences of this conduct could 
not avoid being difagreeable. They returned 
your haughtinefs with hatred. Your avov/ed 
contempt of their privileges alarmed their ap~ 
prehenfions of an invafion of them, and poi- 
foned the weapons they prepared for their de- 
li z fences 
"^ 
150 THE REVERIE. 
fence J and the leaft fufpicion of want of fpirit 
finks a man into the loweft degree of con- 
tempt. 
*' I am fenfihle, fir, that it muft be very dif- 
agreeable to you, to hear thefe things. Be af- 
fured it is not lefs fo to me to repeat them ; but 
before a wound can be healed, it muft be probed 
to the bottom. A falfe tendernefs only pre- 
vents the cure. 
" What Lwould advife therefore is, that you 
fhould immediately treat the gentlemen of the 
manor with politenefs and refpe6l, and as your 
equals, except in the office which you have the 
honour to fill : that you fnould partake of 
their hofpitality with an appearance of fatisfac- 
tion, and return it with grace and magnifi- 
cence ; and that you fhould take all oppor- 
tunities of rewarding true courage, to ihew 
that your diflike is only to the vicious ex- 
tream. 
" If you obferve thefe few fhort hints, I will 
engage that you recover the refpe6l of the te- 
nants ; and then every thing you defire follows* 
I fpeak from experience. I have known great 
things done, folely by this condu6t. This was 
the fecret that won one of your predeceflbrs the 
hearts of the whole mob, and kept them fo 
Guiet all the time of the riots in the next ma- 
i. 
nor, by which he gained fuch honour: and 
no one who has obferved this rule has ever 
failed to do his bufinefs without trouble ; as it 
obviates every attempt to make him perfonally 
difliked, the firft ftep to embarrafling his mea- 
fures. 
'' Nor is there any difficulty to difcourage the 
atten^jpt. . Affability amply rewards itfelf in the 
pJeafures 
THE REVERIE. 151 
pJleafures of friendly intercourfe, aud a proper 
politenefs is the moft certain way of preferving 
refpecft. 
" As for hofpitality, it in fome meafnre in- 
cludes every focial virtue, and yields fuch hap- 
pinefs in the exertion, as often over-balances 
prudence, and leads into profufion. 
" It is inconceivable vv^hat extraordinary 
things have been and may be done, by this vir- 
tue only. It gains the moft folid and ex- 
tenfive influence. No refolution is proof againft 
the pleafures of a genial hour. Among thefe 
people in particular, the very cxcefs of hofpita- 
lity is of more weight than every other virtue, 
and even compenfates for the want of all the 
reft. Give them but drink enough^ and do 
with them what you pleafe. They can fee no 
fault in the man who makes them drunk ; they 
will fee no virtue in him who will not. 
" It was this, and this only, that enabled me 
to maintain fuch an abfolute power over them, 
as I did for many years. My houfe was always 
open, and my table flowed with wine ; but, 
when I had any point to carry, I broke through 
all bounds. I preflTed them to drink ; I fet 
them an example myfelf ; and in the height of 
their fpirits iiever was refufed any thing I afked, 
however contrary to the dilates of reafon, or 
intereft. 
" In thefe unguarded moments, the charms 
of hofpitality are irrefiftible; nor will pride 
permit them to revoke in a cooler hour what 
they have then promifed. The harangues of 
orators^ the promifes of patriots^ make no im- 
preflion, unlefs the head is warmed with wine, 
10 receive them with proper force. 
H 4 "As 
152 T H E R E V E R I E. 
" As for thoie pat}iotSy there is one unerring 
way of dealing with them. Treat them witli 
complaifance, and an appearance of regard, 
and you take ofF half their confequencc. The 
mob will immediately imagine, that there is a 
fecret underftanding between you and them, 
and defert them with indignation; by which 
they will be obliged to fubmit to your own 
terms, without even the trouble of a formal 
capitulation. 
" For, to capitulate they always intend, be 
their profeffions never fo fanguine and high, as 
ibon as they have fatisfied their pafiion for po- 
pularity, and their price is offered; being con- 
vinced that their oppofition in reality fignifies 
Jiothing when combated thus v/ith addrefs; and- 
that their cbiifequence confilfs merely in thej,^^ 
want of judgment in their opponents, though 
they are permitted to play out their farce, to 
keep up an illufion fo pleafing to the people, 
and fave appearances. 
" Thefe are the principal things neceflary, 
indeed indifpenfibly neceliary, to carry you 
through your office with eafe and reputation ; 
though there are alfo fome others which will be 
found very conducive to that defirahle end, and 
which I fhall therefore take tjie liberty jufl co* 
touch upon (lightly. 
" This manor, though it has made larfre'rd- 
vances of late, is yet a century behind the prin- 
cipal orje, in the refinements of luxury and li- 
berties of pleafure. Many things therefore, 
which are conftantly pra<Stii'ed there, canhot be 
clojie amono: us, without hazard of civinsr of- 
leiice to prejudiced weak minds. 
« One 
THE REVER LE, 153: 
" One inftance will be fuflicfent to prove 
this, and lerve for a rule to judge by in other 
cafes. 
" The belief of a revealed religion is yec 
pretty general here, and the forms of it there- 
fore neceflary to be obferved with an appear- 
ance of refpe6i:, as the vulgar and ignorant are 
apt to entertain a difadvantageous opinion of 
perfons who '(light them. 
" For this reafon the polite cuftom o^ phy^ 
ing at cards ^ on the days appointed for reUglcus: 
duties^^ which prevails .fo univerfally among, 
people of fafhion with you, is looked upon here 
with a kind of horror, as a manifeft violation 
of laws- human and divine. I therefore think 
the public pra6lice thereof improper, in your 
'houfe efpecially, to which all are apt to raife 
their eyes for example ; not that I am infenfi- 
ble of the convenience of luch an a2;recab]c wav ' 
of pafling a tedious evening, which fuperllitioii 
has devoted to idlenefs. 
*' B/it, befuie this reafon, there is another 
alfo, which makes gaming^ not only on thefc 
days, but at any time, highly improper in ^oyr 
family. It is a maxim with ganiefters always 
t^ deny their winnings, always to magnify their 
lofs. Now, when it is known than there is 
deep gaming carried on at your houfe, when alL 
who go' there are iieard to complain of their 
lofies, and none to own their gains, the con- 
clufion formed by the generality of the' world' 
will be .very unfavourable. They will imagiYie' 
that you do not play fair ; pr, atleafV, that yoirr-- 
expertnefs gives you an advantage, which. it ^ - 
u^nfieneYous to take :" and there is no cbara^er 
which thefe low-bred people hold in grtat:<?r de-v» 
H 5. ' ' tcftatioi^' 
354 THE REVERIE. 
.tcj^^on than that of a gambler^ or cheat at play^ 
though in never Co genteel life or high ftation ; 
with which their prejudice is fo ftrong, that they 
cannot aflbciate any one virtue, or good quality^ 
" I fhall not trouble you with any farther 
particulars. I have now given you my advice, 
with freedom and fmcerity ; and, if you approve 
of it, fhall be proud of alTifting you to put it in 
practice." 
" §tr, (anfwered the fteward, who was now 
. ful^iclently humbled*"to hear anything, and had 
06^ all this time, like a fchool-boy that had 
€een caught robbing an orchard, while his 
mafter reads him a lecture on the eighth com- 
mandment,without any other-thoughtbut getting 
out of his prefent fcrape at any rate) I am much 
obliged to you for your friendfliip ; and fhall 
obferve every thing that you have faid with the 
greatefl care. But, in the mean time, if you 
think it proper, I fhould be very glad that you 
would take fome method of letting thofe people 
know my rcfolution, and fettling matters with 
them tipon fome amicable footing ; for I can- 
not bear to live any longer in this horrid way. 
As I faid before, 1 fubmit the terms intirely to 
you, and fhal] confirm whatever you pleafe to 
<lo. 
'^ Such nn unlimited commiflion flattered the 
gentlemaji's 'aniiy, as it proved hisconfequence 
with both fiues. Accordingly he undertook it 
with pleafure, and acquitted himfelf with fuch 
addrers,that in a ihort time all parties appeared 
fatisiied, and the fteward had a profpe6t of a 
little peace to enjoy his grandeur, after fo much 
trouble and aftright." 
C H A P. 
T H E R E V E R I E. 155 
CHAP. XXIX. ■' 
J! famous war-fcene. The modern art of general- 
Jhip, A new method of reformation^ with the 
lamentable hijlory of a penitential procejjion, 
*' He that's convincd againft his imll 
^^ Is of his own opinion JiilL^^ — 
THOUGH the fteward, to extricate ^vtni-: 
fclf from the difficulties in which he was 
entangled, had aflented to every thing the gen- 
tleman propofed, there was fomething fo con- 
trary to his natural difpofition in the fcheme of 
life laid down for him, that he very foon grew 
weary of it, and performed his part with fuch 
a bad grace, as in a great mcafure deftroyed the 
merit even of what he did. 
While he was plodding on thus, through 
thick and thin, an affair happened that (hewed 
his chaiadler in a new light. 
A gang of outlawed fmugglers had landed m 
a remote part of the manor that lay upon the 
fea-fide, to look for fome provifions and other 
necefiaries, of which they were in great want. 
The inhabitants not erring to have any 
dealings with them, hunger forced them to pil- 
lage two or three cottages near the place of 
their poultry ; and to fend a threatning mef- 
iage to the next village, that if they were not 
immediately fupplied with fome bread and cheefe 
and a barrel of beer, they would go and plunder 
thatalfo. 
H 6 Sue I 
J56 THE REVERIE. 
Such a piece of Infolence provoked the young 
fellows of the village fo highly, that they bran- 
diflied their cudgels, and were for marching off" 
dire<Stly to attack them. But there happening to 
live two or three warm pedlars in the place, who 
did not chufe to run the hazard of having their 
packs rumaged by fuch cuftomers, in cafe the 
young fellows ihould be over-matched, they 
prevailed upon the parifh-officers to comply 
with the demand; and in the mean time fent 
an account of the affair to the fteward, that he 
might take proper methods for driving thofe 
fellows away. 
Bad news encreafes fafter in its progrefs than 
SI fnow-ball. The account, by the time it reach- 
ed the fteward, was exaggerated in the moft 
formidable manner. Thefmugglers, who were 
only a few fhabby half-fiarved wretches, were 
multiplied into an army, provided with every 
military appointment; and the courage and con- 
duct of their captain raifed to an equality with 
the greateft generals of the age. 
Such a reprefentation was far from being a- 
grceable to the Iteward. He immediately fum- 
moned all the principal gentlemen of the ma- 
nor, to confulfwhat was proper to be done 
m fuch an emergency ; and after hearing all 
their opinions ; that the affair was of fo little 
confequence, it would be fufficient to fend the 
petty conffable, with his attendants, he gal- 
lantly declared his refolution to raife the Po//^ 
©f the manor; and march againft them himfeJf* 
" Gentlemen (faid he, fetting the button of 
his hat before, and looking fiercely) I know 
inore of this matter than you imagine, perhaps* 
1 have been a ferjeant of militia for fome years,. 
and 
THE REVERIE. 157 
and know how to give the word of command, 
Prefent your firelock ! — To the right about ! — 
Shoulder your mufket ! — Fire ! — Aye ! aye ! Let 
me alone, I know what to do, I will teach them 
what it is to have a foldier to deal with." 
Accordingly he gave orders to have the Poffe 
raifed dire(Si:ly ; and as he knew that fighting was 
only one part of the duty of a commander, he 
refolved to (hew the extent of his abilities, by 
making proper preparations for his important 
expedition. 
The buftle and hurry on fuch an occafion 
kept up his fpirits for that day pretty well j 
but upon confulting his pillow, he found that 
of all the occupations of ambition, war was 
leaft agreeable to his conftitution. He con- 
fidered, that be the enemy never fo few, a 
fmgle Ihot would do his bufmefsi that his own 
piftol might burft, orhismen fire aukwardly, or 
in fhort a thoufand accidents happen which he 
had no defire to be in the way of. 
Nor was his refolution raifed any higher by 
the advices he received the next morning; and 
which were continually coming in one upon the 
heels of another, each ftill more terrible than 
the laft. 
In this diftrefs he bethought himfelf, that as 
it was impofiible for him to draw back now, 
without expofing himfelf to contempt for ever, 
his only refourcewas to wafte time in making 
preparations, till the fmugglers, either terrified 
at the report, orcontent with their booty, fhould 
think proper to go ofF. 
Accordingly he fet all hands to work to put 
the old guns, piftols, fwords, and bayonets, 
that were ftuck up as trophies in the manor- 
3 ball 
158 THE REVERIE. 
hall, in order ; and particularly to fcoiir a rujly 
fuit of arinour that had hung there for ages, 
which he defigned to wear himfelf, for fear of 
accidents, confidering prudently that the fafety of 
an army often depends upon that of their leader. 
While all this was doing no body feemed (o 
bufy as he, running here and there, urging the 
workmen to make hafte, and giving them new 
orders every moment, which countermanded 
the laft. 
But all thefe great preparations might have 
been fpared ; for the fmugglers had been fo 
roughly handled by fome of the country-fel- 
iows, whom they had attempted to rob of their 
butter and eggs ; and who, if they had any arms, 
would have let but few of them go home to 
tell the ftory, that feeing the reft of the neigh- 
bourhood preparing to attack them, they pru- 
dently took to their boat, and made off while 
they could. 
For the people not having military fkill enough 
to fee the neceffity for fuch great preparations, 
againft a few poor defpicable wretches, had re- 
folved not to wait for the fteward's arrival, but 
to drive them away themfelves. 
It is eafy to conceive his joy at this account, 
the merit of which he modeftly took intirtly to 
himfelf, writing the lord of the manor word, 
that frighted at the fame of his preparations^ 
they had ran away^ without daring to await his 
approach. 
The airs he gave himfelf on this occafion 
are impoffible to be defcribcd with proper force. 
He borrowed a book of military difcipline from 
-an old foldier in the neighbourhood, and get- 
ting fome of the terms by heart, talked of 
noth- 
THE REVERIE. 
159 
nothing but armies, and battles, and marches, and 
Jieges, (hewing how he would have attacked 
them if they flaid ; how he would have cut off 
their retreat; befieged their entrenchments ; in 
fhort, done every thing that ever had been done 
by the greateft general on the greateft occafion. 
The very appearance of a military paffion, 
though thus in burlefque, began to reconcile 
the mob to him ; efpecially as they had not an 
opportunity of feeing into the ridicule of it. 
But an accident foon happened that effedlually 
turned his heart againft them for ever, and made 
him refolve to get from among fuch a turbu- 
lent crew, as foon as he could. 
As he was bufied one Sunday afternoon in his 
ufual employment, of repeating his oft-repeated 
leflbn in military matters, to fome company 
who had dined with him, his wife enters in 
a violent hurry and diforder, with a piece of 
paper in her hand, and reaching it to him, 
" There (faid fhe) read that, and fee what we 
are to do ! it is a fine thing truly, to live in a 
place where the mob is to dired their mafters, 
-For my part, let me but get fafe home once 
more; and I will give them leave to treat me as 
they pleare,[if ever they catch me here again." 
Thefteward, on looking into the paper, found 
jt to be a kind of a letter, direded to his wife, 
and figned The Mob of the Manor, to let her 
know that, " underftanding flie had made an 
appointment to flay at cards that evening, at 
one of her neighbours, they took the liberty to 
inform her, they would do themfelves the ho- 
nour to be of her party." 
The infolence of fuch a meffage fuprized all 
prefents efpecially the gentleman who had 
ir>ads 
i6o THE R E V E R I E- 
made up matters between the mob and the 
fteward before, and happened to be one of the 
company j *' What can this mean, madam ? 
(faid he, thinking that his former mediation 
gave him a right to interfere) I hope there was 
no foundation for fuch a report." 
" What report, fir ? (anfwered fhe) I do not 
underftand you" 
" Why, madam, (replied he) the fcandalous 
report of your defigning to play at cards this 
evening." 
" I do not know what you call a fcandalous 
report (returned fhe, with a look ofdifdain) 
my neighbour, Mrs. Tofspot^ came yefterday ta 
tell me that fhe had got a keg of choice old 
rum, and as fhe knows I am very fond of a 
glafs of good punch, invited my hufband and 
me, to meet half a dozen other neighbours at 
her houfe to play a game at cards, and fpend 
the evening. This is all I know of the mat- 
ter.'^ 
" And really madam (faid the gentleman) 
this is a great deal more than I am glad to 
hear ; as I was in hopes I had convinced Mr^ 
Steward of the impropriety of this before." 
" Well, my dear (faid fhe, turning to her 
hufband, without deigning to make any reply 
to the gentleman) what do you defign to do } 
it is almofl time. Will you go ? 
*' Not-I indeed (anfwered he, flirugging up 
his fhoulders) I have no defire to meet fuch 
company, I allure you." 
" And fo we fhall mifs our fhare of the 
punch (returned flic, whifpering him) this is 
hard ! very hard ! and after I have fet my mind 
upon it fo, too.." 
THE f[ E V E R I E. i6i 
" I cannot help it (replied he) I will not 
run the hazard." 
" Then get rid of thefe people as foon as 
you can (whifpered fhe again j after a little 
paufe) I have a thought in my head that will do 
as well as going." And then fpeaking aloud, 
" Well my dear, I fubmit to you; but as we 
do not go there, I think it would not be amifs 
if we went to church, the bell rings." 
" And prav, madam (added the gentleman) 
give me leave to advife you not only to deny 
your having had any fuch appointment upon your 
hands, if the affair fliould take wind; but alfo 
never to attempt a thing of the kind again 
Vi'hile you are here; for 1 can tell you, this 
new correfpondcnt of your's, the mob of this 
manor, is particularly whimfical fometimes, and 
may unluckily do fomething that would make 
you cut a very ridiculous figure." 
To this, the gentlewoman did not think it 
worth her while to make any anfwer, but 
turning up her nofe with an air of contempt, 
went out of the room. 
As foon as flie was gone the gentleman be- 
gan to read the lie ward a ledure on his breacYi 
of promife, to which I gave no more heed 
than himfelf, my attention being diverted to a 
more entertaining objedl. 
'' You heard the genthman fay (faid my 
guide) that the mob of this manor is fome- 
times whimfical : look yonder, and you will fee 
a proof of it. 
On his faying this, I turned my eye to the 
next ftreet, where I faw half a dozen ihabby 
fellows following a gentlewoman's chair care- 
U^Yi and as if they were llrolling without any 
parti- 
i62 THE REVERIE. 
Particular defign, till it flopped at the door of 
^n houfe which I found to be Mrs. Tcfspofs, 
when in an inftant two or three hundred of 
them rufhed out of the bye lanes, and alleys, 
where they had been lurking for the purpofe, 
and furrounding the chair juft as the chairmen 
were going to carry it into the houfe, one of 
them flopped it, and lifting up the head, 
dcfired the gentlewoman very civilly to walk 
uut. 
^' What Is the matter? (faid flie, with an air 
of authority, as if flie thought to intimidate 
them) what do the fellows mean?" 
" Only to give you a little good advice, ma- 
dam (anfwered he that fpoke before.) And 
therefore I hope you will pleafe to come out of 
your chair quietly, and not oblige us to be fo 
rude as to pull you out! never fear, madam I. 
we do not defign to do you any hurt.'* 
As it might be dangerous to difobey fo abfo- 
Jute an authority, the gentlewoman complied 
dire^lly, amazed and terrified as (he was ; and 
{landing in the midfl of them, the fame fellow 
who appeared to be the orator of the mob, pro- 
ceeded: *' We underfland, madam (faid he, 
making her a low bow, and holding his hat in 
his hand, which he had very politely pulled ofFj 
when he firfl fpoke to her) that you are com- 
ing here to fpcnd the evening at cards : now', 
as we know that to be a very profane, wicked^ 
and pernicious cuflom, and what has brought 
many an one of our companions to the gal- 
lows,, we think it our duty not only to prevent 
you this time; but alfo to take care that you 
iiiall never be guilty of the like again. We 
fiberefore .humbly infifl, that you give us your 
oath 
THE REVERIE: 163 
^ath here, in the fight of all thefe good people, 
that, from this bleffed moment, you will never 
play at cards, dice, or any other game, on the 
fahbath'day^ while you live. Here is the book ; 
obferve, it is the Bible ! You muft fwear with* 
out any equivocation, or mental refervation 
whatfoever. Come ! it is for the good of your 
foul." 
The gentlewoman was by this time fo terri- 
fied, that flie would have fworn to impoffibili- 
ties, to get out of fuch hands. She therefore 
obeyed them without hefitation ; upon which 
the whole mob gave three huzza's, that made 
the flreet ring; and then the orator, addrefling 
himfelf to her again, " We are glad, madam, 
(faid he) that you complied fo readily with our 
requeft, as we fhould have been very forry to 
ufe any violence \ and we hope your example 
will be followed by the reft of your party, for 
we defign to make a general reformation; but, 
firft, we will do ourfelves the honour to fee 
you fafe home, as you can have no bufmefs in 
that houfe now." 
With thefe words, the whole mob began to 
move; and the gentlewoman judging rightly, 
that it would be in vain to make any words 
with them, was obliged to turn about, walk 
iiome with them, and liften with an appear- 
ance of attention to the pious exhortations of 
the orator, who walked clofe by her fide all the 
way, with his hat under his arm, and handed 
her every now and then over the kennel, with 
as many fantaftic airs as a firfi-rate fop. . 
It is impollible to conceive a droller figure 
sthan (he made on this occafion, walking fo far 
ihiough the dirty Greets, (for they took care to 
lead 
i64 THE REVERIE. 
lead her the longeft way about) in the midft of 
fuch a (habby crcA', in all the frippery fullneis 
of drefs, powdered, frizzed, and furbelowed 
to the very tip of the mode ; and confequently 
without any thing on her head to hide her 
fhame, and fave her from the rain, which fell 
plentifully all the time. 
As foon as the procefTion arrived at her door, 
the orator made her another fpecch ; and then 
the mob, giving her three chears more, left her 
to her meditations, and retired to iinifh their 
pious work. 
But they were too late now ; the birds were 
flown. For, as theyit;f^77;?z^partof the fcene had 
pafled under Mrs. Tofsporfs window, (lie, and fuch 
of her company as were come, had a full view of it, 
and none of them being pioully enough inclined 
to perform fuch a penitential ceremony, as foon 
as ever the mob moved ofF with the gentlewo- 
man, they all flipped out at the back-door, and 
made the beft of their way home ; and Mrs. 
Tofspot herfelf, juft then receiving a card from 
the fleward's wife, to let her know, " that fhe 
" had been taken fo very ill of the cholick^ that 
*' fhe could not poffibly w'ait upon her that 
*' -evening, but lliould be glad of a glafs of her 
'' rum, as fhe imagined it might do her good,*' 
took a couple of bottles in her lap, and hurried 
away to her, to tell her the news, and congra- 
tulate her on having efcaped fuch a ridiculous 
(lifgrace as had*befallen their friend, at the cir- 
cumft^nces' of which they had many an hearty 
laugh over their punch. 
"You fee, frefumed my guide) the vulgar 
fometinusfees n^/;/,,;though their method of pro- 
ceeding is rathi^r- irregular. But this example. 
THE REVERIE. 165 
notorious and ftriking as it is, will have no ef- 
fedt. The pra6tice againft which it was le- 
velled is become a failiion, and, like every 
other fafliion, muft have its run, 'till fome- 
thing elfe, perhaps equally improper, fuper- 
fedes it." 
From that day the fteward never enjoyed a 
moment's happinefs, being continually appre- 
henfive of fome fuch infult from the mob, as 
he could not refolve to defift from the praftices 
which gave them offence; accordingly, when 
the time of his departure arrived foon after, he 
hugged himfelf on his efcape, and laid down 
his grandeur with ten times greater pleafure 
than he had felt on taking pofTe/fion of it ; and 
in return for the uneafinefs he had drawn upon 
himfelf, carried away an heart invenomed with 
the moft rancorous hatred againft the whole 
manor, the effeds of which he refolved never 
to mifs any opportunity of making them feel. 
The End of the First Book, 
( i66 ) 
BOOK II. 
C H A p. I. 
^he happlnefs of having more money than a man 
knows what to do with. The extenfeve know* 
ledge of the lovers ofN\^i:\2y accoicnted for. 
Poets not judges of painting, 
BEFORE I had time to make any re- 
flections on the ridiculous inconfiftency 
in the condu6t and chambers of all the 
adtors in this laft fcene, a perfon caught my 
eye, who feemed to promife more pleafing 
entertainment than I had hitherto met with. 
Hewas juft entering into the prime of life, and 
^p>j^ared to be in pofleflion of every advantage 
that, could enhance the enjoyment of that fea- 
foh of delight. 
" So bright a profpe£^ filled my heart with joy. 
" At .length, O gracious fpirit ! (exclaimed I 
in an extafy) at length I have found a man 
'^whofe life affords another view befide wretched- 
; .'."J^nefs and folly, and reconciles me to humanity. 
^*>jrfet us obferve him for a moment, and fhare in 
' ablifs that feems to be fo pure." 
*' The joy you exprefs (anfwered my guide) 
^'\'i*rg- the genuine emanation of exalted virtue, 
which, rifmg above the malignity of envy, finds 
its own happihefs in that of others, I fhall 
there- 
THE REVERIE. 167 
therefore comply with your requeft with plea- 
fure, and leave you to form your own judgment 
on (o interefting a fubje<St.*' 
Proud of this permiflion, I dire6lly fixed my 
attention on the obje^Si of it. 
Though the day appeared to be far advanced, 
he was juft out of bed, and fitting at brealcfafty 
in all the luxury and ftate of royalty. When 
he had fwal lowed a difh or two of tea, with 
evident difrelifh, " What fhall I do with my- 
felf to-day? (faid he to himfelf, rubbing his 
head, and ftretching in liftlefs lalfitude) I am 
quite ficlc of this infipid kind of life, ftill plod- 
ding, plodding on, in the fame dull, tafte- 
lefs round, without any variety, any thing ta 
expecl, or even wifh for. It is not to be 
borne." 
Then mufing for fome moments, " What 
muft they do whofe ftinted fortunes deny them 
the gratification even of the few defires they 
have, when the higheft affluence cannot pro- 
cure me any fatisfaction ? — and yet, they evi- 
dently enjoy an happinefs which I am a gran- 
ger to. There is fomething in this, mor^/lh«ti 
I can comprehend. I will think of it foiii^ 
other time." . ,-. ;. 
Turning then to his iflan, " What day af 
the week is this, Thomas?" 
"Sunday, my lord.'* ^f^." 
** Sunday ! Order the horfes. I wili tald' ' 
a ride this fine morning. — And what fhall Ivj^cjk* 
with myfelf the refl of the day ? — Let me c6i\^  . 
fider ! Did not I promife to dine with her-  
Grace, and go with her to Mrs. Squeakum's ceij-^.v"' 
cert, and afterwards to lady Modi/h's rout j and*;' 
then return and fpend the evening with the 
Duke !-- 
r68 THE REVERIE. 
Duke! Pfha, I am fiirfeited with mufick; 
the very thought of it makes my head ake. — 
And for routs, they are Hill worfe. To he 
Iqueezed and crouded among a parcel of people 
of al-1 foks and conditions, who come together 
. mCCTly to make malicious remarks, and pick 
" eaeh other's pockets ! It is intolerable. — I am 
.'...tired, quite tired of them all; of myfelf, and 
every»thing in the world. That is right. 
:": Now I think of picking pockets, Jet me fee 
■ ijow I came ofFlaft night, at the club ]" 
^''"- Then pulling a card out of his pocket, 
'^. ** Aye ! here it is. What a black lift ! Lord 
Palmwell looo his Grace 500 Sir John 
200 Mr. Shuffler 1 5 00 Capt. Gamble 
2000 befide aJl the money I had about me. 
Death! This is too much. There muft be 
feme management in it, that I fhould always 
\6^Q \ I pofitively will not go among them any- 
more." ' . 
He was interrupted in thefe agreeable medi- 
tations by the entrance of a fervant. " My 
lord, (faid he) the groom has fent an exprefs, 
to know if your lordfhip has made any bets on 
your new horfe, arid what particular direcSfions 
you pleafetogive about his running to-morrow, 
if your lordfhip does not defign to fee him ftart 
yourfelf; and to let your lordfliip know, that the 
mare, which he told your Idrdftiip he was un- 
der fome apprehenfions of, is to be fold; fo that 
if your lord&ip pleafes to bu.y her, you may be 
fure of the horfe's winning.'* ;.' 
" To-morrow ! Aye. Send- him word, that 
I will be there. And} do;.y6u hear ! order the 
poft-coach, and fend \.q Mr-Slnffler^ Capi. Gam- 
ble), and^/r John^ arid let them know I go di- 
re£lly, 
. ? vJi^ 
,1* .>'■■■ ■-^ 
THE REVERIE. 169 
reclly, and fhall be glad of their company. And 
tell Rackimi I want him. 1 have never leeu 
that horfe run yet, though, he coft me (o high 
a price : and this is the lift king's plate iif this 
year. I muft not mifs feeing him now, by'affy 
means."'* 
*' My lord, (continued the fervant) here is 
a meiTenger from his Grace's gentlernan of^he 
horfe, to acquaint your lordfhip that the fale of 
the ftud is fixed for to-morrow, and cannot be 
put off as was intended. He fays, they are ail to 
go without referve.'* 
" All, does he fay ? then I muft be there. 
There are feveral tip top things among them, 
which I would not mifs of on any accoupt. 
You need not order the coach ; and fend the 
groom word, that he may do as he fees proper^ 
about the mare. I can't be there myfelf." 
" My lord, (faid another fervent, who en- 
tered jud then) Mr. Connoijfeur is below ; he 
fays, your lordfhip ordered him to fend up his 
name. And ^x. Stanza I would have de- 
nied him, but he fays he has bufmefs of im- 
portance.'* 
" Aye ! of importance to him, .1 doubt not. 
— Let them come up. As I have nothing elfe 
to do, their nonfenfe may divert me." — Then 
flretching again, and giving a long yawn, he 
arofc from the table, which was dire<Sily re- 
moved, and walked a turn or two about th^ 
rpom. 
As foon as the gentlemen entered, '^ Your 
fervant, Mr. Comioljjeurf (faid- l»is lordfhip) Mr. 
Stanza, whzt news froit\Parnq/fus f With what 
new infpiration have the Mule^. indulged their 
votary?" 
Vol. I. I -'«My 
170 THE REVERIE. 
*' My lord, (returned the former, with a 
myfterious air, before the poet had time to fcan 
his fyllables for a reply) when you can fpare 
me a moment's private audience, I have feme- 
thing to communicate to your lordfhip, that 
you will find worthy of your attention." 
" Mv.Sta?2za, (faid his lordfhip) if you'll take 
that new play that lies in the window, and look 
it over in the next room, I fhall be glad to hear 
your opinion of it." 
The poet made a bow of afTent ; and taking 
up the book with a contemptuous fmile, re- 
tired, not a little offended at his being obliged 
to give place to a mechanic. 
'' Well, Mr. Co7inoiJJeur ! and what is this 
important fecret?" 
*' My lord, it is an important fecret, I afTure 
you. Your lordfhip may remember I have told 
you that a gentleman of judgment, who had 
fpcnt feveral years in vifiting the cabinets of 
tiie curious in every part of Europe^ out of 
which he had found means, at a very great ex- 
pcnce, to procure many of the moft admired 
pieces, was daily expected home with his valu- 
able coli«(Siion. Now, my lord, this gentle- 
man is juil arrived J and as I have had a con- 
itant correfpondence v/ith him all the time he 
has been abroad, for it was chiefly by me he 
was directed in the choice of what he bought — 
" How ! were you abroad too along with him? 
I did not know that.'' 
" No, no, my lord ! I was not with 
him ; but that did not prevent my being 
able to direct him. For your loidfhip muft 
know, that there is a regular correfpon- 
dence eftablifhed between all the lovers of 
uirtu in Europe, by which means we arc as 
in- 
THE REVERIE. lyt 
intimately acquainted with every thing in each 
other's country as in our own ; (o that I could 
give him my opinion what was proper for him 
to purcha'e in every place where he went, as 
well as if I was upon the fpot with him. — — 
As I was faying, This gentleman no fooner 
landed, than he fent me immediate notice, up- 
on which I went directly to him ; and as I am 
well acquainted with your lordfliip's fine tafte, 
I have by much entreaty prevailed upon him to 
let you have feveral of the moft capital pieces 
in his colle6lion, before he exhibits them to 
the public for fale ; for which purpofe your 
lordfhip may have a fight of them privately to- 
morrow, if you pleafe, when I will wait upon 
you, to point out the proper ones to compleat 
your noble colle6^ion, and prevent your being 
impofed upon in the price ; not that any price 
can in realitvbe too high for fuch mafter-pieces 
oi' art." 
" To-morrow, do you fay«? Can it not be 
put off for a day or two .'' I am engaged to- 
morrow." 
<' My lord, that is impoflible. All the F/r- 
tuo/i in England will know of his arrival in 
twenty-four hours, and then it will be out of 
his pov/er to oblige your lordjQiip ; and you 
will lofe an opportunity never to be retrieved." 
" Well then, I think I will go. Here, Tbo- 
?nas, bid IVillia?n go to his Grace's to-morrow, 
and buy whatever he likes ; I cannot go my- 
felf." 
" I hope your lordfliip approved of the bar- 
gains I made for you at the laft fale ; (conti- 
nued Conm'ijfeur) fome of the landfcapes came 
high i but they are very fine, very fine indeed, 
I 2 and 
172 THE REVERIE. 
and will make a noble appearance in your lord* 
lliip's gallery. Are they put up yet, my 
lord ? " 
" Eh ! Egad, I never once thought of them. 
Do you know any thing of thofe pi6lures, Tho' 
mas P 
" My Lord, the upholfterer nailed them up 
on the garret- ILiir-cale ; he faid, they were not 
iit for the gallery by any means." 
" He is an ignorant puppy, and deferves to 
be turned oft' for prcfuming to difobey my di- 
re£i:ions. How fhould he know any thing of 
paintings ! — My lord, your lordftiip may 
depend on my judgment. They are capital 
pieces. The garret-flair-cafe ! ignorant, im- 
pudent blockhead ! " 
*' Hah ! hah ! hah ! This is exalting into 
degradation, I think. But I will look at them 
myfelf when I am at leifure, and fee that juftice 
is done them." 
" At what hour fhall I call upon your lord- 
fhip in the morning ?'* 
" About twelve. Suppofc we take Stanza 
with us. A poet fhould be a judge of painting. 
Call him in." 
" A judge of painting! hah ! hah ! hah ! a 
mofl excellent one, truly ! How fliould fuch 
low-lived creatures have judgment in things 
they have not even an opportunity of feeing. 
They never travel to improve their tafte, and 
enrich their minds by fludying the excellencies 
of the foreign fchools. They have no notion of 
any thing beyond an Englifli daub. I muft beg 
your lord{l:iip not to take notice of this aff'air 
to any one, as it would entirely ruin the fale of 
the whole collection J and efpecially to fuch a 
fellow 
I 
THE REVERIE. 189 
my intereft with his Grace, which I took care 
to place to the account of my regard for him ; 
fo that I think he cannot refufe me any thing I 
afkofhim; and this very morning the bride- 
groom has been with me, to let me know he 
has taken pcffeflion of his place." 
It is impoilible to defcribe the fituation of 
Chaincelion during the latter part of this ftory. 
Refentment, fliame, and rage fwelled in his 
heart, and tortured every feature of his face. 
Suppreiling them, however, as well as he could, 
" What place, my lord, (faidhe) has the hap- 
py man got ?" 
" Why ! that there place which I have fo often 
heared you fay you fhould like. Egad ! I think 
I (hould have articled for a fhare. The rafcal 
could never have raifed his cxpe6lations quarter 
fo high otherwife. At leaft I fhall claim a right 
to renew my acquaintance with his lady, if ever 
I fhould have a mind. Hah ! hah ! hah ! " 
" And pray, my lord, (continued Cha^neelion) 
When did his Grace confer this obligation ou 
your lordfliip ? " 
" One day lafl: week, — while you were in 
the country. But do not you think, Franks 
that I have well got over this affair ?'* 
" I could have told you fomething, my lord, 
(faid the other, with a fpiteful fneer which all 
his art was not fufficient to fupprefs) that 
would have leflened your anxiety about that 
fair lady.'' 
"Aye! What was that? What do you know 
of her ? " 
*' Only, my lord, that her love mufl cer- 
tainly have been very violent for your lordfhip, 
when 
5 
190 THE R E V E R I E. 
when your fervant could fo readily prevail upon 
her to marry him. Hah ! hah ! hah ! " 
«' Why? Aye ! that is very true. But — 
but — but confider > coiifider What elfe 
could (he do ? " > 
" And your lordfhip may add, that monfieur 
Frippeau i-s a man of parts, and mafter of pre- 
vailing arg^uments. I fee he has condudled his 
fcheme cleverly." 
'' Eh ! I do not underfland you. His fcheme ! 
No. It was my propofal, not his." 
*' Yes, my lord, 1 perceive the propofal was 
your's ; but the plan I have good reafon to 
think was his." 
'' His! No, no; not at all. It was his 
Grace's. Fiippeau knew nothing of the mat- 
ter, till I informed him of it." 
<^' Notdire£lly of this I grant you, my lord; 
but that he had formed fome plan of the kind I 
am very clear ? 
" How could that be ? What (liould make 
you think fo ? " 
'' Becaufe, my lord, he and this lady, to my 
certain knowledge, had a very good under- 
ilanding long before the time you fay you firft 
made your addrefies to her." 
" A good underflanding ! What do you 
mean .'' Prithee fpeak plainer." 
'' I mean, my lord, that monlieur and ma- 
dam had had an amour ; and that, inflead of his 
marrying your lordfhip's whore, and fathering 
your baftard, by a prudent participation of what 
he could well fpare he has had the addrefs to 
take in your lordfhip to provide for him and 
his hopeful family. That is all I mean, my 
lord." 
6 "An 
THE R E V E R I B. igt 
" An amour with her ! ImpoiHbJe ! I am fure 
it could be no fuch thing. What can have put 
this nonfenfe into your head ! " 
" My lord, it was put into my head by my 
happening to catch the fond pair clafped in the 
folds of love one evening, in the arbour at the 
bottom of the gardem." 
" 'Sdeath ! v/hen was this?'*——' — 
" The very evening after wq went into the 
country. It would have done you good to fee 
how lovingly the turtles billed. The joy they 
exprefled at meeting fhewed that they had been 
well acquainted before." 
" Damn their joy ! But how the devil came 
you not to tell me of this ?" 
" Becaufe, my lord, fhe bribed me to fecrccy 
by the fame favour. Bcfides, I could never 
fufped: that your lordfhip would have been 
made fuch a dupe of by a country-girl." 
" Infamous bitch ! And to pretend fo much 
love for me all the while ! But I will be re- 
venged. I will have the fcoundrel turned out 
directly, and let the whore's father know of all 
her tricks." 
" And he will give you all the vexation he 
can in your affairs, in return for the fhare 
you have had in them. Nor is it in your power 
to turn out Frippcau now. He has a patent for 
his place, and defies you." 
" Confufion ! What muft I do? 
*' Why, my lord, you muft even go and re- 
turn your thanks to his Grace for his great fa- 
vour fo worthily beftowed, and fubmit patient- 
ly to the abufe you have received, becaufe it is 
not in your power to redrefs it." 
Saying 
192 THE REVERIE. 
Saying this he took his leave, fomewhatcon- 
foled for the ill treatment he had met with from 
his Grace, by thinking that his lordlhip, who 
thought he had received the benefit of it, was 
ftill more abufed than he. 
CHAP. V. 
Misfortunes ?tinltiply, A neiu method of engaging 
the affijiance of the great. Cornmon occurrences. 
Cham^lion breaks with his great friends 
rather unpolitely. His hijiory concluded with 
fome odd refeSfions. 
SEVERELY as he felt this ftroke, It was 
but a trifle to the misfortunes which began 
now to pour In upon him. From his lordfhip's 
he went on his ufual errand, to the perfon 
who had hitherto fupplied him with money on 
a mortgage of his eftate ; but, to his unfpeak- 
able furprize, Infbead of complying with his de- 
mand, theifcrivener told him very gravely, that 
he could not advance any more upon that fecu- 
rity ; and defired; he would take meafures for 
' .P^y'^o ^^"^ off without delay, or he muft fore- 
t^lofe the morto;af{e. 
■'>. It j&.nnpoflible to exprefs the aftoniftiment 
'. In fo;: Which this fpee.ch threw him. As foon as 
'hei.recoi'ered himfelf a little, " Surely, fir, 
(faiid-he) that eftate muft be worth confiderably 
naVfi^than my debt to you. The clear rent Is 
eight hundred pounds' a year; and the laft time 
we fettled, I uwed you but fourteen thoufand 
pounds, 
T H E . R E V E R I E. 193 
pounds, intereft and principle, fince which I 
have not had any more from you; fo that you 
niuft certainly be miftakcn. The cflatc is worth 
fcveral thoufands more." 
" Look you, fir, (anfwered the fcrivcner) as 
you have always dealt with me like a gentle- 
man, I will Itrain a point fo far as to give ore 
thoufand pounds more; but that is on condi- 
tion, that you execute a Tale of that eftate to 
me direcSlly; and that is by five hundred more 
than I would give any other man I deal with." 
'* I am much obliged to you for your fiiend- 
fliip, fir; but think that fifteen thoufandpound.i 
is rather too little for eight hundred a year." 
" Why, there it is now. You gentlemen 
who haveeflates in land think there is nothing 
like them ; hut we know the contrary. Money, 
money, fir, is the thing. Sir, I can honefily 
make ten percent, or perhaps more, of my mo- 
ney, every day I live now; and this without 
being plagued with tenants breaking, and re- 
pairs, and taxes, and I do not know how ma- 
ny vexations which attend landed eflatcf. No ! 
No I Money, Money is the thing." 
^ *' Ten per cent ! Aye, that you can, and 
more to my certain knowledge, or my debt 
could never have amounted fo; hig^li by fo;ne 
thoufands. But this kind of tallying fignifics 
nothing. Tell rne diredlly,.. yvhat is tlie mofl 
that you will give me ?" . 
" Sir, I cannot give any more than I Have*.', 
faid ; and out of that you'm.uii pay all-the cbfts;;. * 
of making the conveyance'tob.". ,. ^ .. N .s « " . 
"Then, fir, you never ftialllrsA't'^rnj^ eJJa'tei,- 
you may be afi!ured. 1 am 'not. reduced, to A^^* 
mit to fuch iniquitous extortiafis yet.^'-^-^WJfa 
Vol. I. K ' " ■'*-'-^^- 
194 THE REVERIE. 
which words he turned about and left the room, 
lenfible that it was to no purpofe to attempt 
ufing any arguments with one of his profef- 
fion. 
He was well enough acquainted with the 
world, to know that the fcrivener would never 
have made Tuch a declaration till he had every- 
thing prepared to put it in executioii, and con- 
iequently that his own fituation admitted not 
<jf a moment's delay. 
Accordingly he went dire6lly to a gentleman 
who had often hinted a dellre to purchafe his 
cftate, if ever it fhould be to be fold, as he 
plainly forefaw it muft in the end; with whom, 
in the prefent agitation of his fpirits, he con- 
cluded a bargain in a very few words, that left 
him without a foot of property upon earth. 
The forming a refolution, be it what it will, 
3S real relief to a mind in diftrefs, by taking off" 
the attention from that diftrefs, and fixing it 
i)n the means of executing the refolution. 
From the moment he determined to fell his 
.eftate he enjoyed a tranquility which amid all 
his pleafures he had long been a ftranger to; 
and though he was fenfible that he fhould hav* 
but a very poor pittance remaining to found his 
future hopes upoii, when all his debts were paid, 
the thought of difappointing the fcrivener*s 
l)afe defign gave him fuch pleaTure that he fcarce 
.attended to his own ruin ; or, if he had any 
{enfe of it, the illufion that had drawn it upoa 
iim, and under which he ftill continued, took 
(off.half its horrors. 
*' When my friends fee (faid he) that I ftand 
in need of their afliance, they will give it with- 
fiut even putting rae to the pain of making ap- 
plica- 
THE REVERIE. 195 
plication : and I have money enough due to 
me among them, to fupport me as ufual, till 
fome fuch opportunity oft'ers : all cannot be (6 
bafely infmcere as his grace." 
Supported by this hope, he went to fpcnd the 
next evening among them with his wonted 
fpirits : but a confciournefs of his desperate 
circumftances made his apprehcnfions (o deli- 
cate, that he conftrued the common pleafan- 
tries of his companions into perfonal infults, 
and left them abruptly, as much furprifed at his 
behaviour as he was offended at theirs. 
But they were not long at a lofs to account 
for it. One of the club, who had been on the 
fame errand himfelf that day with the lawyer 
who drew the conveyances of the other's eftatc, 
and learned the affair from him, coming injuft 
after he had gone away in that odd manner, di- 
redly told them the whole affair, heightened 
with the additional embellilhments of his own 
good -nature, fuch as the purchafe of hiseftates 
not having paid half his debts, and his being 
reduced now to a condition worfe than beggary. 
This opened a field for curious fpeculations. 
Tnftead of regretting a ruin, which they had 
themfelves been the occalion of, they all ran out 
intothe grofleft ridicule, and fevereft invcdtivcs, 
againft his fool iih vanity, for pretending to live 
upon an equality with perfons of fuperior rank 
and fortune; the moft extravagant of the whole 
fet, and thofe efpecialfy whofe circumilaiices 
were reduced neareft to a level with his, de- 
claiming loudeft in the praife of prudence and 
ceconomy, and railing moft againft him for the 
oppofite vices. 
The conclunon of all was, that it would no 
K 2 longer 
kf?rig6 THE REVERIE: 
;-?J.Jonger be proper for them to admit him into their 
company : but, as forbidding him diredlly might 
too probably be attended with confequences 
they did not chufe, they unanimoufly refolved 
to tal^c the fafer method of treating him with 
a colJnefs, that to one of his delicacy could not 
tail to anfwer the fame end, without expofmg 
them to fuch danger. 
As for him, the manner in which he pafled 
the remaining part of the night is too horrid 
for defcription. After curfmghis own folly and 
their bafenefs, till his fpirlts^were quite exhaufl- 
ed, he at length bethought himfelf, that the 
particular exprefiions v/hich had given him 
fuch pain were in the common flile of their 
converfaticn, and in all probability without any 
perfonal application to him, as it was fcarcQ 
poffible, that they could have received any ac- 
count of fo recent a tranfa6lion. 
The confolation which this thought gave 
him, enabled him to take fome refb -, fo that 
when he arofe, he repaired to the ufual place, 
in., pretty good fpirits : but this was only like 
a gleam of fun-fhine between two llorms; the 
behaviour of his companions, in confequence 
of the generous refolution of the night before, 
foon removing every doubt of their meaning 
^nd. defign. 
* -Stung to the foul at this, he frarted up, and 
looking at them. with the fiercenefs of defpera- 
ti'on ; ^' J plainly fee, faid he, in an haughty 
tone,' that my ruin is no fecretj nor am I at a 
lofs to account for the prudential motives of 
this behaviour: but you are miPciiken, my wor- 
thy friend?, if judging of me by yourfclves, 
you think I am mean enough to follicit, or re- 
ceiye 
THE REVERIE. 197 
ceive any favour from you. Mod of this com- 
pany are in my debt, both for money won and 
lent. The payment of that is all I require, 
and what I will infift on. If I owe any of 
you any thing, let it be demanded now, as this 
is the laft time I fhall ever come among you." 
The firft word he fpoke caufed an univcrfal 
filence, nor were any of them very ready to 
break it when he had ended, but fat lookinr^ 
at each other as at a lofs what to fay, and ex- 
pecting who fhould fpeak fi ft. 
This behaviour a 1 moil di farmed his ra^e, 
and turned it into contempt; calling his eye 
therefore round him with ineffable difdain, '' I 
give you time, faid he, to confider of my de- 
mand till to-morrow, when, if I have not a fatis- 
fa6lory anfwer, I fhall apply perfonally to each 
in another manner" — Saving whicii, he flung 
out of the room. 
The threat implied in thefe laft words in- 
fluenced feme of them whofe debts were but 
fmall to pay him: but the greater part, fhelter- 
ing themfclves in the privileges of their rank, 
gallantly thought proper to take no notice 
of his demand. 
But this was not their beft prote61ion : pro- 
voked as he was at the bafenefs of their beha- 
viour, his pride would not permit him to repeat 
a demand, which, from his prefent circum- 
ftances might be-imputed to neCeffity. According- 
ly, tired of a place where every obje6I he favv" 
upbraided him with his folly, he purchafed a 
commillion in the army with the poor remains 
of his fortune, and fought to filence the re- 
proaches of his own mind, by the tumults and 
horrors of Vi^ar, 
K3 Of 
igS THE REVERIE. 
Of all the inftances of human folly which I 
had yet feen, this afFeded me moft. " O gra- 
cious fpirit ! (faid I with an heavy figh) how 
wretched is the ftate of man, that the finefl en- 
dowments of mind are notfufficientto fecurehim 
from falling into this inexplicable labyrinth [ 
Is there no land-mark to warn him from the 
danger? No clue to guide his fleps in fafety 
through the giddy maze?" 
" The brighteft endowments (anfwered he) 
ferve only to make folly more confpicuous, and 
aggravate the pain of ruin by reproach, except 
they will fubmit to the direction of prudence. 
" But the contrary is too often the cafe. The 
vivacity which refults from great parts is above 
ftooping to any reftraint, efpecially fron;i a virtue 
that appears to be meerly negative. 
" Hence it is that you fee the greateft foJIies 
are generally committed by men of the greateft 
genius ; as, on the other hand, the moft folid ad- 
vantages are obtained by moderate abilities, 
wheji dire(S(:ed by that unerring guide. Of the 
former you have feen a ftriking inflance in this 
perfon, and every view of life makes it unne- 
ceflary to give any of the latter. 
" As to him, there is no fpecies of folly more 
extenfively fatal than that which proved his 
ruin. Everyone, v/ho, liftening to the allure- 
ments of idlenefs, neglects to improve the pre- 
Tent moment, and depends on chance to bring 
on another day that which application might 
procure him now, is guilty of it. All have the 
means of rational fuccefs within their power 
when they firft fet out in life, and the many 
who mifcarry owe their misfortune moflly to 
the want of applying thofe means properly. 
CHAP, 
THE REVERIE. ig^ 
CHAP. VI. 
yH rare charaSier. Dcfcription cf a ladys chfd, 
P leafing meditations ; with one fide of a remark- 
able converfation. The hijiory cf Ccolia and 
Sfrephon. Majqued batteries moji dangerous in 
love as zvell as war. 
WHILE the fplrlt was making thcfe re- 
flections, I happtned to caft my eye up- 
on a female whofe appearance raifed my cu- 
liofity to take more particular notice of her. 
Though file was dcfcending faft into the vale 
of years, and time's inexorable hand had robbed 
her charms of all their bloom, there was a 
fweetnefs and fenfibility in her looks, an ele- 
gance and grace in her whole form, v/hich made 
the very ruins of beauty look lovely, and v.'ere 
impofTible to be beheld without the tendereil 
emotions. 
She was fitting in a favourite clofet, the firil viev/ 
of whichfuggeltedan idea of the owner's charac- 
ter. It looked into a fpacious garden that hung 
over the banks of a filver ftream. At the lower 
end a variety of evergreens and flowering flirubs 
furmed a number of little arbours, and ipread a 
fragrance through the air, that difpofed the heart; 
to loftnefs, and filled it with delight. Beyond 
them a row of venerable oaks bounded the 
view, among which the ftream, ftealrng infen- 
fibly from the fight, made the whole profpeil 
moll romantick and grand. The windows were 
iet out with flower-pots of the finsft china. On 
K 4 the 
200 THE REVERIE. 
the ceiling was painted the ftory of Jpollo and 
Daplme^ by a mafler-hand. A Jarge book-cafe, 
carved in the6'/i/«£/2' talle, and highly gilt, co- 
vered each end of the clofet, ai'd difplayed a 
complete collection of all the plays, poems, and 
romances in the modern languages, which treat 
of love as a fcience, and heighten its pleafures 
by the powers of imagination. A glafs that 
reached from the floor to the ceiling was placed 
againfl: the pier between the windo\vs, and, cor- 
reiponding with one of equal fizeon theoppofite 
fide of the clofet, ferved to (hew the whole perfoii 
at one view ; and a variety of mafquerade-habits, 
for the chara(Si"ers of nymphs, nuns, niepherdelTes 
and queens, with all their difierent infignia, 
hung up in regular order on each fide of the 
door, and, made the whole of a piece. 
She fat at a table placed before one of the 
windov/s, with a huge folio open before her, on 
which (lie leaned her elbow as (he meditated on 
what Vac had been reading, with her head re- 
clined upon her hand, and her eyes fixed upon 
the ceiling ; her fpe(Stacles lay upon the book, 
to mark the place where fhe had flopped, and 
her fnufF-box and handkerchief befide it. 
After fhe had been mufmg thus for fome 
minutes, " Happy days ( faid flic, vviih a 
figh) when love and honour governed the world I 
when ceremony gave place to fmcerity, and in- 
clination went hand in hand with virtue! Why 
did I not live then ? Why was my lot referved for 
thefe dull iron times? I might have been a 
gentle fhepherdefs, and fpent my blifsful life 
with fome fele6led faithful fwain in (\NQ,ciJrca- 
diaji vales, avv^aking with our tuneful pipes the 
flow-paced morn, when we arofe to tend our 
fleecy 
THE REVERIE. 201 
fleecy care ; and, flumbering away the fultry 
noon, clafped in each other's arms, in cool fe- 
queftered fragrant bowers, befide Tome purlin^ 
ftream, whofe murmurs lulled each wearied 
{enCe to reft.'* 
Then, taking a pinch of fnuff, and rifinf" 
from her chair, " Or elfe I might have been 
fome beauteous princefs (continued fhe, as (he 
walked with a majeftick air acrofs the floor) 
whofe fame had filled the world, and brought 
adoring princes to my feet." 
She was interrupted in thefe pleafing medita- 
tions by the entrance of a fervant with a letter, 
Difmifiing him with a nod, the moment fhe faw 
the well-known hand, and then kifrinc; the di- 
rection, {he opened the letter, and read it over 
in a perfect rapture. 
" O Strepbon ! (faid flie, as foon Hie had en- 
ded) who can refift thy fweet perfuafive tongue ? 
Such eloquence fure never fued in vain ! Yes, I 
will meet you. C^elia will meet her Strepho^i 
with all the ardour of unfated love." 
When (lie had thus given vent to her tranf- 
port, fhe fat down again very compofedly to 
her beloved ftudy ; at which fhe continued till 
fummoned unwillingly to dinner, 
A lover's repafts are never long. As fo.on as 
fhe had made an hafty meal, fhe fet out with 
all the eagernefs of expedlation for the fhady 
walk at the bottom of the garden. The throb- 
bing of her heart, as flie approached this fcene 
moft opportune for love, made me imagine fhe 
was waited for by fome favourite fwain, whom 
I expected to fee clafp her immediately in his 
arms. 
K 5 But 
202 THE REVERIE. 
But, though no fuch lover appeared, fhefeem- 
ed neither difappointed nor difpleafed. The mo- 
ment (he entered the walk, " 1 come, my dearefl 
Strephcn! (faid fhe, fpreading her arms to em- 
brace the empty air, and talking as if to fome 
one prelent) your Cos'Iia, punctual to your ap- 
pointment, comes to fpend a rapturous hour in 
converfation with her foul's beloved. Here will 
1 lean upon your arm, and hearken to the mufic 
of your voice, as we walk along the flowery 
margin of this limpid ftream. Thefe confcious 
{hades, the nymphs, and naiads of theftream and 
grove, fhall witnefs for the purity of ourpaflion'*. 
And then again, as if replying to fomething 
he had faid, *' I own the force of what you 
urge. Perfuafion hangs upon your tongue; 
and yielding nature pleads fo ftrongly in your be- 
half, that virtue hardly can refift : but fpare the 
panting fuppliant, nor feek to triumph farther 
over a proftrate foe." 
— '" How can you wrong me fo ? Fantaftick 
honour ! No ! I defpife the thought. Leave me 
the facred fubftance, virtue, and I will chear- 
fully give up the fading fhadow, though cenfure 
pour forth allher invenomed rageagainft me." — 
" Exalted generofity ! Then I am fafe. 
Had you prefied farther I had been undone. My 
rebel hear was ready to revolt.** 
in this rapturous flighty ftrain, flie continued 
her imaginary converfation for juft an hour, 
paufmg at every period, as if for a reply, ufing 
all the geftures, and fhe.wing the attention of 
one engaged in deep difcourfe : then takingleave, 
;. with the molt paffionate exprelTions of regard, 
fhe returned to her company, with whom fhe 
^'pcnt the reftof.th-e evening in thehigheft fpi- 
i^,„---^'^r J' iL  tits i 
■ ■ *^ V'C 
THE REVERIE. 203 
rits; and thatfhe might preferve the loved idea 
full upon her mind, as Toon as her maid left the 
room, fat up in her bed in all the flannels of the 
night, and putting on her fpcdiacles once more 
read over his dear letter before fhe could think 
of going to reft, and then put it carefully under 
her pillov/ to tempt delightful dreams. 
There was fomething fo unaccountable in the 
condu£l of this lady, that, ftrongly as curiofity 
attached my attention to fuch an extraordinary 
fcene, I could fcarce contain myfelfto thecon- 
clufion of it; but was feveral times going to afk 
my guide what it could poflibly mean* 
He read my aftonifhment in my looks ; and 
as foon as the drawing: of her curtain clofed the 
farce, **- I fee, faid he, that you are at a lofs 
what to make of this woman's fantaHick beha- 
viour. It is a fpecies of folly fo little known 
in common life, that it has not yet been diftin- 
gifhed by any particular litk : and vvill, there- 
fore, be bcft underftood by a fhort account of 
her life. 
" She was bom, as you fee, with every ad- 
vantage of beauty, rank, and fortune, which all 
received a higher luftre ftill from the uncommon 
endowments of her mind. So fair a morn pre- 
faged a cloudlcfs day; and hope looked forward 
with afTurance for a life of happinefs sni honour. 
But (lie foon fell from this envied heio-ht; and 
her misfortune was wrought by fuch unlikely 
means, that it fecmed to have been defignedon 
purpofc as a punifnment and check on human 
confiidence and, vanity." ~ 
" A gentleman, of whom it. v/as hard to- 
fay, whether nature was more liberal to his  
mind, or cruel to his* perfo-n, unfortunately 
204 THE R E V E R I E, 
happened to fi?; his eyes upon her; aiid either 
from inclination, or to fhew the power of hio 
wit, by infpiring her with love, in defpite of 
his deformity, directly marked her out for his 
addrefles. 
" Flattery is the incenfe always offered to 
female beauty, and love the only language 
which it hears : but neither did he think, the 
J. proper v/eapons ffi^ beginning his attack. He 
; v/as fenfible tliiit 'the former would only reflecS^ 
"* reproach on hisownunpl«afmg appearance, and 
obviate the fucc(^fs of "the latter, if offered be- 
fore art had palliated j^5^je^.efe<Sis of nature. 
" He refplyed'. chi;r£ibj-e- to proceed upon 
another «?atn {-^ an.d .^ecbrdingly, wherever he 
f^'fi\$t hof^'i.nffe&d^of entertaining her withhack- 
^ lity^dj:'' fuipDme compliments, and unmeaning 
addreile^Vi^^ affedled to difcover new beauties 
in her mind, which raifed his attention above 
every thing elfe; and difplayed the charms of 
his own underilandingio delicately in the praiie 
of hers, that flie infenfibly became enamoured 
of his converfation, to fuch a degree as to be 
indifferent to all other. 
'* One favourable circumfl-ance is often fuf- 
ficicnt to remove the moft difadvantageous 
opinion. The difgufi: which his deformity 
raifed foon fubfided, and her attention was fo 
fixed upon the perfeciions of his mind, that (he 
quite overlooked the defeats of his form: this 
v.'as a great advance ; but difficulties flill as 
great remained, and which required the molt 
confummate art to conquer. Virtue was the 
rule by which (he guided all her flcps, and 
Fame the darling pallion of her fgul. 
4« 
But 
THE REVERIE. 205 
'* But he was not at a lofs how to proceed. 
As he had before avoided flattering her beauty, 
for fear of drawing contempt upon himfelf, fo 
he now refrained from mentioning the very 
name of love, left her virtue fhould take the 
alarm, and defeat his defign. His converfation 
was entirely fentimental: and he never ex-tn 
glanced at fenfual pleafure, but to fhew his 
difapprobation of it. 
" Such a condudl foon worr the confidence 
of her unexperienced, unfufpedling heart; and 
there was fomething fo flattering in the thought 
of being the fele(5ted frieiKl of fuch a perfon, 
that fhe could not rcfift.itj- but gladly met his 
advances half way, and returned his profeflions 
wit the moft folid and bourrdlers- efteem.  
" The tranfltion from friendfbip- 19 love 
is imperceptible, and feldom fails between the 
diflerent fexes : but here the very means 
which had procured the foimer at the fame time 
fecmed to preclude all hopes of the latter for 
ever. 
" But if this difappointed his dcfires, itfaci- 
litated the gratification of his vanity ; to which 
his heart v/as no lefs a flave. Secure in the pu- 
rity of her own heart, fhe was eaGly led into 
breaches of thofe unefiential forms which 
cuftom has arbitraily eflabliihed as the infcpa- 
rable fhadou's of virtue, and too many fubfti- 
tute in the place of the fubftance. 
" Envy inftantly founded the alarm, blazon- 
ing the imaginary fall in the blackeft colours, 
before the innocent viclimof her rage was fenfi- 
hle that Ihc made the leaft flip." 
CHAP. 
"T 
206 T H E REVERIE. 
CHAP. VII. 
Thi hijiory of CiELiA and Strephon, con^ 
tinned, — An extraordinary method of holding cou" 
'uerfation at a diflancc. People often pay for 
peeping. Love is a riddle, 
H E eiFe6ls of innocence and guilrbftcn 
bear fo near a refemblance as to be mif- 
taken for each other. Provoked atfach injuftice, 
fhe thought it beneath her to pay any farther 
regard to the caprices of public opinion; and, 
confcious of her own innocence, piqued herfelf 
on perfifting in what had been fo bafely mifre- 
prefented : but this imprudent pride was imput- 
ed to another caufe \ and fhe was faid to be 
hardened by guilt into a dejRance of fhame. 
" Her friend^ who had defignedly led her by 
the hand into this labyrinth, thought he now 
had a proper opportunity to unmafk his whole 
defign. Accordingly he began to change the 
the tenour of his difcourfe, and try to pervert 
her principles, or tempt her pailions to rebel 
againft them. He drew pleafure in the molt 
alluring colours, and foftened the horrors of 
vice by every fpecious artifice : arguing againil 
the excellence of virtue from the general op- 
pofition of nature to ks dicSlates -, and, by a da- 
ring perverfion of divine truth, attempting to 
prove the very neceflities of guilt as the proper 
means to merit the rewards of Innocence." But 
" Thou<zh his tongue 
** Drop'd manna,, and could make the worfe 
appear 
'*' The better reafon^ for his thoughts were lowT 
^^^■- She 
THE REVERIE. 207 
She faw that " all luas falfe andhollow^^ and 
refuting his arguments with an indignant afpe- 
rity, convinced him that all attempts of the 
kind muft ever prove in vain : nor was this difap- 
pointment fo fevere as may be imagined. Vani- 
ty had at lead an equal (hare with defire in his 
original defign againft her ; and age and infir- 
mities had now fo far cooled the latter, that he 
was eafily contented with the gratification of 
the former. 
" For this reafon he readily agreed to a pro- 
pofal of hers to hold an intercourfe of foul, 
into which fenfe fhould never be admitted ; and 
as it might not be in their power to meet fo 
often as they muft defire each other's converfa- 
tion, they fettled rules for a correfpondence by 
letter, which nothing fhould ever interrupt. 
" From this time, to enable her to fupport the 
heavy weight of public cenfure and negle6l, of 
which flie now began to be fenfible, flie was 
obliged to have rccourfe to books ; and the turn 
of her thoughts naturally fuggefted the choice 
you faw. 
" Nothing is more dangerous than flying for 
relief from any diftrefs to folly. The natural 
propenfity of t+ie mind to it is fo ftrong, that 
the fainteft (hadow of encouragement from rea- 
fon links them infeparably for ever. The plea- 
fure {he took in thefe books grew upon her in- 
fenfibly, till fhe loft all tafte for every other en- 
joyment; and the ftudy of them wrought fuch 
a change in her mind, that fhe foon relaxed the 
rules of her correfpondence, and defcended to 
write like other mortals. 
" How 
3 
^- 
2o8 THE REVERIE. 
'^ How far this humour might have been Im- 
proved, it is not fair to conjecSlure : perhaps, 
what was her friend's confolation before was her 
protedlion now. However, he keeps up his 
correfpondence with all the ardour of dcfire ; but 
asthis change intheftile might feem to lead to a 
more material one in their conduct:, fhould they 
meet frequently as before, he luckily thought 
of the fantaftic expedient which you faw her 
put in practice of retiring each of them alone at 
an appointed time, to converfe in the power of 
imagination as if together; and to give aconfif- 
tency to their thoughts, the fame letter which 
makes the aflignation appoints the fcene of it 
and the fubjeft of the converfation. 
" There is nothing fo extravagant orabfurd 
but habit will reconcile; efpecially when it flat- 
ters any favourite paffion. Ridiculous as this 
thought of holding an imaginary converfation 
muft appear, (he was fo pleafed with it, that it 
foon became her greateft entertainment; nor to 
this day will fhe fufrer the moft ferious concerns 
of life to interfere with the enjoyment of it. 
" Of thisfhe has given inftances, v/hich have 
been attended with circumftances of fo fevers 
ridicule as muft have cured any mind of fuch a 
folly, tnat was not under an abfolute infatua- 
tion. I will relate one for the whimfical fingu- 
Jarity of it. 
" Soon after this method of converfing was 
fettled between her and her friend, while her 
charms were ftill in all their glory, a nobleman 
of the firft rank v/as fo fmitten with them, that 
he refblved to propofe an union with her for life, 
concluding that the cenfures which had been 
levelkd 
THE REVERIE. 209 
levelled againft her, and were now almoft for- 
got, fomething more recent having given the 
tongue offcandal other employment, were only 
the eftcvSl of envy at her fuperior excellence. 
" The firft hint of his defign was received 
with pleafiire by all her friends ; and he was 
even beginning to make fome advances in her 
efteem, when an unlucky accident at once 
overcaft fo fair a profpecl. 
" As he was walking alone with her one 
morning in the garden, and ftriving to give his 
converfation fuch a turn as Ihould introduces 
declaration of his palTion, as if by accident and 
without the painful formality of a direct addrefs, 
a fervant delivered her a letter, which in the 
abfence of impatience, flie inftantly opened, 
without ever reflecting who was prefent. 
" The pleafure fhe difcovered in her looks 
while fhe was reading it raifed his' curiofity to 
know who her happy correfpondcnt could be, 
for he faw the direction was in a man's hand ; 
and an accident foon prefcnted him an opportu- 
nity of gratifying it : for fhe had fcarce ran the 
letter over, when recollecting the impropriety 
of what (he had done, fhe haftily attempted to 
put it up, and making him an apology.for fuch 
a breach of ceremony, refumed her former con- 
verfation ; but with fuch an inconfutency and 
abfence of mind as evidently fhewed fhe was 
thinking of fomething elfe. 
" But, inftead of putting the letter in her 
pocket, fhe had in her confufion dropped it on 
the ground, which he dire6tly perceived, and 
the nature of his intentions making him think 
he had a right to take every method of gaining 
iiiformation in any thing that might a&6i his 
hap- 
210 THE REVERIE. 
happinefs in (o delicate a point, he refolved if 
poflible to avail hiinfelf of the accident, and get 
a fight of it. Accordingly he led her awav to 
fome company who were in another part of the 
garden ; and as foon as he faw her engaged in 
converfation, feigning an excufe of having 
dropped his handkerchief, went back in fearch 
of the letter, which he readily found ; and 
opening it without hefitation, faw to his utter 
aftoniihment and confufion, that it contained 
the moft rapturous exultations of fuccefsful 
love ; for the further gratification of which, it 
appointed a meeting in the (hady walk at the 
bottom of the garden that very evening. 
It is eafy to conceive hb fituation at this dif- 
covery. The firft impulfe of his rage was to 
find out the bold invader of his happinefs, and 
facrifice him to his juft refentment, as he con- 
cluded, that he could not be ignorant of his in- 
tended alliance with that deceitful wanton : but 
the difficulty was to difcover who he was, for 
the letter was figned only with the fiftitious 
name of Strephorr, and he could not expert that 
fhe would inform him, fbould he charge her 
with her bafenefs, and demand his name. 
" But he was not long at a lofs. He readily 
judged that fhe would be punctual to an affigna- 
tion, which evidently gave her fuch pleafure. He 
therefore refolved to take no notice of what he 
J^^^JlidiY^ixd y but to try if he could not by 
fome means' or other gain admittance into the 
jtt>, garden, and conceal himfelf near the fcene of 
Li, Jp .appointment, foas to be able to dete(51: them in 
■£uch a manner aslhould deprive them of every 
CQlQ,ur of defence or extenuation, and juftify 
th#ifeyerity of his meditated revenge: and for 
feair 
THE REVERIE. an 
fear the lofs of the letter fliould alarm her, he 
laid it exaclly in the place he found i; . ^nd 
turning (liort into another walk, had not gone 
many fteps, when he faw her running with the 
utmoft anxiety in her looks in queft of it, as he 
alfo perceived by the joy that fparkled in her 
eyes when fhe returned to the company, that 
Ihe had found it. 
'* The next p^^rt of his plot fucceeded 
without difficulty: he readily got admittance 
indifguife at the back-door of the garden, as if 
to gratify common curiofity ; and had not been 
many minutes in his concealment, when he 
faw her haften to the place of affignation with 
all the eagernefs and impatience of love. 
" His difappointment then was the fame as 
yours. He heard her hold her imaginary con* 
verfation in the lame manner ; and as it was 
impofTible for him to comprehend what it meant, 
that very circumftance only doubled his anxiety 
to develope fuch a dark and unaccountable fcene, 
" But thou2:h he had not detedted her in the 
flagrant manner he defigned, his fcheme was 
not entirely difappointed, as (he had made the 
difcovery he wanted, by her frequent repetition 
of her lover's name in thecourfe of herconver- 
fation. As foon therefore as fhe retired, he re- 
folved to go directly to him, and require an ex- 
planation of the whole affair: but w«hat was his 
furprife to find that he had been confined to his 
room for many months by the gout, nor had a 
profped: of quitting it foon ! He therefore 
thought that he fhould only make himfelf ridi- 
culous by mentioning the motive of his vifit, 
and fo pafied it oft' under the appearance of 
common ceremony. 
C HAP, 
212 THE REVERIE. 
CHAP. VIII. 
Continued. — Perplexity ivorfe perplexed. A Jlight 
prejudice of education opens a newfcene of confufion. 
A curious accoun t of a Juggler. lie foils the 
Devil at his own ivcapons \ but is furprifed him- 
ff in the midji of his triumph. 
*''' I ""HIS naturally encreafed his perp]exlt3\ 
JL He now confide red the affiiir as a maf- 
ter-piece of intrigue ; the niyftery of which he 
was determined, if poffible to difcover. With 
this defign he diredly difpatched a trufty fer- 
vant to try if he could find out among the fer- 
vants of the other, whether there was any 
intercourfe between them and that lady ; who 
immediately returned with an account, that 
fcarce a day pafl'ed in which they fent not let- 
ters to each other in the moflpublick manner ; 
and particularly, which was the principal point 
of his enquiry, that her footman had received 
one for her that very morning. 
" Theaftonifnment into which this accdunt 
threw him may be eafily conceived. The 
avowed libertinifm of this gentleman's charac- 
ter gave him too juft reafon to form the word 
opinion of any intercourfe with him ; at the 
fame time that the manner in which it was car- 
ried on feemed to contradidl its being of an 
improper nature : but, as this might alfo be only 
a finefle, he refolved to try if he could not 
make ufe of it to confirm that very fufpicioa 
which it was devifed to eludes 
" Accordingly 
THE REVERIE. 213 
*' Accordingly he employed the fame fer- 
vant to corrupt the gentleman's porter, by a 
confiderable bribe, to let him have a fight of 
the next letter he received to fend to her, which 
he folemnly promifed to return fo foon, that it 
fliould not be miffed . 
" The porter had had too much conne£lion 
with the great to be proof to fuch a temptation. 
He gave the letter, and the nobleman had 
the farther aftonifliment to find, that it con- 
tained not only another aflignation, but even 
fpokein raptures of the pleafures of the laft. 
" This involved him in tenfold darknefs. 
He fcarce knew how to believe his fenfes ; and 
began to confider whether the whole might not 
poffibly be a dream. As foon as he recovered a 
little from his adonifliment, he returned the let- 
ter ; and prepared in the fame manner as before to 
be a witnefs of this mofi: furprifmg fcene, when 
upon feeing her former incomprehenfible extra- 
vagancies, he direcSlly concluded fhe was under 
the delufion of ibme fafcination, and that the 
gentleman ufed more than natural means to 
bring her into this flate, to fervefome bafe pur- 
pofcs of his own. 
" Full of this notion, which an unhappy 
prejudice of education, his imagination having 
been filled in his infancy with fuch terrors of 
withcraft and incantation, as it was im- 
pofTible for reafon ever abfolutely to get the 
better of, made him more readily give into, he 
flipped away unperceived by her, and running 
to the houfe, alarmed the whole family with a 
dreadful account of her being, at that very in- 
flant, under the dominion of an evil fpirit. 
" It 
214 THE REVERIE. 
*' It is impoilible to defcrice the confterna- 
tlcn into which this ftcry threw them all ; efpe- 
cially the lady's mother, who, in the vveaknefs 
of extreme age, had refigned herfelf to the iUu- 
fions of a fet of pretended reformers, whofe 
method was to fill the minds of their infatuated 
followers with imaginary terrors, that they 
might the more eafily mould them to their own 
iniquitous purpofes. They ftared at each other 
for fome time, in all the ghaftlinefs of affright, 
unable to fpeak a word : but he knowing that 
the time of her pojfeffion would foon be at an 
end, and having obferved before that no traces 
of it remained after the expiration of the ap- 
pointed hour, defired that they would come out 
with him diredly, and be witnefies of the truth 
of what he told them. 
** On this, fome of the boldeft ventured 
with him, while the reft went pioufly to prayers, 
and coming upon her unperceived, over-heard 
her in high difcourfe, which they readily be- 
lieved his lordfhip's opinion to be with an evil 
fpirit, whofe voice even fome of them confi- 
dently aflerted they heard talking to her, though 
he did not appear to their fight. 
*' As foon, therefore, as her taking leave of 
her imaginary companion made them think 
the fpirit was withdrawn, and that they might 
approach her without danger, they all rufhed 
upon her, and holding her faft, while her fur- 
prize deprived her of power to afk the reafon of 
fuch treatment, hurried her directly into the 
houfe. ^ 
" It had happened, that while theywere out upon 
this important expedition, her mother's ghoitly 
guide had called in as ufual, to enquire into the 
ftate 
THE REVERIE. 215 
flate of her confcience, and to exchange fpiri- 
tual for bodily comforts. The fight of him 
filled them all with joy. " ODo6tor, faid the 
good old lady, you are come in a lucky mo- 
ment." — Ar.d then wringing her hands, *' my 
poor unhappy daughter ! O doctor, the enemy 
has furpriied lier ; the foul fiend has taken 
pofleflion of her body ! O my daughter, my 
daughter !" 
As it was impoflible to conceive what fhe 
meant, the do6tor turned to another of the 
company, whole grief and affright had not (o 
far overpowered her reafon; who in a few 
words informed hini of the whole affair. Though 
upon all occafions, he affumed an appearance 
o[ the highoft .refolution which his pretended 
fantStity of life could infpirc, his foul was fe- 
cretly a flave to every terror which confcious 
guilt could raife to Itartle the moft bigottcd 
luperflition. Such a ftory, therefore, was far 
from beiog agreeable to him : however, as it 
bore not the leaft appearance of probability, and 
cfpecially as it was impoffible for him to retreat 
now, without forfeiting his credit for ever, he 
rcfolved to hide his fears, and a6t his part in 
defiance to his confcience, as he had often 
done in other cafes, be the confcquence what 
it would. 
" While he was forming this refolution, he 
Hood with his hands and half-clofed eyes raifed 
to heaven, as if wrapt in mental adoration and 
prayer^ to invoke the divine aififtance : an atti- 
tude which he had practifedfo often, whenever 
he wanted time to confider how he fliould ex- 
tricate himfelf out of any difficulty, or carry 
joa any glaring impofuion, that he now fell 
into 
2i6 THE REVERIE. 
into it mechanical^. Then turning to the 
trem'blin^ matron, " Fear not madam," faid 
he, in a flow folemn voice, and with an air of 
importance, "the prayers of the faithful are 
able to prevail oyer all the powers of Satan. 
Thy daughter ftiall be reftored: my fpirit hath 
received, aflurancc, and longs to undertake the 
conteft. Now fhall thou behold the prince of 
darknefs put to flight, and all his ftrength de- 
feated by tfce word of feeble man : but faith 
does all." " Juft as he faid this, he heard 
them forcing the fuppofed demoniack into the 
room, and fummoning up all his courage 
-and effrontery, prepared *p exorcife her accord- 
ing to a ritual of his own invention : the terror, 
that W fpiteof all his efforts to conceal it glared 
in his eyes aflifting his impofition, and palling 
upon all prefent for the emanation of enthufia- 
iHck rapture. 
" All defcription falls fliort of fuch a fcene. 
'tlhe aflonifhed patient was obljged to undergo 
the whole ceremony, without heing permitted 
to afk the meaning of it, every ,time flie at- 
tempted to fpeak her voice being drowned by 
a general exclamation of- affright and folemn 
adjuration to filence^ which her amazement 
made her the more eafily "comply with. 
" As file fat.therefore in filent wonder, with- 
out any appearance of diflradtion, during the 
Jafl acl of the farce, the ^Ji^ggler^ asfoon as it 
was finifhed, addreiling iiimfejf to her mother, 
" I tqld you madam (faid he with an air of 
* -SeeViCAVi^Hcirmonies and religioui cujiomi. . VoJ. Ill, 
■' . triumph), 
^i^:^4'^C^ 
THE R E V E R I E. 217 
triumph), that my method .v/?^ infallible : it vj'as 
partly invented by that fage and pious-^prince 
jfames I. to whom the policy of Satan's kingdom 
was as well known V that of his own ; the reft 
is an addition of mine, in which the fuccefs 
tcftifies that my (pirit was not denied divine af- 
fiftance : fcepticks and infidels may fcefF and 
doubt ; but to pious faith is given demonftra- 
tion." 
Then turning to his patient, " And you, 
my daughter, fhould repent of all your evil 
ways, and turn your heart to rightcoufnefs, left 
the evil one fliould not only come again and 
take pofTeflion of his. former habitation, but 
alfo bring others more wicked than himfelf with 
him; fo that your laft eftate would be v^ovi'c 
than the firft. Open your heart therefore- to 
the entrance of faith, and^obey the- tv?// of 
grace." 
This edifying addrcfs had an eflecl very contra-: 
ry to what v/as intended. The authoritative air  
with which he delivered it, and the infmuations 
o{' fome iccrct guilt in hi^ exhortation to repen- 
tance, provoked her fpiiif, naturally high, to fuch 
a degree, that her anger .getting the better of 
her aftonifnmer.t, " I defire to know, fir, (faid 
file, with a look of indignation and contempt) 
by what right you prefume fo fpeak to mc in 
this infolcnt manner?. Overpowered by vio- 
lence, and out of refpeiji to a perfon vvhomiL 
am forry to fee join in fuch an unnatural com- 
bination, I have fubmitted to lifren to th^ incom-. 
prehenfible nonfenfe, by which the facred'namq^'; 
of the Deity has been profaned in-.the ridicuJoiif^  
farce, which you have juft been a£ting : .but Xaiir 
not under the fame obligation to bear with you.'' ' 
Vol. I. L 'The 
ii9 THE REVERIE. 
" The refentment that flafhed from her eyes," 
when fhe began to fpeak, had railed the ap- 
prehenfions of the company, that flie had not 
been fufficiently exorcifed, which were too 
flrongly confirmed by what file faid : refpe^f, 
however, if not perhaps fear, prevented their 
interrupting her, till a tame jack-daw that had 
got up to the top of the houfe happening to 
chatter as he fell down the chimney, juft as (lie 
faid thefe laft words, they all thought the Jugg^ 
lers prophetick fears fulfilled ; and that a legion 
of devils was coming to take pofTeflion of her, 
and falling upon their knees at the fame inftant, 
the Jiigg^er began to run his lore over again in 
the moft violent agitation ; his fuperflitious 
imaginationtaking the general alarm, while the 
reft hung down their heads, nor dared to raife 
their eyes for fear of feeing fom'e horrible fight. 
CHAP. IX. 
^he Hifiory o/Cjelia and Strephon concluded* 
The Ju G G LER juggled 5 and the myjlery cleared 
up at lafi. Habit too powerful for convidion, 
The advantage of making the firji Jiory good. 
c«r-j-N{^j5 doubled her diftrefs, and almofi: 
X communicated the infedion to her. 
The terror glaring in all their ghaftly looks_ 
convinced her that there was fomething in their 
conduct more than fhe could comt-rchend, and 
that they did not a6l thus meerly to infult and 
ridicule her as flie had imagined. Unable there- 
fore 
THE REVERIE. 2i 
^Tore to refift her impatience to be informed in 
the meaning of it, fhe ftepped up to her nobl6 
lover, for no one dared to hold her any longer, 
and addrefling him with an earneftnefs thatfliew- 
ed the anxiety and aflonifhment of her foul, 
and added not a little to the affright of his, 
*' To you, my lord, (faid flie) I apply for re- 
lief from an amazement and perplexity whichi 
torture me alm.oft to madnefs. What means 
the violence which has been offered to me ? 
What means this incomprehenfible behaviour of 
all prefent ? You have given me reafon to ima- 
gine I held fome place in your efteem ; by 
that 1 adjure you not to let me burft in igno- 
rance." 
"Though his iordfhip's fright was little infe- 
rior to that of the oldcft woman prefent, and 
fcarce left him power to comply with her re- 
cjueft, there was fomcthing fo alFeding in this 
application, that hexould not refift it. " Ma- 
dam (faid he, looking earneftly at her as he 
arofe fi'om his knees) I hardly know how to 
obey your commands, for fear of giving you of- 
fence." 
" Fear not, my lord, (anfwered (lie, impa- 
tiently) I a(l<: for information, and defire to be 
told the truth." 
" Then, madam, I am forry'to tell you that 
you were feized in the garden on an opinion of 
your being at that inftant under the power of 
witchcraft, if not actually poffeffed by fome evil 
.' fpirit ; and to deliver you from fo dreadful a 
fituation was and is the motive of that beha- 
viour at v/hich you feem to be fo much fur- 
prifed." 
L 2 ' " Be- 
120 THE REVERIE. 
*' Bewitched ! Poflefled ! Patience. Kind 
heaven, grant me patience ! What can have 
given occafion to an opinion (o bafely infamous 
and abfurd?" 
" Before he had time to reply, the unlucky 
jackdaw hopped from the chimney, and, with- 
out giving him any warning, perched upon the 
Juggler^s head, who happened to kneel very near 
with his back toward it, and at the fame inftant 
repeating the tremendous chatter, caught him 
by the nofe, which was thrown up in his ufual 
attitude, as he muttered over his incoherent eja- 
culations. 
" Such an attack was too dreadful to be borne. 
The affrighted wretch threw himfelf forward on 
the ground, and in the guilty terrors of his 
imagination, thinking all the devils of hell had 
laid hold on him to revenge the infolence of his 
pretending to an authority over them, roared 
cut with all his might, " O fpare me ! Spare 
your poor fervant, and I will never give you 
the leaft difturbance more ! Never prefume to 
offend you by mimicking a power which I too 
well know I am not poffeffed of! Do what you 
pleafe with all the world befide, but fpare your 
faithful indefatigable flave ! Spare me at leaft 
for this time, and take me wholly when I die." 
'' His lordfliip, who by his having rifen to an- 
fwer the adjuration of his miftrefs, had an op- 
portunity of feeing thecaufe of thepoory^^o-^/^r'i 
fright, the ridiculoufnefs of which opened his 
eyes to the abfurdity of the whole fcene, burft 
out into an immoderate fit of laughter, in which 
fhe joined him with all her power. 
As foon as he was able to fpeak, '* Never 
fear, doctor, (faid he) I'll infure you, for this 
time j 
THE REVERIE. 221 
time : vour mafter has given ycu the reprieve you 
cJcfire, and left this honeft jack-dhvv to witnefs 
the bargain." 
" It is impoflible to exprefs the effect which 
this fpeech had upon all prefent. They in- 
ibntly raifed their heads, and turning their 
eyes to the proftrate Juggler^ Taw thejack-daw 
bulled in tearing his wig, which had unluckily 
tangled about his claws. 
" This fight inftantly put an end to all their 
fears : they raifed a peal of laughter that (hook 
the room, which fufficiently informed the un- 
fortunate juggler of his dif2;race, Vv'ho, rifing 
from the ground in the utmofl: confufion, flunk 
away without daring to fliew his face, efpecially 
as he had made fuch a fatal dilcovery of his i<r- 
iiorance and impoftures, as it was impoflible for 
bio mofl: inventive afllirance and hypocrify to 
extenuate. 
'* But the company was too Intent upon other 
matters to take any farther notice of him. As 
foon as the tumult of their mirth, in which all 
flrove to hide the remembrance of their pafl: 
folly by their prefent loudnefs, had fubfidcd, 
they made all poflible apologies to the lady for 
their behaviour, and expreflbd the higheft allo- 
iiifliment at their own weaknefs, in giving cre- 
dit to fuch a ridiculous ftorv, at the fame time 
fixing their eyes upon his lordfhip as the author 
of it. 
" This threw him into a very difagreeable 
fituation. He faw that it was neceflary for 
him to exculpate himfelf ; but how to begin, 
or in what manner to do it, he was utterly at 
a lofs. 
L 3 *« The 
222 THE REVERIE. 
The lady and he flood looking at eacfe 
other thus, for fome time, till at length her 
impatience made her break lllence. " 1 hope, 
my lord, (faid (he) that you are faiisfied with 
the fuccels of your.exorcifm ; and now that I 
am reflored to myfelf, fhould be glad to know 
your lordfhip's reafon for entertaining an opi- 
nion not only fo injurious to me, but alfo (o^ 
ridiculous in itfelf.'' 
. ''Madam, (anfwered he, in the higheft con- 
fufion) I fee the abfurdity of the fcene in the 
jftrongefl light; and fhould be fincerely glad 
that the removal of one difficulty convinced me, 
that the opinion which gave rife to it was as ill- 
grounded as I am fenfible the confequences 
of that opinion have been ridiculous^* 
" For heaven's fake, what can that difficulty 
be, my lord ? Speak ! Speak without referve ! 
That delicacy which at other times is necef- 
fery, is improper in fuch cafes as this, and muf^ 
give place to plainnefs and fuicerity." 
"1 mean, madam,, thofe myfterious conver- 
sations which you hold in the fliady walk, yoi^^ 
heji know by what meansy with an abfentperfon.'* 
" Alea72s, my lord ! — -By vjhat means! — I 
don't underfland you." ■ 
"; " Such converfations, madam, can be held 
only by the affiflance of evil fpirits^or under the 
illufion of fafcination : this is what I mean, 
madam ! And I wifh I vyas not obh'ged to add, 
that your manner of ailing, at the fame time, 
was fo extravagant, that nothing but being 
tinder fome fuch unhappy influence can account 
for it." 
It is not eafy to conceive the confufion 
with which thefe words ilruck her. In the 
flightiueis 
THE REVERIE. 223 
flightinefs of a warm imagination, (he hadcon- 
fidered this method of holding an ideal conver- 
tion, not only as innocent and fafe from repre- 
henfion, but alfo as fomething of a refined and 
elevated nature, never fufpeding its beino- 
fubjedl to fo ridiculous a conftrudion, nor in- 
deed giving herfelf time to rcHecSi:, that (he 
muft certainly be taken notice of one time or 
other; and fome fuch wrong condrudtion put 
upon it, as it was impofTible that reafon ever 
could fuggeft the moll diltant conjedure of the 
light. 
'' But her eyes were now opened, and fhe 
faw her folly in its mod mortifying confequen- 
ces. At firft (he was undetermined" how to a6r, 
whether to attempt pafTing it off as no more 
than a meer whim of her own, without any 
meaning or defign, or candidly to confefs the 
whole ; for flie faw the indifpenfible necefTity 
file was under to give fome account or other of 
to 
It. 
''The difficulty was diftreffing; the latter 
muft betray a myftery, which, as too fublime 
for common minds to comprehend, would only 
expofe her to farther ridicule; and the former 
{he thought would fhew a levity and childifh- 
nefs which muft bring her underftanding .in 
queftion. 
\" This reflexion determined her. When 
once a woman entertains an opinion of her own 
underftanding, there is nothing which ftiewill 
not facrifice to preferve it. ''' I find myfelf 
reduced, my lord, (faidflie, after fome paufe). 
to the difagreeable neceftity of difclofmg what 
I will own I had rather conceal. Theconverfa- 
tions which have given occafion to all this folly 
L 4 and 
2IZ4 THE REVERIE. 
« and difturbance, are fo miich out of the com- 
mon way, that, to fet them in a proper light, it 
will be neceilary to trace them to their original/' 
'* She then, in a few words, ingeniicufly told 
the whole, in the manner I Lave related ; and, 
- to confirm the truth of her account, produced 
ieveral of \\q.x frhnd' s letters, making appoint- 
ments for, and fixing the fubje^ts ot their ima- 
ginary converfations. 
" His lordihip, Vv'ho, from the circum- 
flances he knevv^, though for obvious reafons 
he had thought proper to conceal his know- 
ledge of them, was convinced that fhe had 
told the truth, afked her pardon in the po- 
litefi: manner for the part he had unwittingly 
afted in the affair, and v/as fo charmed with 
her ingenuity, and the delicacy and fublimity 
of her fentiments, that he left her, ten times 
more in love than ev^er.*' 
"^ But when he came in a cooler moment to 
3efle<5t on the chara6ier of her friend^ and the 
unhappy confequences of utter lofs of reafbn, 
which fuch a flightinefs of imagination might 
too probably end in, even though his other 
apprehenfions could be removed, prudence pre- 
vailed upon him, to put a violence upon his 
inclinations, and break off, while it was yet in 
his power, fo dangerous a conne6lion. 
" As to the lady, her mind was fo much 
taken up with her darling folly, that inflead of 
being cured of it by all this vexation and dif- 
- grace, fhe immediately gave her friend an ac- 
^v'^cpunt of the whole, and appointed a meeting 
*:""^^h'a.t very evening in her clofet, to enjoy a 
;3iih together at fo whimfical an affair. 
<' From 
THE REVERIE. 225 
*^ From that time fhe has dreamed away her 
life in the manner you faw, an abfolute blank 
in the creation, ufelefs to hcrfclf and all the 
world ; To unaccountable a ftory raifmg fuch a 
prejudice againft her, that no one ever fought 
an alliance with her after. 
" Nor were the confequences of it much 
lefs difagreeable to \\qv friend. The J^J^S^^^'y 
who was fenfible that he had totally forieited 
his influence in that family by the unfortunate 
adventure of the jack-daw, was rcfolved to 
obviate the effcvSl of their tellin^r the llorv, and 
be revenged for the mirth they had indulged 
at his expence, by making fuch a reprefenta- 
tion of the whole as fhould throw the burden 
entirely upon them. 
" Accordingly, the very next morning, he 
entertained his fleck with a moft melan.holv 
tale of a lady of diftincSion's being bewitched 
by a certain gentleman, and holding frequent 
converfations with him, in his abfcnce, by the 
afnflance of an evil fpirit, under whofe domi- 
nion he had put her; and how he himfelf had 
offered to deliver her by the power of his 
prayers; but that her friends, out of a perverfe 
pride, had refufed his afliftance, and afi-c(fled to 
make a jeft of the affair; and then, with th« 
higheft appearance of piety and compaflion for 
fo deplorable a cafe, offered up a long and fer- 
vent prayer for her deliverance. 
' This reprefentaiion he knew would pre- 
poflefs his followers in his favour, an.d prevent' . . 
their f^-ivinsr credit to any thins that mi2;ht be . v' 
faid to his difadvantage, however notorious .a>a- ' 
true: and though he did not di redely tell tl«,.;-' 
perfons names, he, as if without defign, gav* ; 
L 5 fuch 
226 T H E R E V E R I E. 
fuch a defcription of them, that no one could 
be at lofs to know whom he meant. 
*' This ftory, as he intended, was induftri- 
oufly propagated, with the advantage of fuch 
circumflances as every relater thought proper 
to add -y in conieqence of which not only the 
lady was afhamed to fhew her face, but there 
w^as alfo fuch a prejudice raifed againft her 
friendy that for a long time he was infulted and 
reviled by the mob in the moft opprobrious 
manner whenever he ftirred out, and more than 
once was in danger of having his innocence 
put to the teft of a dippiTig ; the deformity of 
his perfon ' unhappily agreeing with the idea 
which the vulgar entertained of witches, 
and confirming their prejudice againft him;- 
v/hlle by this addrefs of making good the firft 
ftory, the fecret by which he had fo long fup- 
ported himfelf againft the force of numberlefs 
dete6lions of the blackeft nature, the Juggler 
haj the fatisfacStion to fee his enemies over- 
whelmed with a ftroke which he had fo dex* 
teroully fl:iifted from his own head/' 
CHAP. 
THE REVERIE. ^^^. 
CHAP. X. 
Different appearances of the fame ohjc5l fecn In 
different lights, A whiinfical reprefentation . of 
the laj} efforts of gallantry^ with other no lefs 
curious ?natters, 
*' ^7 O U may perhaps have a curiofity (con- 
X tinued the fpirit) to fee one who has 
a6led a part in every rcfpec^t fo extraordinary 
as tliis gentleman. Behold him yonder; and 
acknovi'lege the power of a wit able to conquer 
the antipathies of nature, and make fuch a per- 
fon the obje6l of a tender paflion." 
The aftonifhment with which the fight of 
him ftruck me is not to be conceived. Though 
I was prepared to cxpecl an appearance re- 
markably difagreeable, my imagination had ne- 
ver framed an idea of fuch abfolute deformity 
as now met my eyes. The defcription would 
be too difgufting. Turning from him haftily, 
" Is it polTible, O my guide, (faid I) that this 
can have been the objedl for whom that beau- 
teous creature facrificed her happinefs ? 1 have 
feen too many inftances of the frailty and ca- 
pricioufnefs of the female heart ; but never 
did I tnink they could life fo high as this be- 
fore.'' 
'' View him again, (faid he, touching my 
eyes with his wand) and then let me hear your 
fcntiments," . ' 
L 6 « O 
i2S ' THE R E V E R I ]g, 
*' O gracious fpirit ! (exclaimed I, in a tranf- 
port) what lovely creature can this be ? Such 
beauty never did my eyes behold before this 
moment. What grace! what elegance 1-^ 
And then the unbounded generous benevo- 
lence! That fpirited fenfibility and fire! — 
Sure he mufb be the mafter-piece of nature 1 
Some favourite work of heaven, to fhew man- 
kind an inftance of perfection." 
" Such is the light! (anfv^ered he with a 
fmile, as he touched my eyes again with the 
■wand, and reftored the gentleman to his former 
sppearance) fuch is the light in which his 
writings reprefent him ; and fo does the brilli- 
ancy of his wit dazzle the delighted imagina- 
tion, and make his very defeats appear perfec- 
tions. I have given you this view of him, to 
convince you of the error of judging too haf- 
tily from the firfl: appearance. Not that you 
are to give too i:iiplicit credit to this either. 
To form a proper judgm.ent of a man, his ac- 
tions muft be confidered ; and though the mo- 
tive may in reality often alter the intrinfick 
merit even of thefe, the error will be pardon- 
able. Obferve his prefent employment, and it 
"will give you a juft idea of his chara6ter. 
Such parts of his paft life as may illuftrate 
this, and afford inftru6live entertainment, I 
will afterwards draw a fhort fketch of." 
On turning my eyes then to the gentleman, 
I faw him in the moil whimfical fituation pof- 
fible to be conceived. Pie was fitting up in 
his bed, wrapped in fiannels, and fupported by 
boliier.^, with a writing-table before him, fixed 
upon a frame that fiood acrofs the bed, to pre- 
vent its bearing on his feebls knees. 
Vi\ 
THE REVERIE. 22^ 
On this lay an hqap of love-letters, odes, and 
fonnets, the fubjedts of which were fo ill fuited 
to his condition, that they almoft fecmed to be 
a fatire on it, at the fame time that he perufed 
them with an appearance of pleafure, which 
made his very infirmities ridiculous, every at- 
tempt at laughter being echoed by a groan, 
every feeble fmile followed by a frown of 
agony. 
As foon as he had read them through with 
attention, he reclined his head upon his fhoul- 
der, and, (hutting his eyes, fell into a medita- 
tion on the manner in which he ftiould anfwer 
them. 
When he had mufed for fome moments in 
this pofture, *' Sylvia! (faid he, thinking 
aloud) Sylvia! — Aye, fhe begins. Raptures 
and fire for her ! — Damon muft prefs her home. 
Youth and luxuriant health require a bold ad- 
drefs. The thought will warm me, elevate 
my fancy! — O my (houlderf — My back too!" 
Then calling to a fervant, " Fetch me another 
blanket. The cold (hoots through me. There ! 
That will do! So much for Sylvia! (conti- 
nuing his former foliloquy) Who comes next? 
— Corinna, — Wanton baggage! — Amoret muft 
wooe in double entendre ! Lewdnefs fcarce wrapt 
in gauze muft be his cue. — Thischolic — Oh! 
— Some cordial ! Fill the glafs. O my bowels \ 
— So. Now I'm better. Then {qx Pamela. 
I'm tired of Mufidcrus, I mufl: drop her. That * 
unimpafiioned fentimental ftrain gives me the 
hip. Fd fooncr write a fermon. — Chloe ! — 
Luanda! — Phillis! Aye. They'll come of 
courfe I I need not ftudy much for them." 
Having 
0.2O THE REVERIE. 
Having ran over the lift of his correfpondents 
in this manner, he directly began to anfwer 
them, as faft as the frequent interruptions of 
his various pains and aches w^ould permit. 
It is inconceivable with what addrefs and 
fpirit he afllimed all thefe different characters, in 
fpite of the repugnancy of nature, in his en- 
feebled tortured ftate to every fenfation of plea- 
fure. Gay, grave, or loofely light, cold, 
amorous, pious, or profane, he was every thing 
to every one, according to the part he under- 
took. 
The fatigue of fuch a tafk was too great. As 
foon as it was finifhed, his fpirits failed him, 
and he funk back upon the bed, where he lay 
in m.ore than infant imbecility, while his 
fervant removed the writing-table, and locked 
up his works. 
" What think you now (faid my guide) of 
the volubility of human genius? — Of the power 
of imagination to create its ov/n happinefs?" 
'' It is impoffible (anfwered I) not to admire 
fuch abilities, though the ufe they are put to 
almoft takes off their merit : for, what can be 
conceived more ridiculous and difgufting than 
to fee old age mimicking the levities of youth, 
and pretending pafllons which it can no longer 
feel ; pafHons too powerful of themfelves with- 
Odt fuch irritation^ and to which nature that 
makes their impulfe irrefiftible prefcribes myf- 
terious privacy and reftraint." 
'' Yet fuch (replied the fpirit) has been the 
conftant bufmefs of his life, and to this foolifli 
vicious vanity have abilities been proftituted, 
which proper application would have made an 
honour to himlelf, and an advantage to his 
4 country* 
THE REVERIE. 231 
country. Sometimes, it is true, he has broke 
the chains of this infatuation, and given in- 
flances of the moft exalted powers and virtues 
of the human mind ; but the force of habit foon 
funk him down again to his former folly, and 
the glory of thefe fhort emerfions, like lighten- 
ing flafhing through the darknefs of the nighty 
feemed only to (hew his indolence in a more 
flriking light. 
" You have feen the number of fonnets and 
epiftles he has now wrote in varied chara6tersy 
and to various perfons, and juftly reprehended 
the folly of an amufement fo inconfrftent with 
his prefent ftate, fo much beneath his better 
reafon. 
" But how much higher ftill will your indig- 
nation rife when you know, that of all thofe in 
writing to whom he thus confumes the few re- 
maining moments of his life, two only have any 
exigence out of his own imagination, Calia 
whom you have juft now feen, and one more, 
whofe vices have been a difgrace to her fex ; 
though, to indulge his abfurd vanity, he fhews 
thefe labours of his folly as the genuine pro- 
duce of a real correfpondence. 
" The hiftory of the former you already 
know ; that of the other, though not fomuch 
out of common life, is filled with incidents 
which would afford abundant matter of enter- 
tainment, were they not foreign to our prefent 
purpofe. One. only in which this gentleman 
was concerned I will relate, as it illuflrates his 
charader in the ftrongeft light." 
CHAP, 
S13Z THE REVERIE. 
CHAP. XI. 
'j§necdotes of a celebrated female. A fencer foileS 
at his ozun iveapons.] Secret of a correfpondence _ 
not fo unco?nfnon as unaccountable j with ajlrik-' 
ifig injlance of vicious vanity, A neiu fcene, 
*' ^TT^ HIS celebrated female was one whom 
JL her vices of every kind had reduced to 
the neceffity of ftriving to fubfift by ftratagem, 
when debauchery had anticipated old age, and 
worn ofF the bloom of thofe beauties which had 
been the firft caufe of her fall, and the price of 
whofe proftitution had fmce afforded her a 
wretched fupport. 
" In the promifcuous acquaintance of fuch a 
life, fhe happened to fall into the company of 
this gentleman, and, readily forming an idea of 
his characSler, judged that he was a proper fub- 
je(Si: for her to try her talents on. 
" Accordingly fhe wrote him a letter, pro- 
feiling a paflion, the extraordinarinefs of which 
for fuch an objeil: fhe palliated by praifing the 
charms of his mind, and turning the imaginary 
advantages of external beauty into the moft de- 
licate and poignant ridicule ; and propofing a 
corrcfpondence, on condition of his giving her 
an inviolable afiurance, that he never would 
take ariy methods to find her out, as it was ab- 
folutely impolTible for them to have any perfonal 
iniercourfe whatfoever, gave him an addrefs, by 
which fhe took care ic fiiould not be in his 
pQV/er to trace her. 
. '. "This 
THE REVERIE. 233 
*' This was attacking him at his own wea- 
pons. The vivacity and wit difplayed in her 
letter, for nature had been as liberal to her in 
the cndowmenrs of mind as in the beauties of 
forin, and her way of life, which had worn out 
the latter, ferved only to polifh and give a 
keennefs to the former, furprifed and charmed 
him beyond exprcffion. Befide, niyftery doubles 
the plt-afure of intrigue, by giving fcope to the- 
imagination incelTantly to frame new fchemcs 
of delight, and keeping the attention always 
hxtd. He therefore readily accepted her offer, 
and begun a correfpondence, in the courfe of 
which ihe raifed his defires fo high, for he was 
not then quite funk into his piefent ftate of de- 
crepitude, and played with them io artfully,- 
fometimes feeming to difcover an inclination,, 
and then darting difficulties as from virtue, and 
giving equivocal hints of dependence in her 
circumflances, that (he led him infenfibly ta 
jnake her moft liberal offers, if fhe would only 
indulge him with an interview on terms of the 
ftridlcft honour ; and, to remove every doubt of 
the fincerity of his intentions, figned his pro- 
pofal regularly with his own name, the corre- 
spondence between them having been till then 
carried on under the fiditious ones of Corydon 
and J^hillis, 
" Though this was direftly what fhe aimed 
at, fhe ffill affeded difficulties, and expreffed 
doubts to preferve appearances, and draw him 
to explain and confirm his propofals beyond a 
poffibility of retraction or evalion ; and then at 
length complied with his defire of an interview, 
with all the diffidence of virgin mgdefly, tJd& 
234 THE REVERIE. 
coy^ relu^ant^ amorous delay of unexperienced 
young defire. 
'* Raifed to the higheft pinnacle of expecta- 
tion by this management, his aflonifamcnt may 
be eafily conceived, when he met an old ac- 
quaintance at the place of afTignation. His dif- 
appointment was {o great, that he ftared af her 
for fome moments before he could believe his 
fenfes. 
" But fhe foon convinced him that he was no 
longer under a mifiake. Throwing herfclf at 
his feet, fhe conjured him to pardon a deception 
which necefTity and hopelefs love equally fug- 
gefted; and, wretched as he muft know her 
circumftances to be, offered to return him all 
his letters, and depend entirely on his genero- 
fity, if he would only allow her to enjoy per- 
fonally that place in his efteem which he had 
honour, d her correfpondence with ; and ap- 
pealed to all her letters, if flie had been guiltjr 
of any other deceit than that tacite one of not 
revealing herfelf diredtly ; or had given him juft 
reafon to form any particular expe(5tation from 
this meeting, in which he could fay he was dif- 
- appointed, 
*' She was fufficiently acquainted with him 
to be convinced of her fafety, in making this 
offer. His ample fortune raifed him above re--' 
gard to money; and no human heart ever 
glowed with a more benevolent readinefs to 
difpenfe it to the relief of the diftrefled. Be- 
fide, fhould he fhew any defign to take sjin' un- 
generous advantage of this confidence, the're 
was a material difference between actually giv- 
ing' up his letters, and making fuch an offer;^ 
which ftie could eafily retra6t. *"iV -^ 
THE REVERIE. 22s 
. *' It was fome time before he recovered him- 
felf fufficiently to give her an anfwer. At 
length, having weighed every circumftance dif- 
pafTionately, he railed her from the ground, 
and fmiling, with a beneficence that diflipated 
all her doubts, '^ Make no apology, madam, 
(fahd he) for a device that has aftorded me the 
higheft pleafure 1 have ever enjoyed. All man- 
kind wears a mafk ; and happy are they to 
whom the pulling it ofF proves no greater dif- 
advantage. li 1 have fhewn any furprize at 
feeing you, it was only at my own inattention, 
that had not before difcovered the beauties of 
your mind in fo much converfation as we have 
had together." 
*' He then afTured her of his friendfhip, and 
in return for the ^enerous offer (lie had made 
him of reftoring his letters, gave her a conn-. 
derable fum of money, to fettle her affairs; 
which (he preferred to an annuity, that might 
prove precarious." 
" Since that time {he has been, though pri^ 
vately, his principal correfpondent in diff^erent 
chara(Slers, which fhe aflumes with as much 
eafe as himfelf, to give variety and afford mat- 
ter for agreeable furprize, the pleafure of which 
he never fails to reward liberally on the difco- 
very : thus fhe is the Cynthia, Chloe, Conjlan- 
tia, Phryne, Phillis, Sec. of his mufe ; and in- 
deed fends him all the letters he fiiews with 
fuch oftentation as from diff'erent perfons, ex- 
cept thofe he often does himfelf the honour of 
writing to hfmfelf, Calia's being in general too 
particular for publick infpedlion. 
'' In one inftance only has their correfpon-i ^^ 
. ndi^lli^ been made public, which was by her ad-v 
^/^V dreflin^'^- 
&i 
*iZb THE REVERIE. 
drclTing to him a fpecious apology for the par- 
ticular vice of her profe/Hon, in which (he lef- 
iens the merit, if not denies the ncceflity, of the 
oppofite virtue that has ever been efteemed the 
indifpenfibie teft of female honour. His ac- 
cepting fuch an addrefs at a time of life when 
the fubje^l of it was mecr matter of fpeculatioa 
to him, is a ftrong though not uncommon in- 
ftance of the force of vicious habit, which can 
thus influence old age to a ridiculous vanity of 
inhnuating a tafte for the moli reprehenilble 
pleafures of youth, by countenancing them in 
theory, after the practice is become impof- 
liblc. 
'' But the greateft danger of this infatuation 
is, when it fixes upon a particular objedl:. Its 
force, v/hich before was weakened by difperfion, 
is then colled^i^d into one point, and the extra- 
vagance of its efledts encreafes in proportion as 
the abilities for its gratification fail." 
*' Obferve that perfon walking in deep me- 
ditation, by the fide of yonder ftream. The 
fituation he is in at this very moment is one of 
the -moft ftriking inftances nature has ever 
fliewn of the difEculty of fhaking ofF the afcen- 
dency which loofe, lafcivious blandifliments 
and female artifice will infenfibly gain over the 
heart, in fpite of the ftrongeft admonitions of 
reafon and virtue. 
" While he is forming a refolution, on his 
fteadinefs, in which depends the crifis of his 
fate, I'll give you a few general fketches of his 
pad: life, as far as is necciTary to explain his 
prefent perplexity." 
CHAP. 
THE REVERIE. 23; 
CHAP. XII. 
Account of a remarkable p erf on. Common confg^ 
quences of a co77mion connexion, TJje feme 
cha?7ged, A good partner often helps out a bad 
game, 
*' J-T^^ y^^^^ openea with every profpcfl 
X X of happincl's and glory, which an ex- 
alted rank and the moft promifing abilities of 
mind could prefent ; nor did his rifing years 
difappoint the moft fanguine hopes formed of 
him, till an unlawful paffion, after his fhadow 
had begun to lengthen in the vale of life, poi- 
foned his domeftic peace, and gave his mind a 
loofer turn. 
'^Happening to go to one of the fcenes of 
public entertainment with which this place 
abounds, he was ftruck with fomething in the 
appearance of one of the female performers. 
Curiofity to know whether her converfatioji 
was equally agreeable with her looks prompted 
him to intimate a defire of fitting half an hour 
in her company, after her performance was 
ended. His rank raifed him above refufal ; flie 
received his invitation as an honour, and ex- 
erted her powers of pleafing to fuch advantage, 
that, though he had not the leaft intention'^of 
^ entering into any particular conne6lion with 
her when he defired this interview, before they 
parted he propofed to her to quit her prefent 
precarious occupation, and live with him. 
The 
238 THE REVERIE. 
" The beauties of fuch perfons, as well as 
their talents, are too often venal. She com- 
plied with joy; and fafliion, if not abfolutely 
juftifying fuch indulgencies, at leaft making 
them pafs uncenfured, he not only received 
her publickly in the charader of his miilrefs, 
but alfo, to remove every obftacle to his plea- 
sure, procured her profligate hufband an em- 
ployment in one of the diftant colonies ; who 
readily made the infamous though advantageous 
exchange of an abandoned wife, for an inde- 
pendent fubfiftence. 
" When a woman of this caft once gets ad- 
miilion into a man's heart, (he leaves no artifice 
untried to gain the abfolute dominion of it. Hers 
were too fuccefsful. By her infmuating addrefs 
fhe foon improved the influence of her charms 
to fuch a degree, as to be an over-match for rea- 
fon in all his refolves, and in fome meafure to 
become the foverei2;n arbitrefs of his fate. 
" Virtue makes many ftruggles before it will 
entirely give up an heart of which it once has had 
pofieffion ; of this the perplexity in which you 
behold him at prefent is a fignal proof. Surfeited 
"with the tumultuous gratification of loofe de- 
fire he languifhes for the pure tranquil happi- 
nefs of connubial love. On this important oc- 
cafion prudence and inclination have gone hand 
in hand in directing his choice, of the fuccefs 
of which reafon fees no room to doubt. The 
only difficulty is, to break the chains of his pre- 
fent unhappy connection, as the generous deli- 
cacy of his heart will not permit him to put on 
an appearance of diflike, or exert an authority 
over )ne abfolutely in his power, and who has 
al\v. '^een fubfervient to his pleafure j and fhe 
is 
THE REVERIE. 239 
IS too firmly attached to her own intereft to un- 
derftand the milder hints of rejedion which he 
has of late given her. The throws of fuch an 
heart in this trying conflicl may be worthy -of 
attention." 
Juftas the fpirit faid this, theperfon of whom 
he fpolce flopped fliort, and knitting his brow, 
as if in the a6l of forming fome important re- 
folution, " It {hall befo! (faid he, with vehe- 
mence, and flapping his right hand upon his 
heart) Itfhallbefo; T'll fhake otF this difgrace- 
ful infatuation, and return once more to the 
deferted paths of virtue and of glory." -At 
thefe words a blufh of confcioiis indic^natioA 
overfpread his face -, and his eyes fparkled 
with the ardour of a refolution which inflantly 
enlivened all his fame. 
He was prevented from purfuing his medita- 
tions any farther by the approach of a perfon, 
the fight of whom feemcd to double his emotion. 
This was he to whom the education of his 
youth had been moft worthily entrulled, and 
who had for fome time felt the mofl poij^nant 
grief, at feeing the fruits of all his anxious care 
blafted by the baleful influence of this pafTion, 
though refpe6l for his fuperior flation had hi- 
therto kept him filent on io delicate a fubjec!:. 
But he was no longer able to contain him- 
felf. A fenfe of duty over-ballanced all ret»;ard 
to forms, and he refolved to acquit himfelf 
of the facred office of a friend, by fhewino; fo 
deftru^tive an error in its proper light, ber'the 
confcquence never fo difagrteable to him. With 
this refolution he had followed him hither,' 
when the gentleman advancing to mrj .; him, 
anticipated the painful attempt. " ,j ^vaTiend' 
(faid 
^^40 T H E R E V E R IE, 
(faid he, embracing him with ardour,) my 
friend is come in an happy moment to confirm 
the refolution of my foul : I fee at length the 
faral error into which" I have unwarily fallen, 
and am determined to avoid its fnares for the 
future. That wretched woman ihall no longer 
lead my heart aftray." — 
*' Hear, gracious heaven 1 (faid the good old 
man, dropping upon his knees and raifing his 
hands and eyes in extafy), and ratify that re- 
folution." — Then catching his hand, and pref- 
fmg it eagerly to his lips, *' O my friend ! — 
my fon ! " — fobbed he, while the big tears rol- 
led down his reverend cheeks, and choaked his 
utterance. 
Such eloquence was not toberefifted. ^^}Ay 
friend ! — my father !" anfwered the gentleman, 
falling infenfibly on the good man's nsck, and 
mingling tears of piety and joy in the honeft 
over-flowing of his heart. 
After forr.e moments fpent in this filent rap- 
ture, " Infatuated wretch that I was (faid the 
gentleman, raifing the other tenderly in his 
arms) to flight the friendly admonitions which 
my confcious foul read in thy troubled looks: 
bow could I give that worthy heart fuch pain !" 
" Name it not, my fon (anfvv^ered he, in a 
voice of extafy) think not of any thing that I 
have fufrered. This blefTed account of thy re- 
turn to virtue has amply overpaid it all. May 
heaven enable you to keep this facred refolution 
fo worthy of your truly-noble heart ; and I have 
nothing more to wifh for in this life." 
" Fear not! (replied the gentleman) your 
friend (hall neveraftunworthy of himfelf again ! 
ihall never more difgrace your virtuous carc.^ 
This 
THE REVERIE. 24r 
This is not a fudden guft of paflion. Reafon 
and virtue, which have infpired the thought, 
will bear me through the execution. Never 
will I enter yonder monument of my folly, 
(pointing to a fumptuous houfe which he had 
built for his miftrefs) till the forcerefs is rcmoT- 
ed. The enchantment under which fhe held 
me is at laft diflblved, and I am my own maf- 
ter again: nor is this all ; I will go this mi- 
nute, and offer my heart and hand to one who 
will do honour to my choice : you fliall accom- 
pany me, plead for your friend, and be furety 
for the immoveable firmnefs of my refolution, 
my truth, and honour. A fervant can deliver 
a mandate of my difmifTion to tliat unhappv 
creature." 
r; *' Saying this, he fleppcd into his chariot, 
which he had ordered to attend him there ; 
and taking th-e venerable old man with him, 
drove to the lady's houfe, on whom he had in 
fccret fixed to be the partner of his life, where 
he urged his fuit fo powerfully, and was fo well 
afliftcd by his advocate, that as reafon could 
fuggcft no objection to the fair one, and her 
beartreally felt none from inclination; fhe 
fliewed her aflent to his propofal as far as was 
confiftent with the forms obferved on fuch deli- 
cate occafions. 
" Fluihed with this fuccefs,as foon as ever he 
went to hisvown houfe, he fcnta peremptory mef- 
fage to his miftrefs, to quit her prefent habitation 
dire£tly, and retire to fome other better fuited 
to her condition, promifing to make fuch a pro- 
vifion for her future fupport as fhould place her 
above the temptations of neceflity, in which he' 
found her, if her ready obedience, to.thi's order. 
Vol. I. ' M --^ = and 
\:i4i THE REVERIE. 
and regular condmS: Tor the remainder of her 
life fhould merit fuch a favour. In a cooler 
moment, he would have found it difHcult to 
lend fo harfli a melTage ; but his fpirits were 
now up, and he could think of nothing but the 
happinefs he had in view in his intended mar- 
riage. 
" This was a ftroke for which his miflrefs 
was quite unprepared. Her aftonifhment there- 
fore at receiving fuch an order may be eafily 
conceived. At lirflH^e doubted the authenticity 
of it, and threatened the fervant with his maf- 
ter's feverefl: wrath for fuch an infolentabufe of 
his nam.e: but when his perfifling in it con-- 
vinced her of the fallacy of fuch an hope, flic 
refolved to try all poffible means to avert the 
misfortune ; and as flie was free from every at- 
tachment of perfonal regard that might have 
made grief difturb her mind, her ready genius 
foon fu2;s;efled the moft effe6tual one to her. 
*' Accordingly, the firfl thing fhe did was 
to gain the fervant to. her intereft by a con- 
fiderable bribe, and promifes of farther favour, 
when this ftorm fhould blow over; the 
fudden, and groundlefs violence of which, 
Ihewed, fhe faid, that it could not laft ; 
and then giving him inftrudiions what to fay 
to his mafter, prepared to a6l her own part in 
this important fcene, according to the fuccefs 
he met with. 
" The gentleman, as foon as the fervant re- 
turned, naturally enquired how file had received 
his melllige: " Sir, (faid the fellow, who had 
put on a rr.elancholy look, and now fighed as 
?rom the bottom of his heart) fhe at firfl: could 
fcarce believe what i faid ^ but when 1 had re- 
mpved 
The REVERIE; . ■-.^ 
Trioved her doubt, fne lifted up her eyes for 
fome moments without fpeaking a word, and 
then fell into a lit, from which I thou2;ht (lie 
never would recover : hov/ever, me came to 
■herfclf at lall ; and when a fhower of tears had 
g\ven her heart fome eafe, and fhe was able to 
?peak, " Tell your mafter, faid the dear lady, 
as The fat upon the fioor^ that it is my duty 
to obey his orders, be they what they will ; 
thoui^h I little thou^yht ever to have received 
fuch as thefe, and in fo fcornful and cruel a 
manner. Sure he might have fpoke to me him- 
(elf, without cxpofmg me to fervants ! But I 
have no right to complain : God blefs him and 
profper him in all his ways;" — and then fli3 
wept again, and wrung her hands in fuch 
agony it would have melted an heart of ftone. — 
Saying this, the fellow wiped his eyes ^hich 
had been well onioned for the purpofe, and 
hung down his head, as if he was overcome 
with grief. 
"It is impoflile to defcribe the gentleman's 
fituation when he received this account. He' 
was affeiled by herdiftrefs in the fevered: man- 
ner. The generous humanity of his heart 
would haveiliared in the fufferin^rsof his ijreatef?: 
enemy, what then mud he have felt at tho("e of 
one whom he had fo lately been accuftomed to 
think of with the tendereil reoard! His delica- 
cy alfo was hurted at having font fuch a meilage 
in fuch a manner, and he difdained the thought 
of exerting authority with rigour, where relif- 
tance was imgoflible. In a word, though his 
refolution was not abfolutely overtufijcd, he 
fecretly began to wifh, that he had Jiot been 
Co precipitate in puttins it iu gxecutiwi* 
M 2 The 
244 THE REVERIE. 
" The fervant faw the confli^St in his heart; 
and, faithful to the truft he had bafely under- 
taken, as Toon as he was difmiired from his pre- 
sence, flew to acquaint her with it. 
CHAP. XIII. 
J^ooking hack often dangerous* Female arttpce in- 
u?nphant over reajon and virtue. The natural 
cQ'tifequences of this. A remarkable injlance of 
the effe£i of coinplying with the fajhion, 
^' ^ s ^ H I S account confirmed her wavering 
A hopes J flie refolved not to lofe a mo- 
ment, but ftrive to improve the imprelHon 
which her afibciate had thus fortunately made 
in her favour, before the unknown motive of 
her diff2:race (hould have time to counteract it. 
Accordingly fhe went directly to his houfe, 
and as he had not taken the precaution to for- 
bid her admiliion, rufhed into the room where 
he was, in a well-imitated phrenzy, threw her« 
ielf at his feet, and embraced his knees, in all 
the apparent agony of heart v/hich the fondeft 
defpair could dictate, before he could poffibly 
prevent her. 
'^ 7>erc is nothing more dangerous than look- 
ing back to former fcenes of pleafure ; it fof- 
tens the mind, and makes it long for a repeti- 
tion of them. The account of her diftrefs had 
awakened his compaffioa, and he v/as unde- 
signedly running over all the engaging qualities 
yr.d fuft endearments which had given him 
fuch 
THE REVERIE. 245 
fuch delight the very moment fhe entered the 
room. 
If the defcriptlon could afTe^^him fo flrcnglr, 
what then nuill he not feel from the fight? He 
was not proof to fuch an attack. All his refolir- 
tion vanifhed, in an inftant; he raifed her from 
the ground, and, embracing her tenderly, rc- 
flored her to the empire of his heart with ten- 
fold the authority fhe had pofT^ficd before. 
'The only difficulty that remained v/ashow 
to break off his engagements wiih the lad\', 
whom he had juft paid his addreffes to in fo 
ferious and public a manner: as for his friend, 
he concluded rightly, that after this rclapfe he 
fhould never fee him more. 
" He was not long at a lofs. Even in fo delicate- 
ly diftreifing an affair as this, his foul detefled dTf- 
ingenuity, and he refolved to make her admire his 
candour at leaft, though fhe might blame his 
ficklenefs. Accordingly he wrote her a letter 
next morning, to tell her, that upon examin- 
ing his heart more nearly, he found another 
had taken fuch ftrong poffeffion of ft, that it 
was not in his power to give it with his hand ; 
wherefore he thought the latter alone unwor- 
thy of her acceptance, nor (hould prefumc to 
prefs the offer of it any farther. 
" The lady's indignation was equal to her 
furprize, at fo defpicable an inftance of levity : 
fhe thought it beneath her to return an anfwer 
to fuch a letter, or take any notice of the wri- 
ter ; to fliew her perfect indifference and con- 
tempt for whom fhe foon after liftened to the 
addreffes of another. 
** As for him, his condition became worfe than 
ever. According to the common though mif- 
M 3 take* 
246 THE REVERIE. 
taken notion of over-bearing contempt, he 
gloried in his difgraceful folly, which he car- 
ried to ten times more extravagant excefles than 
before; while fhe, convinced that he had now 
faftcned his chains top ftrongly ever to be fliakcn 
off, returned his fondnefs with indifference, and 
at the very time that flie was making him the 
-dupe of her mercenary defigns, took every oc~ 
cafion of treating him with infolence and ty- 
ranny. 
'* The conCequence of this was natural. De,- 
flitute of domeftic peace, robbed of the approba- 
tion of his own raind, and confcious of ths 
contempt of every man of fenfe and virtue, he 
grew carelefs of himfelf, his affairs ran to con- 
fuflon and ruin, and his name became a by-word- 
among all his acquaintances.'* 
" O my guide, (faid I, fhocked at fo deplor* 
able a fall) how powerful are the wiles of wo- 
man! How dangerous is it for a man to let her 
get an afcendency over him ? If once he refigns 
the reins which nature wifely put into his^ 
hands, I fee that it is impolTxble for him ever to 
refume them again, and affert the juft preroga- 
tives of his fuperior ftation !" 
'^ It may perhaps be too much to fay that itP 
is abfolutely impoffible ; (anfweredhe) though- 
jnany_ circumfiances concur to make the at-. 
t€mpt moft difficult, Prefuming on his greater, 
strength, man thinks it beneath hisn to be up- 
en his guard againft her, till flic has taken fuch 
firm poffeffion of her authority, that it appears- 
lefs painful to fuffer, than ftruggle to fliake 
off a tyranny whofe chains are riveted fo faft.. 
Or, fhould he venture on the attempt, fhc 
tf^akes her very weaknefs a. defence,, and ex- 
THE REV E R I E. 247 
pe^ls to be let conquer, becaufe fhe Is unable 
to refill:, throwing herfelf upon a generofity to 
which her own heart is a ftranger. The event 
rs generally more favourable than (lie deferves ; 
and a falfe tendernefs permits her to retain a 
■power which falfe fecurityfnfl gave her an op- 
portunity to ufurp. 
" But the fevered cafe is to be governed by 
a woman who is herfeif a flave to any pariicu- 
lar vice, or folly. To break the double chain 
is a difficulty few have refolution to attempt; 
and fewer have attempted with fuccefs. 
" Of this you may behold a ftriking inftance 
in yonder houfe, which prefcnts you with a 
fcene of fuch confufion. That gentleman whom 
you fee in all the apparent agitation of the moft 
determined wrath, gave his heart and hand to- 
gether to the lovely woman who fits befide him 
melted into tears. The advantage of the 
match, according to the mercenary maxim 
which prevails at prefent, was on her fide ; but 
love overlooked fuch mean confiderations, and 
he thought his elevated rank received honour 
from her participation. 
" Her heart felt all the ardour of (o generous 
a paflion; fhe devoted herfclf entirely to his 
happinefs, and, by her obfequious attention to 
every motion of his will, gained fuch an in- 
fluence over him, that he foon forgot he'had 
any will of his own, and refigned hi.nfelf abfo- 
lutelv and folely to her direction, pleafed with 
a yoke which fondnefs would not let him feel 
the weight of. 
" From the flrfl: dawn of reafon in her mind, 
fhe had ever exprefled the ftrongeft diflike to 
the idle drudgery of play ; but now the tyran- ^ 
M- 4, Dy^' 
248 THE REVERIE. 
ny of fafhion obliged her to give into a prac- 
tice which was become the cement of fociety, 
the general bufinefs of genteel life. Example 
can foften prejudice, and habit even reconcile 
antipathies. The reluctance with which (he 
complied with this cuftom foon wore ofr, and 
file entered into the very fpirit of gaming with 
an avidity that exceeded her former averfion. 
'* Her hufband, whofe heart happily was un- 
tainted with this fatal vice, was alarmed at a 
madnefs which he faw in all its dreadful con- 
fequenccs. He knew the rich mufl: always lofe; 
the numbers who are deftrtute of any other 
means of fubliftence, befide their expertnefs in 
the myfteries of play, making a property of their 
folly^ and experience had Aewn him to what 
black expedients women will have recourfe to 
repair their lofTes, how debts of honour are too 
often paid Vv'ith honour itlelf. He refolved 
therefore to 'take the iirft opportimity to warn 
her againfl: indulging a pafTion, the apprehen- 
fion of whofe confequences gave him fo much 
pain ', judging that his advice would have more 
weight when it fhould feem to arife from fome 
immediate caufe, than if obtruded abruptly, or 
oft'ered only in cool fpeculation. 
*♦ Nor did he long wait for the occafion he 
^efired. Obferving an uncommon uneafmefs 
in his wife's looks one morning as they fat 
alone at breakfaft, he enquired what was the 
caufe of it, with all the tender anxiety of love. A 
guilty blufh overfpread her face ; flie hung down 
her head in the utmoft confufion, and could 
fcarce iind fpirit to fay, on the moft earncft 
entreaty, that fhe had loft a fum of money at 
play the night before, which fhe coirid not pay 
with* 
THE REVERIE. 249 
without his afllftance, her private ftipend, am- 
ple as his love had made it, having ail funk, in 
the fame gulph before. 
" The pain fhe evidently felt at making; this 
difcovery, flattered him with an hope that fhe 
would for ever after avoid the occafion of it. 
He therefoie w^ould not aggravate her concern 
by faying any thing juil then ; but giving her 
the money (he had loll, and an additional fup- 
ply for her own necefl'ary occafions, told her, 
with a look of inexpreflible tendernefs, that fhe 
fhould never feel any uneafmefs in his power 
to remove. 
*' However, not entirely to mifs fo favour-? 
able an opportunity, he took occafion next 
morning, from fome late occurrences of a fimilar 
kind among his own acquaintances, to exprels 
his difapprobation of that pernicious pra6tice in 
the flrongeft terms, and drew the confcquences 
of it in lo black a light, that, unable to bear 
the reproaches of her own confcience, (he burft 
into tears, and, falling on her knees, itnplored 
his pardon in the molt affecting manner. 
'* Rejoiced at this behaviour, which he 
thought a proof of her concern for what fhe 
had informed him of the day before, and an 
happy aflurance of her never falling into the 
fame error any more, he raifed her from the 
ground, and, embracing her tenderly, told her 
he had not fpoken in allufion to any thing paft, 
which he had thought no moi^e of fmce, and 
hoped that no future inllance of thekindfhould 
ever recal it to his remembrance. 
*' This was more than fhe was able to bear. 
She funk down upon her knees again, and, as 
foon as a flood of tears had given her utterance > 
^ Ms o\vii<^. 
«/■/ 
2^0- THE Ri: V E R ^Er 
owned in terms of thewarmeft contrition, that',/ 
tempted by an hope of recovernig her former 
lofs, fhc had ventured to play again the night 
before, but with the fame fuccefs, having not 
only loft all the money he had given her, but' 
added confiderably to her debt alfo. 
C II A P. XIV. 
IVorfe luck^ and fnore of it. A new nicthod fof ' 
breaking a bad habit. Travellers often return: 
without their errand, 
«< npHE hufband's aftonifhment and diftrefs 
X at this unexpected news may be eafily 
conceived. He ftood fome moments before he 
had power to fpeak. At length, raifing her 
Irom the ground, though not with the fame 
emotions as before, " I had flattered myfelf, my-^ 
dear, (faid he with a ferious look, and accent of 
reproof) that the concern you fliewed yefter- 
day fecured me from any more follies of this 
kind ; but I fee I was miftaken. However, I 
will pay your debts once more; but rerrtember,. 
I tell you, this is the laft time I fliall dofo.. 
My fortune^ though fufficient v/ith prudence 
and ceconomy to fupport the dignity of my rank, 
is not equal to fuch boundiefs diflipation, by 
ji^yhich I may be ruined befbre I am aware. Nor 
"^ is this all ; other confequences too often follow 
f  ihis paflion, the remoteft apprebenfions of which 
i.camiot bear* 
T HE R E V rR IE. 251 
" Diftant as this infinuation was, it ftruck 
her to the foul. Though ihe was confident of 
'her own virtue, too many melancholy inftances 
Ihewed that in the general it was not unjuftly 
founded. She begged that he would have a 
more favourable opinion of her, implored again 
his pardon for what was paft, and prom i fed in 
the ftrongeft terms never to £»ive him the fame 
caufe of difpleafurc more. This was all he de- 
fired ; he directly gave her the money ; and, 
throwing his arms around her neck, fealed her 
forgivencfs with a kifs of rapture. 
*' It is a juft obfervation, that vices take the 
deepeft root in weakeft minds. This accounts 
for the common remark that woman, when once 
fhe goes aflray, is more profligate and harder to 
be reclaimed than man. Of all the paflions 
which mark the chara<£ler cf the prefent age, 
that which runs into the moft extravagant and 
incorrigible excefs, even in the ableft minds, is  
this of gaming ; what havock then muft fuch a 
tyrant make where it fcarce meets any oppofi- 
tion from reafon ? How difficult mufi: it be to 
break its chains ? 
' She had promifed more than (he was able 
to perform. The love of play had taken too (ad 
hold of her heart ever to be entirely expelled, and 
in a very little time drew her into the fame 
diilrefs again, with this additional aggravation, . 
that {}\e knew not hov/ to apply to her hufband 
for relief, as (lie had formerly done. But fuch 
an affair could not long remain concealed from 
his knowledge. Her creditor, oh two or three 
breaches of promife, applied to him direx^^Iy fpr  
it by letter. What he felt on receiving fuch at 
demand is not to be defcFibed, He anfwercd'. 
252 THE REVERIE. 
Coldly, that he would enquire into the affair, 
*ind then went to his wife's father to aik his ad- 
vice, how he fhould wean her from fo dangerous 
an habit, telling him the preceding circum- 
Itances without exaggeration or excufe. 
' The father's wrath arofe almoft to mad- 
nefs at fuch an account. He propofed me- 
thods which were not only improper, but even 
impOiTible to be purfued ; and treated her huf- 
band's propofal of removing her from the temp* 
tation, as there was no probability of reclaim- 
ing her otherwife from the folly, as an inflance 
of unmanly weaknefs rather than the effe6i of 
. prudent moderation and tender afFedtion : how- 
ever, as his paflion cooled, he was obliged to 
yield to the juftice of his arguments ; and he 
undertook to enforce her obedience by his au- 
thority, (liould fhe attempt to oppofe her 
hufband, whofe love made him diffident of his 
own refolution in ib delicate a ftruggle. 
*' To avoid a contefl that mult be equal- 
ly difagreeable to them all, they judged it 
woulJ be the bcft way to give her the firfV in- 
timation of the defign, in fuch a manner as 
ihould convince her that it mufl be in vain for 
her to oppofe it. Accordingly, as her hufbnnd 
and (he were fitting at breakfait next morning, 
when the news-paper was brought in as ufual, 
the firfl: glance fhe caft on it prefented her with 
"ail advcrtifement, (placed in the mofk confpi- 
cuous part of it for that purpofe) giving notice 
of a fpeedy fak of all her hull)and's coaches, 
horfes, furniture, &c. wiio intended to go 
.and rcfide abroad with his whole family for 
. faiirc years:'^ 
' ' *' Stactir^ 
'■-x 
THE REVERIE. 253 
*' Starting in aftonifliment, " Good God", 
my dear, (faid (he ) look: here ! what can thb 
mean ? « 
" To pay this demand," (faid he {iernly, 
pulling her creditor's letter out of his pocket, 
and reaching it to her.) 
" It is impoflible to defcribe her fituation at 
this fight. Confcious guilt deprived her of 
power to fpeak or move. She ftood petrifkd 
with (hame and horror." 
" I am forry, madam, (continued ke) that 
you have driven me to this extremity ; but I 
will not facrifice my fortune, if not perhaps 
worfe, by ftaying any longer in this place." 
" O, forgive me ! Try me ! Try me 
but once more ! I promile " She was 
unable to fay any more, a gufli of tears choaked 
her utterance; which he waited for her to give 
full vent to before he would purfue his pur- 
pofe any farther. In this critical fituation you 
behold them at prefent, your own obfervatioA 
of their condutSl in which will be more fatif- 
fa^tory than any defcription. Take notice on- 
ly, that his wrath is worked up ta this height 
by ait, and tha his refolution is fcarcely proof 
to the fight of her diftrefs ; while, on the other 
hand, vexation glillens through her tears, and 
(hews that (he is lefs grieved for the caufe than 
alarmed for the confequence of his difpleafure^ 
which fhe is this very moment cafting about 
how to evade." 
When my guide had concluded this account, 
I fixed my attention on the fcene which had 
given occafion to it. The firft violence of ^he 
lady's grief had begun by this time to fubfide, 
■which her hulband thinking the proper moment 
254 THE R E V E R J E. 
to make an impreflion on her : " Mad^m, 
(('aid he, replying to her laft words) my refo- 
lution is unalterably fixed ; you know what- 
faith I ought to place in promifes." 
The reproach implied in thefe words ftung 
her pride. She had been too long accuf- 
tomed to receive implicit obedience to every 
thing fhe faid, to bear fuch an affVontive infi- 
nuation pailively, and refolved to (hew that Ihe 
would not give up her authority io eafil}^ Ri- 
fing therefore in an inflant above her fuppliant 
Tnood, " I know too, fir^ (faid (he, with an in- 
dignant air) that I am not your fl$^e, nor to 
be forced to any thing againft mywill. You 
may keep your refolution, and go if you pleafe, 
mine is io flay ; nor fhall you find it lefs un- 
alterable than, your own." ,i' 
*' Madam! madam ! this falfe fpirit ill be- 
comes you j nor think it will avail. Your 
tears were far more powerful j but all are now 
in vain; and I will be ob.eycdi" With thefe 
words he left the room, proud of having fup- 
poited his refolution fo manfully, and went to 
.give orders for the immediate execution of his 
delign., ;, 
But {lie was far from thinking of obedience 
yet. Her heart was fo wedded to the pleafures 
.of her pj-efentway of life, that (he looked on 
.leaving it as the fevereft puniftiment. Befide, her. 
.pride w^s 'pjqued' by ithe authority with which 
he-fpoI^^'X ^^^ J^.^. '^'^^^^^^^ '^^ fufFer the worfl 
fubmit to a 
effectually 
ij;*r;t»*^?pv^: Whj 
*:my:. 
'* * I»#f-'^'-'- 
T-HE R EV E R I E. 255- 
. When fhe had formed this refolutlon, the 
next, diiliculty was how to execute it. The firft 
thought that occurred to her was, to throw her- 
{€,lt upon the fondnefs of her father, vvhofe in- 
dulgence fhe had ever experienced in the moft 
unlimited degree, and did not doubt but fhe 
fliould find equally on the prefent occafion. She 
accordingly flew to him directly, and, pouring 
out the anguifli of her heart before him, im- 
plored his piotevSlion againft her huiband's iaw- 
lefs tyranny. 
Not to appear prejudiced by any former mif- 
reprefentatjc^, he beared her flory with th§ 
greateft attention ; and then, condemning her 
from her own mouth, flew into a rage a thou- 
fand fold feverer even than her huiband's, up- 
braiding her \«ith ingi^titude to his love, and dif- 
obedience tohisjuft authority; and drawing her 
crime, and the too probable confequcnces of it 
HI fuch dreadful hghts, that, terrified at the ' 
horrid reprefentation,-fhe gave up all farther 
thoughts of oppofition, and only befought her 
father to mediate a peace, on condition of her 
abfolute obedience in every action of her future- 
life. 
Such a reconciliation was eafily efFecied ; he 
defireu no more, but paid her debt dire6lly:- and ■ 
all things being prepared for their r'eparturc a.s 
foon as polTible, he fet out- on- -his intended 
exile, taking his whole 'fSnDily^wid. 'him^, hi^ 
hope that a paiiioir which -had gfyeiV'jtim .To 
But, likc;.»t%e;^'iy5\iRi(qdr4^a«,^ t^-*- 
deadly arfi9W;il(;^^e->'^j#V 'aiM, though ftie qoii^*' " 
plied, b^eff&li^r^Siil^l^*^ 
■'■''^<^^ **!&' ' formatio;* 
256 T H E R E V E R I E: 
formation intended by this harfh expedient was 
far From being probable. The poifon had taken 
too faft hold to be cured by any change of cli- 
mate, and flie languifhed to return .to her own 
country, only that (he might return to her be- 
loved plealure ; while her hufband thus facri- 
ficed to a vain hope the flower of a life which 
bis exalted rank and abilities might have made 
an honour to himfelf, and an advantage to hh 
country. 
v^^'M^m^^^^^^kWMim^: 
CHAP. XV. 
Jnecdotes of a profejjed wit, A lucky hit made the 
mofi of. Too much of one thing won^t do A 
rough retort of a coarfe jejl ; with other curious 
Tiwtters of the fame kind, 
« \7'OU fee (faid my guide) the confequence 
X of indulging a pailion, till the gratifica- 
tion of it becomes an habit ; though there may 
be but few acSlually (o fatal as this of gaming, 
the excefs of aiay other will be attended by ef- 
fects far from defuable, and end in ridicule a 
leaft, if not in ruin. 
" Obferve that man who ftands in yonder 
coffee-houie, pumping his brain for pleafantry, 
and labouring for wit to entertain the fneering^ 
croud around himi vvhofe fuhome compliments 
and ironical -applaufe pafs upon his vanity for 
a tribute juftly due to his merit. He is one of 
your profelTed wits, whofe good opinion of 
ihera- 
THE REVERIE. 257 
ihemfelves makes them think every one obliged 
to admire what they fay. 
*' He was raifecl to this eminent ftation by 
the fuccefs of a ballad he wrote fome time ago, 
of which it may be difficult to determine whe- 
ther its merit lay in its oddity, its obfceniry, or 
its profanenefs. However, the thing took with 
the public tafte in (o extraordinary a manner, 
that the happy author not only got the price of 
a new coat by the fale of it, but was alfo ad- 
mitted to the tables of all thofe who liked fuch 
buffoonery, to entertain them, and their compa- 
ny ; where, having an eye to bufinefs, he al- 
ways took the opportunity when they were in 
high fpirits and could refufe nothing, to follicit 
fubfcriptions for a collecSlion of eld faws which 
he had picked up and tagged fome how together, 
by which artifice he contrived to make a good 
penny of them alfo. 
" Elevated with this fuccefs, he thought he 
had nothing more to do but publifh a fecond part 
of the fame tune^ to make his fortune at once ; 
but, to his great mortification, he found himfelf 
miftaken ; for, the novelty that rccommendea 
the former being now worn off, there w^as little 
or no notice taken of it : befide, he lud ex- 
haufted the fpiritof obfcenity and profanenefs fo 
thoroughly in the firfl: pai t, that there remained 
nothing for him now but dregs, too coarfe for 
the groffeft tafte, though he ftrove to make up 
for the quality by the quantity, of which he gave 
mqft plentiful meafure. 
" Severe as this difappointment was to him 
in every refpe£t, he affected not to feel it; but, 
. modeftly imputing it to the badnefs of the public 
tafte, takes the liberty, by way of rep'rifal, to 
turn 
258 T H E R E V E R I E. 
turn every thing that it approves into ridicule, 
with a petulance little fliort of fcurriJity; and, 
to Tupport thecharadter of a privileged wit, ne- 
ver milTes an opportunity of being'impertinent 
to every perfon he converfes vi'ith. 
*' Such a conduft cannot always efcape re- 
proof; fome, and thofe fevere flrokes of it, he 
frequently meets from thofe who have not a 
tafte for his jokes, or do not think that a pre- 
tence to wit gives a privilege for ill manners.. 
An inftance or two may not be unentertaining, 
and may alfo give you a notion of the dangers 
which attend fuch a pra6lice. 
'' Talking away the other evening at his 
ufual rate, in a mixed company, one of his 
random-ihots happened to hit the profeiTion of 
a gentleman prefent. As there was nothing in- 
what he faid more than common cant,, the 
other, who was a man of years and character, 
would not have thought it worthy of his notice, 
had not our hero at the fame inftant looked 
him full in the face, and burft out into a loud 
laugh., 
" As this was fixing the ftroke rather too 
clofe to be overlooked, the gentleman gravely 
afked him what he laughed at, as he really 
could not fee the wit of what he faid. " Not 
lee it, fir, ( faid the other, ftarting from his feat 
and going up clofe to him) then, fir, you may 
fmell it, if your nofe is not as dull as your ap- 
prehenfion^" and letting a great f 1, rai»- 
fed a louder laugh than before. 
'' This was an infult too grofsly perfonal to 
be borne. The gentleman rofeup, and, without; 
faying a word, gave him a kick on theoff'ending 
^artj that drove him to the other fide of the 
,  room,. 
THE REVERIE- 259. 
yoom, and then, ringing the bell, coolly or- 
dered the waiter to turn that ftlnking cur down 
flairs. This naturally turned the laugh to the. 
other fide. The unfortunate wit had occafion^ 
for all his afllirance, to ftand it; and the poor 
efforts he made to turn it off with a joke on- 
ly fhewed his impotent vexation, and made him 
appear, if pofJible, ftill more ridiculous. 
'^The proper province of wit is, to difcover 
and point out a relation and refemblancc in 
Tome particular circumftances, between ideas 
obvioufly inconnedted and unlike ; and by that 
means fhew them in a light the novelty and 
oddity of v/hich may give a pleafmg furprize. 
To do this, the mind muft be endowed with a 
power of viewing a variety of things in all their 
fliapes and fituations at the fame inftant, and a 
readinefs at catching thofc fugitive refem- 
blances, and (hewing them in obvious and 
flriking colours. 
" Thus far reafon can trace the origin and 
effe£ls of a faculty, equally mifunderftood and 
mifapplied 5 or, I might rather fay, indeed, 
whofe name is ufurped by another of the moft 
contrary nature : for inftead of this fpecula- 
tive manner of exertion, and the inoffcnfive and 
delicate entertainment arifmg from it, the em- 
ployment of what is at prefent called wit, is to 
difcover and invent perfonal misfortunes and 
defeds, and difplay them in the grofTeft lights- 
o( ridicule and infult, as the pleafure which it 
gives arifes from the bafcft and moft malignant 
motive, that of a man's feeling a fecret fatif- 
fadion on feeing that others are as bad as him- 
felf, or perhaps fuffer a, difgrage which he 
efcapes,. 
"But. 
26o THE R E V E.R I E. 
*' But generally as this pleafure is enjoyeJ, 
the authors of it always meet a juft return of 
averfion and contempt for that proftitution of 
their abilities, by which they afford it. This is 
not fo ftrange or ingrateful as it may appear. 
As thofe who can have a tafte for fuch enter- 
tainment are confcious that they themfelvcs are 
liable to be made the lubjeds of it to others, 
they naturally fear and hate the perfons who 
may polTibly bring them into fo difagreeable a 
fituation. 
*' Thus the moment a man profefles himfelf 
a Witt he, as it were, declares war with all the 
it:^ of the world : as in return everv one lies 
on the watch to pull down and punifh fo invi- 
dious a prefumption. Of this he continually 
meets the moft mortifying inftances, to which 
the means he is obliged to make ufe of to fup- 
port fuch a character, lay him conflantly and 
defencelefsly open. 
*' Befide this kind of wit, which preys upon 
particulars, there is another more malignant 
in its eiFects, becaufc more extenfive ; though 
motives of the fame ungenerous nature with 
thofe which recommend the other, make itpafs 
almoft uncenfured even by the injured objects 
of it, who are afraid to complain for fear their 
feeming to feel its force fhould be taken for an 
acknowledgment of itsjuftice, and fo make the 
injury irremediable. This is turning frofejio'tu 
into ridicule; by which means individuals are 
precluded from the fruits of their honeft in- 
duilry, and the community robbed of their 
contribution towards the general flock : for, 
however abfurd a prejudice raifed in that man- 
ner may appear to reafon, experience fhews 
T H E R E V E R I E. 261 
too many unhappy inftances of its influence to 
admit its being doubted. 
" But though the fufferers do not think pro- 
per to complain, they never mifs an opportu- 
nity of returning an attack they fo feverely 
fed ; and many a wit has paid 'dearly for his 
pleafantry, when he has happened to come in- 
to the power of thofe whom he has fo irrecon- 
cileably offended. 0( this the perfon before us 
lately experienced an inftance, difagreeable 
enough to furfeit him of this his very favourite 
pra<5tice as long as he lives. 
" Of the many profcflions which he has 
wantonly fallen upon, the medical art has felt 
the fcvereft fallies of his uncommon turn for 
ridicule. As he was riding one day to pay a 
vilit to a nobleman, who had dcfired him to 
come in that manner, that he might take a 
view of the extenfive and grand improvements 
about his feat, the heat of the day, and his be- 
ing unufed to that method of travelling, expo- 
led him to fome injuries which made his fitting 
X)n a faddle very painful to him. 
*' While he was in this diftrefs, he happened 
to go by the houfe of an apothecary on whom 
he had exerted his unlucky talents with the 
moft injurious fuccefs, having fixed his general 
ridicule of the profeflion upon him, by a par- 
ticular defcription of his perfon irrefiitibly ri- 
diculous. Without thinking of this, or dread- 
ing any retaliation from a refentmcnt fo juftly 
provoked, he called upon him, and, making 
known his complaint, defired his a/Tiftance. 
" The apothecary, whofe difpofition was 
equally fpiteful and droll, refolved not to mifs 
fuch an opportunity of taking a fignal revenge 
-31:62 T H E R E V E R I E, 
for all the mortifications which the other had 
brought upon him. Accordingly he defired 
him to alight for a moment, with all the pla- 
'cid politenels of his profeflion, and made him 
■up two plaifters, one of which he himfelf moft 
officioufly applied to the part affected, dire6tlnp- 
hifii to put on the other when thatlhould come 
■ofF; and, refufrng to take any return for a piece 
of fervice which he allured him the pleafure 
of conferring amply overpaid, wifhed him an 
agreeable ride. 
" The plaifter had the defired effecSl:, and he 
felt no farther pain during the red: of his jour- 
ney ; at the end of which, finding that the 
motion of the horfe had rubbed it off, he took 
, an opportunity to flep afide, juft before he went 
to dinner, and pvit on the other, as he had been 
directed. The firft application of this was at- 
tended with fenfations far from pleafmg ; how- 
ever, he thought that muft proceed from his 
"being more chafed than before, and concluding 
that they would foon go off, went dire<5ily in 
to dinner, where, as if fortune combined with 
his foe, he was placed betv/een tv\^o young 
ladies, equally fprightly and arch. 
" He had not been feated long before the 
plaifter began to operate, in a manner that 
made him fincerely fick of his honourable fitua- 
tion He was in torture impoffible to be fup- 
ported; and v/hat added to his diflrefs, he 
knew not how to get away to remove the 
caufe of it, confcious that the difcovery of 
a trick he was now fufficiently fenfible had 
been played him, would fix a ridicule upon 
him, which he fhould never be able to fhake 
off, as he had had too many proofs of the plea- 
fure 
THE REVERIE. 263 
fiire every body took in every thing .that gave 
him the leaft vexation ordifgrace. This made 
Jii 11 rclblve to fit it out, intolerable as the pain 
he fiificrcd was. 
" But he had more plagues to encounter 
than his utmoft rorccaft could provide afrainfl. 
The ladies between whom he fat fooii fav/ 
that he was in fome uneafmefs, and refolved 
with the ufual good-nature of the fex, to ag- 
gravate it, for their own entertainment, by 
every teazing trick they could devife. Accord- 
ingly, winking to each other to ad in concert 
ihcy drew their chairs clofer to him. To as to 
make it impolTjble for him to ftir, whi h ne- 
ceHicywas now beginning to make him think of, 
in rpite of all his refolutions, and made the moft 
malicious conjectures at his want of his ufual 
rnirth and fpirit ; to awake which they puflied 
him from fide to fide with their elbows, though 
every time he moved upon his chair pierced 
him to the foul. 
" The effeds of the plaifler were by this 
time become fo violent, that nature was no 
longer able to fupport them. He fainted away 
in the midll: of the company, and was removed 
to another room, to undergo a fcene of raille- 
rie and ridicule, if pofiible more fevere than 
his pain. 
CHAP; 
264 TH E REVERIE. 
CHAP. XVI. 
Injlances of the companion common on fuch occa- 
Jions. The praSiical joker i7ijoys a double triumph 
over the wit. Other worje conjequences of the 
projiitution of genius. 
** np^HE firft thing that ftruck him when 
X he came to himfelf was the ridiculouf- 
nefs of his fituation. He was laid on his face, 
acrofs a bed, in the midft of a number of fer- 
vants, who, in undrelling him, had difcovered 
his ailment, fome of the confcquences of which 
they were bufied in removing with wet cloths, 
in the fame manner as a nurfe cleanfes an in- 
fant. It was fome minutes after he recovered 
his fenfes before he was able to fpeak, during 
which time he had the mortification to hear the 
uafeeling wretches round him cracking their 
Coarfe jefls at his misfortune. At length too 
rough an application to the part afFedted ex- 
torted an, involuntary roar, which (hewing 
them that he was come to his fenfes, they in- 
ilantly changed their feoffs for a curiofity equal- 
ly difagreeable, all opening upon him at once 
to enquire v/hat had thrown him into that con- 
dition. 
*' It maybe tbouo-ht he had no jjreat inclina- 
tion to anfwer their queflions. He tnanked 
them for thetr care, and, dcfiring they would 
let the chaplain know he wanted to fpeak to 
him as foon as he had-doue 6,\n\x^Xy begged to 
be left alone. 
« His 
THE REVERIE. 265 
** His meditations in fuch a fituation could 
not be very pleaflng. He was not nt a lofs to 
difcovcr the caufe of what had happened ; and 
curfino; his own foolifh confidence for putting 
himfclf any way in the power of one whom he 
might naturally fuppofe to be. his enemy, re- 
folved to take the fevcreft revenge which the 
law could procure him, for fo painful an injurv, 
without making any allowance for the pfovo- 
cation that had prompted it. He comforted 
himfelf with thefe thoughts as well as he could, 
till the arrival of the chaplain, whofe refent- 
ment for fomc laflies of wit made him in no 
hzile to come, had not the curiofity of the reft 
of the company, which was raifed by the repre- 
fcntation of the fervants, accelerated his mo- 
tion. 
" *As foon as he entered the chamW, the 
poor (ufferer, whofe pain was far from 4:>cing 
entirely removed, exclaimed in the anguiili of 
his heart, '* O my friend, 1 have fent for you 
to implore your a/Tiftancc to inflicl-'a proper 
prtnifliment upon the villain who has brought 
me to this difgrace and torture." — He then re- 
counted the affair of the plaiflcr, as I have relat- 
ed it to you, and concluded with conjuring tho^ 
chaplain to ufe his influence Vv'ith his lordlhiji, 
t>i do hicn jullicc for an outrage which, accord- 
ing to the laws of hofpitality, afFcded hifnftl^V 
-3 it was offered to his guc(t. . 
" His reverence ht picking his tee'h in th'e 
_preate{l compofure while he was 'telling his ■ 
tale, at the end of which, " Pray fir, (faid he; 
with an air of the moft infulting indifference) 
v/hat would you have me do f"—" Do fir, -(an-, 
fwered the wit, provoked bevond his patiertce 
Vol. I. N ' ' a< 
266 THE REVERIE. 
at the other's behaviour) chew the cud of your 
laft meal till you are To happy as to get another, 
that you may not iofe a moment's enjoyment of 
that pleafure which feems to be the foie end of 
your exigence.''' — 
" Stung by the feverity of this reproach, the 
chaplain diredlly left him without making any 
reply, and returning to the company told them, 
that the violence of the pain had difordered the 
poor man's head, and made him ilark mad. 
Such a reprefentation afforded matter for many 
curious remarks, in which the affinity between 
wit and madnefs was moft learnedly difcufied, 
while they were finifhing their wine, without 
c-ver thinking of procuring the fubjeft of their 
fpeculation any relief. 
" At length curiofity prompted his lordfhip 
to fee fo ftrange a fight, in hopes of confirming 
hy his behaviour fome nice obfervations he had 
been making on the nature of madnefs, evident 
iVmptoms of which he declared he had per- 
ceived the moment he faw him that morning ; 
but he v/as difagreeably difappointed to find the 
chaplain's account without foundation, and the 
fnan in his fenfes, fo that he was deprived of 
the merit of his judicious difcovery, on which 
]ie had plumed himfelf not a little, and his theo- 
ry was left unfupported by the proof he had ap- 
pealed to. However, he concealed his chagrin, 
^nd, enquiring into the particulars offb extraor- 
dinary an affair, for the chaplain's account was 
Jar from being fatisfactory, revenged himfelf 
ibr his difappointment by laughing in the moft 
rnortifying manner at every ridiculous circum- 
ilance 5 a behaviour that aggravated the other's 
diflrefs, as he was rcftrained, by refpecl, from 
making any reply. *' When 
THE REVERIE. 267 
** When they had fufficient'v enjoyed the 
fccne, one of the coirtpany, more compafljonate 
than the reft, bethought himfeJf that it mieht 
not be improper to do fomething for the relief 
of the poor fuffcrer, whofe appearance fhewed 
that his pain was not much abated. Accordino-- 
]y, upon confultation, it was agreed to bethebeft 
way to fend for the apothecary who had made 
up the plaifter, as he mufl neceflarily kjunv 
what was proper to remove its effejfls,' better 
than anyone elfe. The diftrefied patient would 
gladly have avoided fuch an interview, if only 
to diCappoint his enemy cf the plcafure of tri- 
umphing in the fuccefs of his trick : but per- 
haps for that very rcafon his lordfliip infifted on 
it, and he was lent for direc}-lv% 
** This exceeded the apothecary's hopes. He 
obeyed the fummons with the greateft pjeafure; 
and on his arrival, having firll: prudently ex- 
prefTcd his furprize, and afTerted his innocence 
of any evil intention in what he had done, was 
fhewn up to his patient, who no fooner fixed 
his eyes upon him, than burfting into the moll 
violent rage, " Villain ! (faid he) what bafc 
trick is this you have played me ? }>ut be af- 
fured that I will have the moft exemplary fa- 
tisfad^ion ! I'll make you know" — 
" Sir, (anfv/ered the apothecary, with a fly 
grin) have a little patience, and alJ will fooii 
be well. I am forry that an innocent joke 
(hould give you fuch cfFence." — 
'' A joke, wretch ! Do you call putting me 
to fuch torture and difgrace'a joke?" 
*' Nothing more, 1 allure you, fir; and if 
you will give me leave to apply this liniment 
to the place where your complaint is, I'll en- 
iN 2 <^?^c 
iJtC8 THE P. E V E R I E. 
^a2;e to remove it in a few minutes ; and as for 
the difgrace, there is nothing in it ; it is only 
matter for a few days laughter, and it will then 
be no more thought of.'' — 
*' No more thought of! Yes, it will be al- 
ways thought of J and I fnall never be able to 
{hew my face again after the ridiculous figure 
I have made by your curfed means ; but if I 
foro-ive you, may I be the laughing-flock of 
every fool I meet." — 
" Surely, fn-, a man of your reafon and be^ 
nevolence cannot harbour fuch an implacable 
refentment ! What would you do if you were 
in my cafe ? Unprovoked by the leaft offence^ 
you wantonly /ell on my uncouth figure, on 
the profeffion by which I earn bread for myfelf 
and my family, till you have made both fo ridi- 
culous, that children hoot at me as I gp 
slon<T the ftrects, and their equally wife parents 
^icrht my (kill, and psfs by my fliop with con- 
tempt. The blider on your pofteriors will foori 
be healed ; nor can the difgrace you feem to 
take fo heavily to heart, be attended with any 
confequences worfe th.:n a la.ugh, which you 
are well able to (hift from yourfelf to fome body 
elfe.; but with me the cafe is quite different; my 
very fubfiitence is attacked, and the happir 
nefs of my family facrlnced, merely for a mif- 
chievous jeft, and to fhcw your pov/ers of ri- 
dicule."— - 
" Struck with the juflice of this rcpmof, 
the Wit had not power to m.ake any reply, but 
Submitted in filence to receive the other's afiif- 
tance, y/ho^ fatisfied with this double triumph, 
foon put an end to hjs pain by a proper appli- ■ 
cation. When this relief had rellored him a 
little 
THE REVERIE. 269 
little to his fpirits, he took the apothecary by 
the hand, fqueezing it eagerly, " Dear doctor, 
(faid+ie) I acknowled2;e that I have been to 
blame, much to blame; but I never confidered 
this matter in a proper light before. All that 
I can do now, is to make you any reparation 
in my pov^-er, and to promilc that I vi'ill never 
be guilty of the like indifcretion again. Never 
will I indijl':xe wit anv more at the expeiicc of 
giving pain to an honeil heart.'* — 
" This refolution lafted wliile he was under 
the apothecary's hands ; but no fooner was he 
recovered than he rehipfed into his old humour, 
which he even indulged v/ith greater 1-uilude 
and virulence than ever, that he ihojld not ap- 
pear to have been difpirited by what he had fuf- 
fered. As to the other, his trick was attended 
with fucccfs beyond his moft fanguinc hopes. 
Befide the prefent plcafurc of revenge, the mo- 
ment this (lory took wind, the ridicule whicii 
had been fo prejudicial to him, recoiled with 
tenfold force upon his advcrfarv, and he reco- 
vered his former credit and refpeci. 
'' But this perfonal licentiouln. Is, though 
perhaps the moll immediately painful to parti- 
culars, is not the word inilancc in which this 
perfon abufes the talents nature has bellowed 
upon him with more than common liberality. 
You fee the levity of his looks and behaviour; 
the fame folly infcdls his writings to the moft 
extravagant excefs. In thele he is dillipatioii 
itfelf. Starting from one fubjecl to another, he 
jumbles all together the lighted and mod fe- 
rious, fo as to make them appear equally ridi- 
culous, facrificing everything to raife a laugh, 
N 3 "as- 
2^0 THE RE V E R 1 E, 
as if that were the fole end of genius, the fole 
obje(Sl of eructitfon. 
*' Nor is this all ; there are fome things over 
which nature herfelf commands to throw a veil. 
To lift this up therefore, and make them the 
fubje^t of vv'it and pleafantry, even in the al- 
molt boundlefs liberty of difcourfe, is a great 
otience ; but in writing it is abfolutely unpar- 
donable, as that perpetuates the evil, and lays 
the foundation for debauching:; generations yet 
unborn. This is the groiiel!: proftitution of 
powers given for a better purpofe, and is al- 
ways brought to a fevere account." 
C H A p. XXII. 
A^ old objervation confirmed by a neiv charaSief. 
A remarkable injfancc of the hicorfijhncy cf the 
human heart, A curious love-fccne proves that 
the pie a fur e of variety is fonie times attended ivith 
danger and inconvenience:, 
" 13 U T, as I have remarked on other occa- 
X3 fions, it is the proper application that 
efFeeiuates the blefling. Without this the beft 
gifts of heaven become a curfe, and only ag- 
gravate the evils they were beftowed to pre- 
vent. 
" Obferve that perfon who ftruts about yon- 
der in a military habit, pleafed with the enfigns 
of his profeffion, as a child with a new bawble. 
Every favour, by which fortune could feem to 
fecure human happinefs, had (he heaped upon 
his. 
THE REVERIE. 271 
his head in the moft unbounded manner ; but 
this verv profufion produced the contrary ef- 
fect : and milerabls in imagination for want of 
fomething to wifli for, he has renounced fuch 
an infipid" plenty, and plunged himfelf, for va- 
riety, into the real mifcrics of a way of life, 
v.hich is permitted only as a pumiliment on 
the follies and vices of m>ankind. 
" It has been obferved, that from a clofe at- 
tention to the firft eflays of the openin-; mind, 
a prefage may be formed of the fi;ture life. The 
diftin-^uifhing charaflers of h^s youth were a 
fated indifference to every thiii'^ in his poflil- 
fnm i an inconflancy even more than chiidilli in 
all his puifuits, he feldom pcififting in any to the 
attaiimient of its object. As the afiluence of 
his fortune made any particular application not 
abfolutely neceflary to him, this fluctuating im- 
becillity of difpofition pafled unnoticed, and his 
inattention to every prudential regard in all his 
actions, was extolled as generofiry and magnifi- 
cence of fpirit. But the event has proved the 
error of this judgment, the famewcaknefs hav- 
ing ruled the conduct of his riper years, and 
made him an eafy prey to every idle paflion ol 
his own, to every mean defign of his more in- 
digent companions. To recapitulate every in- 
ttance of this would be to make an hiftory of 
his whole life. It will be fuflicicnt juft ta 
touch upon one or two, to fupport the charac- 
ter I have here drawn, and as they fo (trong- 
ly illuftrate the inconfillency of the human 
heart. 
" On his arriving at that period of life, when 
men are concluded to be capable of condu6ting 
themfelves^ the firfl thing which the care of his 
N 4 friends.. 
.Vfi. 
272 THE REVERIE. 
friends iuggefted to fecure his happincfs, i\yr 
their eyes at length began to be opened to the 
dangers attending fiich a difpofition, was to 
find out a female, whofe prudence might be a 
ihield to his levity, and prevent its worfi: el^^- 
fedts ; and whom reafon and inch'nation fhould 
go hand in hand, in recommending to his 
choice as a partner for his life. In this deli- 
cate and important fearch they were not long 
undetermined. They fixed upon one to whom 
envy herfejf could make no poflible objedion. 
Born in an exalted rank, and rich in every fa- 
vourite gift of heaven, ihe feemed defigned to 
crown the bleHings of an happy life. The 
moment iliQ v/as nsentioned to him he received 
the hint with rapture. Jn the intercourfe of a 
general acquaintance his heart had not been 
infcnfible of her charms, and on the nearer at- 
tep.tion of fuch a defign, he foon perceived the 
more valuable beauties of her mind. By the 
alliftance of his friends, he preferved his refolu- 
lion i'o long as to make his addredes acceptable, 
and received, in her hand, a feal of the moil: 
perfeil felicity which this life is capable of en- 
joying. 
" But fcarce was he In polTeflion of this jufl 
object of every rational defire, when the natu- 
ral inconflancy of his temper prevailed, and he 
flighted an happinefs for which all others fighed, 
only becaufe it was in his poilefHon. Accord- 
ingly he foon relapfed into all the licentioufnefs 
qf his former life, and vainly fought in loofe 
.'' variety for that pleafure, which his pervcrfe in- 
'.;* vfenfibility prevented his enjoying at home. 
^'f j" *' Such pleafure is always purchafed with 
>r^exation and pain. As he was prowling about 
-*4^»?-''>- ■ ..' one 
THE REVERIE. 27? 
one evening for his ufual game in the galle- 
ries of the theatre, he happened to fee a female 
whofe appearance had fomething in it more 
than commonly pleafmg to him. He imme- 
diately addrefled her in the familiarity of fuch 
places, and was not lefs ftruck. with the fpright- 
linefs of her converfation than he had been be- 
fore with her beauty. Encouraged by her free- 
dom, and confiding in the fuperiority of his 
rank, at the end of the play he hehtated not to 
propofe retiring to one of the nighbouring ta- 
verns, to improve fo agreeable an acquaintance. 
This file pofitively refufed, though in termi* 
which implied not any refcntmcnt at the pro- 
pofal, nor prevented his preiTing her at lead 
to give him another meeting at the play-houfe, 
which {lie at length confcntcd to do. 
" In two or three interviews of this kind, 
which file let herfelf be pcrfuadcd to indulge 
him uithjflie pla)cd hcfr part with fuch addrels, 
that (he gained an abfolute conquefl: over him, 
removing by her well-a6led modcfly every fuC- 
picion of her real chara(Slcr. At length, v/hen 
he had brought her blufhingly to confefs a re- 
turn of his paflion, and filenced every other 
fcruple, file ftarted the lad diflkulty, of the 
danger of being detected by her hufband, as {he 
unhappily was a married woman. This difco- 
verv was far from beino; ao-reeable to him. He 
loved his plcafures ; but he was far from de- 
firing to have them enhanced by any appear- 
ance of danger. However, he had gone too  
far to retreat now j and therefore, putting the 
beft face upon the affair, he prevailed uponlier * 
to run the hazard of this difcovery, by promiv ■ 
Ting toprotc6l her againft her hufband's refeht-/ 
mcnt,' 
274 THE REVERIE. 
ment, fliould any fuch thing happen, and to 
make a provifion for her that fliould fave her 
from any difagreeable confequences of it. 
*' His ability to perform fuch a promife, 
which file was no ftrangerto, and the perfua- 
fiv.e argument of feveral very valuable prefents, 
in the end prevailed upon her. Accordingly 
one evenin^r, when her hufband was cnza<yed 
nhroad^ fhe let him in at the back-door of her 
houfe, with the greatcii: appearance of privacy 
and fear, and conducted him foftly up to her 
own chamber. He had not been many mi- 
nuies in pofl'ellion of his defires, when all on 
a I'udden the door was burft in, and a drawn 
fword was held to his breaf}-, by a man who 
appea^/ed to be in the mod violent agitation of 
frantic rage. 
"Villain! adulterefs I (exclaimed he, foam- 
ing at the mouth, and rolling his eyes wildly 
around) have I then caught you at laft ? ► 
This inftant fhall your adulterous blood pay the 
price of my difhonour ! — this inftant will I" — 
" O mercy ! mercy ! (cried the trembling 
female, holding up her hands, and tuning her 
voice in the moft plaintive tone) Spare us! — ^ 
fpare us but a moment ! Murder not our 
wretched fouls as well as our bodies." 
*^' The hufband ftart^d at thefe words, and 
feemed loft in thought, while his lifted arm 
hung over them in the air. She faw the critical 
moment, and jogging her lover, who lay pe- 
trified with fear, " Speak to him, (faid fhe) 
perhaps your words may have effect:! his heart 
was ever tender and humane." 
*' Rouzed by this addfefs, the poor felf-con- 
vi6tcd culprit attempted to aflay him with the beft 
argu- 
fct>>- 
THE REVERIE. 275 
ar;^uments his ffear could fuggeft. *' Think not 
of a revenge (faiii he) which muft prove as fa- 
tal to yourlelf as to us ; but name any repara- 
tion yo'j- pleafe tf) require, and it fhall be in- 
ftantly made. My fortune is fufficient" — 
" Reparation? — No. Nothing but blood 
can make me reparation, (anfvvered the huf- 
band, rifmg to tenfold rage after the paufe) my 
honour, my love for that ungrateful woman will 
hear of no other reparation. — As to myfelf,*my 
life I value not at a pin*s fee ; all that is dear 
to me is now loft."- Then fmking, as it 
were, into foftnefs, *' And can I wound that 
breafl: fairer than monumental alaballcr r i) wo- 
man ! wom.an 
I" 
" At thc^t words he held his hand to his 
eyes, to hide his tears, and fobbed aloud as in the 
anguifh of his foul. The lovers thought this 
fit of foftnefs favourable to their fears, and, 
flipping out of bed, naked as thty were, threw 
themfelvcs at his feet, and'befought his mercy 
in the moft moving terms. After futFering a 
conflict of fome moments, he funk backwards 
into a chair, and, bidding them put c:.i their 
cloaths, fat as deliberating how to a<St in fuch 
a diftrelling fvtuation. 
*' In the mean time the lover, who thought 
that his life depended on the refult of this deli- 
beration, renewed his otFcrs of reparation with 
the greateft earneftnefs, while his partner in 
guilt applied for mercy, with every argument 
that could move compaiTion. His tender heart 
vyas not proof to fuch a double attack. After 
paufmg for fome little time, '' And what repa- 
ration can you make (faid he) for robbing me 
of the love of a woman, to obtain whom I have- 
facri- 
276 THE REV E R I E, 
facrificed my whole fortune, and plunged my- 
lelf into debts, which have driven me to the 
brink of defpair ? but I thought nothing too- 
much to fufFer for her, bafe and uno;rateful as 
ihe is." 
*' I will not only inftantly enable you to dif- 
charge thofe debts (anfwered the lover eagerly, 
catching a glimpfe oi' hope from that capitulat- 
ing queftion) but I will alio fetle iuch an an- 
nuhy on you for life, as Ihall raife you above the 
iieceiiity of ever contra6ling ajiy more." 
" What fnali I do? (exclaimed thehufl^and, 
as in an agony) fiiall 1 compound my difhonour 
for a price ? fhall I perifh in want and defpair? 
— What fhall I, can I do ? 
*' The irrefolution implied in thefe words, 
gave the terrified lovers new hope. They aC- 
failed him again with every argument they could 
devife, which they purfued with fuch fucctls, 
that at length he fubmitted to receive a repara- 
tion for an injury not to be recalled. When thia 
firft point was gained, the terms were foon fet- 
tled, "the eagernefs of the lover preventing the 
other's making any demand, by the largenefs of 
I\is ofr'ers, A lawyer, who was a friend of the 
hufband, and luckily happened to be in a neigh- 
bouring cofFee-houfe, was directly called in^ 
and foon confirmed the compadt beyond a pof* 
fibility of revocation ; one article of which was> 
that the lover fhould make a feparate provifion 
for his miflrefs, the hufband's delicate fenfe of 
honour not permitting him to have any farther 
intercourfe with her. 
CHAP, 
THE REVERIE. 
CHAP, xxiir. 
277 
A new motive for turning fildicr ;  with a ficrt 
view of the military profejfion. The fcene is 
changody and a more extenftve profpeci opened. 
*' t? VERY circumftance of this tranfailion 
jlLj bore fuch glaring marks of impofition, 
that any other perlon would have {Q.zn through, 
and avoided the deceit; or at lead, v/hen that 
vi^as too late, have fhewn a proper refcntmenc 
of it, by dropping all farther commerce u^ith the 
bafe woman who drew him into fuch a fnare, 
and was evidently an accomplice in the whole. 
But, blijid to aJl convi£lion, he grew fonder of 
ber than before, and, feeming to have changed 
his very nature, proved conttant to her longer 
than he had ever been to any other object ; tho' 
far from driving to retain him by any appearance 
of regard, any obfequioufnefs in her behaviour, 
now that her independence, #ie firft obj zQ. of her 
defigns, was eftalplifhed, flic aftecled on all oc- 
cafions to treat him v/ith the moll infolent con- 
tempt, and openly beflowed upon others thofe 
favours which had coft him fo dear. 
" While he indulged every vicious pafllon in 
this profiigate manner, the condition of his de- 
ferted wife deferved the highell companion. Sen- 
sible of the danger of"expoitulating on i'o delicate 
a fubjeiSI, ilie feemcd not to fee the fliglits which 
he hourly fliewed her, but, drying up her tears 
whenever he approached her, always met him 
with a fmile of tenderncfs and refpsdf. Smo- 
thered grief preys with double violence upon the 
heart. Though flie did not complain, fbe could 
not avoid feeling ihc pain of fuch treatment un- 
der 
^7B THE REVERIE. 
der which fae pined infenfibly away, like a 
flower cankered at the root. 
*-' But that which reafon could not do, was 
efte6led by the natural inconftancy of his tem- 
per, and a new whim fupplanted his profligate 
miltrefs in his thoughts. His country happened 
to be engaged in war; the noife of drums and 
trumpets turned his head, and he muft needs be 
a ibldier, for want of fomething elfe to give him 
employment. As foon as this caprice took pof- 
leflion of him, he bought a commifTion in the 
army diredtly, and fet about learning the milita- 
ry trade v^'ith as much eagernefs as if he was 
obliged to follow it for bread ; and, to fliew his 
proficiency in tafticks, even went fo far as to 
write an elaborate treatlfeon the mighty advan- 
tages of a foldier's turning out his toes in his 
marching. 
" When he had with infinite pains got his 
company trimmed and difciplined to his mind, 
contrary to the e?^e<ftation of all' who knew 
him, he purfued the humour fo far as to go with 
them into the field, where they foon had an op- 
portunity of fignalizing their val#ur, at the ex- 
pence of near half their lives. But an unlucky vi- 
fitof compliment to the colonel deprived him of 
the glory of fharing in the danger of that day,.i; - 
though the gallant behaviour of his men reflect' 
ted fufHcient honour on him, for having trained 
to fach excellent difcipline, and infpired them 
with {o noble a contempt of death. Encouraged 
by that fuc^efs, he perfirts in his purfuit of fame, 
the viciflitudes of the military life keeping his 
mind continually employed, and faving him 
from >the fatigue of a moment's reflection; an 
evil to avoid which he has ever had recourfe to 
iome new fcheme of a^Slive idJenefs." '' I 
THE REVERIE. 279 
^' I thought it impoflible, (faid I) O my 
guide, that the heart of man could he (o ablurd- 
Iv perverfe ! The general motives for embracing 
the military life are necefTity, an enthufiaftic 
pafTion for tame, and perhaps, in a very iew in-^ 
llances, a difinterefted fpirit of patriotifm. But 
here none of thefe can be alledged; for the laft 
his temper is too indift'erent ; too lilUefs and un- 
fteady for the purfuit of fame; and his afHuence 
raifes him above necciTity, which is the moft 
univerfal of all : fo that he literally facrilices the 
moft folid advantages of life for nothing, and 
runs into danger and diitrefs, becaufehe is in- 
capable of enjoying the oppofite blciTings." 
" To the motives which vou have affig;ned 
(returned the fpirit) you might have added ava- 
rice and ambition, from both of v/hich he is al- 
fy conftitutionally exempt. As to the dangers 
and diftrcfles in which you imagine he muft 
have involved himfelf, though fufficicnt to de- 
ter any man of reafon frorfl plunging wantonly 
into them ; in fuch cafes as his, they aic far 
fhort of what inexperienced apprehenfion may 
rcprefent. The private centincl who hourly cx- 
pofes his life for a morfel of bread to fupport it, 
and the fubaltern officer who leads that foldier 
to fight, ftruggle witH difficulties, and encounter 
dangers, which nature fhudders at tlie thought 
of; but afcend to the higher ranks, and a great 
part of thofe terrors vanifh. Their carriages 
lave them from fatigue, their tables are heaped 
with delicacies, and luxury reigns in their tents. 
The day of battle, in which alone they are ex- 
pofed to danger, is in fome meafure a day of 
reft to 'the others ; the motions and manoeuvres, 
in which the modern art of war moftly confifls, 
3 >Jar. 
28o THE REVERIE. 
harrafling the unhappy foldier with greater hard- 
fliips, and expofing him to more dangers than 
-any general engagement. But of this you will 
he a better judge when you have taken a view 
of yonder fcene of war. We have dwelt too 
long upon the minute concerns of private life, 
of individuals, however ftrongly marked out for 
obfervation, by titles, w^ealth, or folly. We will 
now enlarge our view, and fee whether the con- 
duel of nations is more rational ; whether the 
clouds of folly and vice which overcaft the cot- 
tage, and produce domeftic unhappinefs in lower 
life, may hot, when raifed into the higher regi- 
ons, burft into florms and thunder, and make 
an univerfal wreck of all the works of nature. 