T H E 

ADVEN TURES 

O F 

DA FID SIMPLE: 

Containing 

An Account of his Travels 

Through the 

CITIES of LONDON and 
fFESTMINSTER, 

In the Search of 

A REAL FRIEND. 



By a L A D Y. 

VOL. II. 

THE SECOND EDITION, 
Revifed and Correfted, with Alterations and 
Additions. 

LONDON: 

Printed for A. Miilar, oppofite Katharine' 
Jireet, in the Strand, 

M.DCC. XLIV. 



THE 

A DVE NT U RES 

O F 

DAF ID SIMPLE. 



BOOK III. 



CHAP. 1. 

The Continuation of the Hifiory of 
Camilla. 

TH E next Day, the firft Op- 
portunity Camilla had of being 
alone with Davids on his De- 
fire flie proceeded as follows. 

VALENTINE was now all the 
Comfort I had left me ; his Paffions were 
Vol. II, A either 



1 

2 Adventures Book IIP 

either not fo ftrong, or his Refolutions 
ftronger ; for he bore up much better , 
than I did, altho' I found his Sentiments I 
were the fame with mine. We were al- 
ways together, from which Livia pof- 
feffed my Father with an Opinion, that we 
were making Parties in the Houfe againft 
them. I was fo altered with the continual 
Uneafinefs of my Mind, that no one 
would have known me. This, which 
was owing to my tender Regret for the 
Lofs of a Parent's Love, was imputed to 
Rancour and Malice ; thus my very Grief 
was turned to my difadvantage. My 
Father, whofe Nature was open and ge- 
nerous, was as it were intoxicated by his 
Paffion for this Woman \ and grew, like 
her, fufpicious of every thing around 
him. She foon perceived the fuccefs of 
her pernicious Defigns, and omitted no 
Pains, nor no Falflioods to improve it. In 
fhort, was I to tell you all the little Arts 
Ihe ufed to make us miferable, to impofe 
on the Man who doated on her to Diftrac- 
tion, and in the end to ruin herfelf, it 
would fill Volumes, and tire your Pati- 
ence Whenever Ihe had laid any exti*a- 
vagant Scheme to fpend Money, Ihe ne- 
ver dire,(5lly propofed it, but only gave a 
hmr, chat it would be agreeable to her 



Chap. I. ^ David Simple. 3 
If it happened to be a thing her Hufoand 
thought very unreafonable, and he did 
not catch immediately at the lead Intima- 
ti-on of her PJeafure, and fpeak of it as if 
it was his own Defire, and in a manner 
force her to comply with it, in appearance 
againft her Will ; fhe then threw htrftlt 
out of humour, and contrived all manner 
of ways to plague him ; and when fiie faw 
him in Agonies at her Frowns, fhe often 
faid things to him, I really would not 
fay to the greateft Enemy I had in the 
World. But I muft take fhame to my- 
felf, and own a Weaknefs which you 
perhaps will condemn me for ^ but I 
could not help being fornetimes a little 
pleafed at feeing my Father teazed, by. 
the Woman he himfelf fjftered to be fo 
great a Curfe to me and Valentine. " Here 
fighed, and looked down, not 

anfwering one Word ; for he could not 
" approve, and he would not condemn 

her. Camilla obferved him, and haf- 
" tened to take him out of that Per- 

plexity fhe fav/ him in, by turning 
" again to the brighter Side of her own 
" Charafter ; and went on as follows/' 
But then flie carried this on to fo great a 
degree, that the Mifery I faw my once 
fond Father in, raifed all my Tendernefs 
for him ; the Comparifon between her 
A 2 Behaviour, 



4 The Adventures Book ill. 
Behaviour, and that of my dear Mo^ 
ther's, (who made it the Bufinefs of her 
Life to pleafe him) and my own, who 
watched his very Looks, and carefuliy 
obeyed their Motions, with various Scenes 
w^hich formerly had paffed, ruflied at once 
into my Memory, and J often Jeft the 
Room with Tears in my Eyes. 

She knew fo well the Bent of his 
Temper, and how far fhe might venture, 
that fhe v/ould carry it exaftly as far as he 
could bear. But when flie found he be- 
gan to grow warm, and retort her III- 
nature, fhe could at once turn from a 
Devil into an Angel. This fudden 
Change of the Mind, from Pain to Plea- 
fure, had always Hich an Efieft on him, 
that he in a moment forgot all fhe had faid 
or done to hurt him, and thought of no- 
thing but her prefent Good-humour. 
The behig reconciled, was fo great a Hea- 
ven to him, he condemned himfelf for 
having offended fuch a charming Crea- 
ture \ and was in Raptures at her great 
Guodnefs in forgiving him ; would afK a 
thoufand Pardons, and be amazed at her 
Ccr.defcevficn in granting them. His Fond- 
.nefs was greater than before ; for all vio- 
lent Paffions, put a flop to but for a mo- 
rocrtj increafe on their return, as Rivers 

flow 



Chap. I. ^Davjd Simple. 5 
flow fafter after any Interruption in their 
Courfe. People who really love, will 
grant any thing in the moment of R'econ- 
ciliation. My Father would then think 
what he fhould do, to return all this Soft- 
nefs and 'Tendernefs ; and ten to one but 
he hit on the very thing which had been 
the Caufe of all her Ill-humour ; he would 
then intreat her to oblige him fo much as 
to do what he knew fhe had moft mind 
to ; which, after Objeftions enough to 
fhew him the Obligations he owed her for 
complying, flie confented to. Thus every 
thing fell into the right Channel again \ 
my Father was the happieft Man in the 
World, and had nothing to vex him, 
but the Enmity he was made believe his 
Children had to him. 

Poor Valentine and I walked about 
the Houfe forlorn and negleftcd ; 
I felt, (and I dare aflert the fame of nim, 
at the Alteration in our Father's Btrhavi- 
our) I fhall not attempt to defcribe, as I 
am very certain no Words can exprefs it 
fo ftrongly as your own Imagination will 
fuggeft it to you. But Livia was not yet 
contented, altho' we were mademiferable ; 
vv^e were not utterly abandoned, akho' 
Ihe had contrived to give my Father an ill 
A. 3^ Opinion 



6 T?'^ Adventures Book III. 
Opinion of us ; nay, iinlefs fhe could e - 
ven prevail on him, to turn us out of doors, 
which unlefs fhe could make us appear 
guilty of fome monftrous Villainy, fhe 
defpaired of cfFe£ting. 

As the bringing us into abfolute Dif- 
grace with my Father, was her greateft 
Gric^f, fo fhe conftantly pretended it was 
her greatefl Fear : For all her Power was 
owing to his Blindnefs; and had fhe done 
any thing to have opened his Eyes, the 
Goodnefs of his Heart would have made 
him detefl, as much as now he loved her. 
She was obliged therefore to be cautious 
in what ihe did ; for the way to bring 
tilings about with Men, who have no ill 
Dcfigns of their own, is to work under- 
hand, by pretending our Views are good. 

She had fo long been our Enemy^ 
and endeavour'd to impofe us, as her's, 
on my Father, that I really believe at lafl 
fhe impofed on herfelf, and thought we 
were fo. She watched us about theHoufe, 
as if fhe was afraid we fhould do fome 
mifchief : She did not concern herfelf 
much about Valentine ; and thought, 
as we were looked on to love one an- 
other, in fuch a manner, than what one 



Chap. I. of David Simple. 7 
did, was always approved by the other, 
as I v/as the moft paffionate, and had 
lead Command .of my Temper, I was 
the propereft Perfon to work on. She 
therefore continually did all fhe could to 
provoke me into Paffions, and work me 
into Madnefs, that I might not know 
what I faid or did. 

DAFID could not forbear fighing 
" at fuch a piece of Barbarity, but would 
not interrupt Camilla's Narration : on- 
*^ ly begged to know what could be 
the End of all thefe Defigns of her 
Mother's, and how far her Father 
could be blinded by his Paffion. 

Alas ! Sir, anfwered Camilla^ there 
is no knowing how far Pafiions of that 
kind will carry People ; they go Lengths, 
which they themfelves at firft would be 
perfedly ftartled at, and are guilty of 
Adions, which, were they to hear of 
a third Perfon, they would condemn, 
and think themfelves utterly incapa- 
ble of. Perhaps you will wonder to 
hear me fay it, but I could never e- 
nough get the better of the Opinion I 
had fixed of my Father's Goodnefs, not 
to think if his Mind had been lefs great, 
A 4 his 



8 Jhe Adventures Book III, 
Lis Adions would have been better ; for 
that Tendernefs and Good-nature, which 
made him really love the Objedl that 
gave him Pleafure, was the Caufe of all 
Jiis Errors. A Man who looks upon a 
"Woman as a Creature formed for his 
Diverfion, and who has neither Compaf- 
fion nor Good-will towards her, can ne- 
ver be worked on by her Arts to do him- 
fc!f or another an Injury. Women have it 
in their power at once to pleafe all the 
Pafflons a Man can be poffeffed of ; he is 
Hattrred by her liking him, meked into 
Tendernefs (if he has any) by her Spft- 
nefs, and eafily drawn in to efteem her, 
if fhe thinks it worth her while to gain 
his Friendfhip ; becaufe he finds fhe 
pleafes him, and he would not willingly 
think he can be thus pleafed with a Crea- 
ture unworthy his Efteem, So that a 
Man, in fome meafure, thinks it necef- 
fary^ in order to prove his own Judg- 
ment^ to jufiify the Woman he finds he_ 
cannot help being fond of. This is a 
Paffion I have always obferved People 
of Merit to be moft liable to. If it 
happens to light on a Woman, who 
really deferves it, the Man becomes a 
greater BlefTing to all his Acquaintance, 
his Thoughts are more refined ; and, ly 

continually 



Ghap. I. cf David Simple. 9 
continually being influenced by a Perfon 
v/ho has no other View, but to promote 
his Intereft and Honour; all the little 
GareleffneflTesof his Temper are correfted, 
and he is vifibly both happier and better 
than he was before. But if, on the/ 
contrary, as in the Cafe of Lhia and my. 
Father, the Woman looks on her HuC- 
band*s Love for her, in no other Light, 
but as it gives Reran Opportunity to make 
a Prey of his Fortune, and to impofe on 
his Underftanding ; the latter will be de- 
ftroyed as fall as the former is fpent, his 
Friends will drop from him, he will find 
a Fault fomewhere, and from a Defire 
not to impute it to the right Caufe, not 
know where to place it. He will awaken > 
that Sufpiclon zcb/cb always Jleeps at 
Wifdom^s Gate^ and find he has rouftd 
a Fury, which neither Poppies, norr 
Mandragora, nor all the drowfy Sy- 
" rups of the World, can medicine to 
" fweet Sleep again/* 

But r afk pardon, L am led into a- 
Subject I could for ever expatiate on, and 
forget, while I am induUijng myfelf, yoir,^ 
Sir, may bt:r tired : I wi'l therefore nov/ 
bring myfelf back to the Thread ofm.y 
Story, as well as I am able. This Vr'as 
A 5. the: 



lo The Adventures Beck III. 
the Life the whole Family led \ my Fa- 
ther was continually uneafy, at feeing a 
Difagreement between us and his Wife. 
My Mother fpervt her whole Time, in 
confidering which way fhe (houid bed 
cany on her perniciousSchemcs. Valentine 
walked about filent and difcontented, and 
as for niy parr, I was worked by my 
Paffions in fuch a manner, that I hardly 
knew one thing from another, nor can I 
think I v/as perleftly in my Senfes. 

I tell you, Sir, every thing without 
Order, ard hope ycu wiil be fo good as 
to forgive the Incoherence of my Style. 
I remember once, when my Mother's 
Extravagance had drove her Hufband to 
great Diftrefs, and he knew not which 
way to turn himfelf, I afked no Que- 
ftions, but borrowed fome Money of an 
intimate Friend of mine, and brought it to 
them. My Father, who, tho' he was ca- 
joled and deceived by his Wife's Cunning, 
yet in his Heart was all Goodnefs, could 
not help being pleafed with this Inftance 
of my Love and Duty ; and as he had no 
Deceit in him, did not endeavour to con- 
ceal it. I faw hivia had rather have fuf- 
fered any thing than have given me an 
Opportunity of ailing what my Father 

was 



Chap. I. (p/' David Simple* ii 

was pleafed to efteem a generous Part : 
however, flie carried it off in fuch a man- 
ner, that her fond Lover never perceived 
it gave her any Difquiet. I declare, I did 
it fincerely to ferve thenijand had no othen 
View in it. I had for fome time had 
fuch a defpair in my Mind, of ever en- 
joying my felf again, that even that De- 
fpair really gave me fome fort of Eafe; 
but this Adlion of mine, had revived my 
Father's former Tendernefs, juft enough 
to bring to my Remembrance all I had 
Joft. The little while this continued, I 
was more miferable than when he quite 
negledled me ; for now the want of thofe 
trifling Inftances of his AfFedion I once 
enjoyed, began to rife In ray Mind 
again, and I had all the Pain my Heart 
had feft at the Lofs of them, to fufFer 
afrefti. I had fpent a great deal of Time 
in endeavouring to calm my Mind, and 
inure it to bear ill Ufage : but this little 
View of PJeafure, this fmall Return of 
Hope, quite got the better of all my Re- 
folutions. For I am convinced, that to 
live with any body we have once loved, 
and fancy we have, by any Wifdom or 
Philofophy of our own, put it out of 
their power to hurt us, is feeding our- 
felves with a vain Chima^ra, and flacter- 
A 6 ing 



12 The i^DVENTURES Boolc IIL 
ing our Pride, with being able to do 
more than is in the power of any 
Moital. 

LIVIA faw the Agi-tations of Mind 
I;fuftered, and. was refolved to make 
them fubfervient to her Purpofcs. She, 
therefore, one Morning, as I was mu- 
fing and revolving in my Mind, the Dif- 
ference of my prefent Situation, from 
what it had formerly been, came into my 
Room with all the App^^i'^^^ce of Good- 
humour, and fat and talked for fome 
time of indifferent things; at laft, flie 
fell into a Difcourfe on our private Af- 
fairs, in which, flietookan Opportunity, 
of faying ^11 the moft fhocking Things 
Ihe could think of, altho* fhc kept up to 
the ftrifteft Rules of Civility, for fhe 
valued herfelf much upon her Politenefs : 
and I have obferved feveral People value 
themfelves greatly on their own good 
Breeding, whofe Politenefs confifts in no- 
thing more, than an Art of hurting - 
others, w:ithout making Ufe of vulgar 
Terms. 

When Livia had by thefe Means 
worked me up to a Rage, then flie had 
her Ends. She knew my Father was 

reading 



Ghap. I. o/^David Simple. 13 

reading in a Room very near us, ffie 
therefore exalted her Voice to fuch a pitchy 
that it was impoflible for him not to hear 
her ; this immediately brought him to 
know what was the matter : He found me 
endeavouring to fpeak, and yet from the 
Variety of PafTions v/orking in my Mind, 
unable to utter my Words : for from 
v/hat we had been talking of, the Idea 
of all the Torments I had fuffered from 
the Time I firft obferved a Decline in 
my Father's Affedlions, ruflhed at once 
upon my Thoughts, and quite over- 
powered me. Livia looked as pale as 
Death; for thus provoked, I could not 
help telling her what I thought of her Be- 
haviour. Her Pride could not bear to 
think I knew her, fo that I believe (he 
was at laft in as great a Faffion as Jhe 
could be ; but fhe never was carried fo 
far, as to forget her main View. My 
Father looked wild, at feeing us in 
this Condition, and defired Uvia to 
tell him, what could be the Caufe of all 
this Confufion;folemnly affirming, that 
no Nearnefs of Blood, or any Tye what- 
ever fhould fcreen the Perfon from his 
Anger, who could ufe her in fuch a 
" Way as to ruffle that Sweetnefs of 
f ^ Temper y which he knew nothing but 

the 



14 TZ^e? Adventures Booklll. 

the higheft Provocation could fo much 
get the better of, as to make her talk 
fo loud, and look fo difcompofed/* 
By this time fhe had enough recollefled 
herfelf to think of an Anfwer proper for 
her Purpofe, and told him, It was 
no matter now — it was over — flie had 
recovered herfelf again ; but I had been 
in a violent PafTion, only becaufe fhe 
faid — " And then fhe repeated fome 
trifling thing, which however had two 
Meanings, and the different Manner fhe 
now fpoke it in, from what fhe had done 
before, gave it quite another Turn ; and 
you may be fure her Hufband took it 
in the mofl favourable Senfe. But faid 
fhe, " I mufl have been a Stock or a 
" Stone, and have had no manner of 
Feeling, if I had not been provoked 
at the Anfwers fhe made/* On which 
fhe chofe to repeat the mofl virulent Ex- 
preffion l had made ufe of And, I con- 
fefs, I was quite unguarded, and faid 
whatever I was prompted to by my Rage. 
She conckided, by faying, " there fhould 
be an end of it ; for now fhe was calm 
" again/* During the Time fhe was 
Ipeaking, the poor unhappy deceived 
Man flared with Fury, his Eye Balls 
rolled, and like Othello^ he bit his nether 

Lip 



Chap. I. cf David Simple. 15 
Lip with Fury, At laft^ he fuddenly 
fprung forward, and flruck nie. 

While Camilla was relating this laft 
Tranfaftion, her Voice faultered by de- 
grees, till fhe was able to fpeak no more. 
She trembled with the Agonies, the Re- 
membrance of pad Afflidions threw her 
into ; and at laft fainted away. David 
catched her in his Arms, but knew not 
what to do, to bring her to life again j 
for he was almoft in the fame Condition 
himfelf. 

At this very Inftant Valentine en- 
tered the Room ; he was amazed at 
this Scene, and knew not to what Caufe 
to afcribe it. However, his prefent 
Thoughts were all employed in Confide- 
f ations how he could help his Sifter ; he 
ran for Water, and threw it in her Face, 
which foon brought her to herfelf. The 
Brother and David were both rejoiced to 
hear her fpeak again, but particularly 
David^ for he really thought fhe had 
been dead. The reft of the Evening 
pafled in Converfation on indifFerent 
things. Valentine feemed more thought- 
ful than ufual ; Camilla obferved it, and 
could not help being uneafy: flie was 

terrified 



1 6 The Adventures Book III. 
terrified left he fhould have met with 
feme new Vexation. However, as he 
did not mention any thing, fhe would 
not afk him before a third Perfon. When 
they retired to Rei% Valentine followed 
her into her Room, and feemed as if he 
had fomc thing to fay to her, which he 
was afraid to difclofe, and yet was unable 
to conceal for his Love for Camilla was 
quite of a different kind from that of 
thofe Brothers, who, by their Fathers 
having more Concern for the keeping up 
the Grandeur of their Names, than for 
the Welfare of their Pofterity, having 
got the Poffeffion of all the Eftate of 
the Family, out of meer Kiftdnefs and 
Good-Nature^ allow their Sifters enough 
out of it to keep them from ftarving in 
fome Hole in the Country ; where their 
fmallSubfiftencejuft ferves to fuftain them 
the longer in their Mifery, and prevents 
them from appearing in the World to 
difgrace their Brother^ by their Poverty. 

VALENTINE was afraid to fay 
any thing which could any ways be fliock- 
ing to the Perfon he would never have 
been aftiamed of owning a Friendfhip for, 
notwithftanding fhe was a Woman Ca- 
milla faw him in perplexity, and begged 

him. 



\ 

Chap. I. of David Simple. 17 
him to let her know what it was that- 
grieved him i and if it was in her power^ 
by any Labour or Pains, either to reheve 
or comfort him, affured him of her 
Afliftance. Valentine then made the fol- 
lowing Reply : My dear Camilla^ I 
am certain, wants no Proof of my fin- 
" cere Affeftion, and I muft confefs all 
my prefent Uneafinefs is on your ac- 
count : The Condition I juft now 
" found you in, with the Confufion in 
" Mr. Simple^s Looks, raifed Fears in 
my Bread, left you fhould be now go- 
" ing to fuffer, if pofTible, more than 
you have already gone through ; for in 
Minds as generous as I know yours to 
" be, the ftrongeft Affedions are thofe 
" which are firft raifed by Obligations. 
I am not naturally fufpicious ; but the 
Experience I have already had of Man- 
kind, and the Beauty of your Form, 
with th^ Anxiety I am always in for 
your Welfare, inclines me to fear 
the worft. You, of all Womankind^ 
fhould be moft careful how you enter 
*^ into any Engagements of Love ; for 
^' that Softnefs of Difpofition, and all 
'V that Tendernefs you are poiTeffed of, 
" will expofe you to the utmoft Mifery.; 
and, unlefs you meet, with a; Man 

whofe: 



i8 The Adventures Booklll, 
whofe Temper is like your own, which 
will be no eafy matter for you to do ; 
you will be as unwife to throw away 
" all the Goodnefs you are miftrefs of on 
him, as a Man would be, who had a 
great Stock in Trade, to join it with 
another, who not only was worth no- 
" thing of his own, but was a Spend- 
thrift, and infenfible of the great Good 
he v/as doing him. I acknowledge 
" this Gentleman has behaved to us both 
" in a manner which demands the Return 
" of all our moft grateful Sentiments ; 
but if what he has done fhould be 
owing to his liking of your Perfon, 
and he fhould be plotting your Mifery, 
inftead of your Welfare, I had rather 
be in the Condition he found us in, 
than be relieved by any one, who caa 
" have fo mean, fo defpicable a way of 
thinking/' Camilla hearkened with 
the utmoll Attention, while Valentine was 
fpeaking-, and, when he had finifhed, 
told him, fhe thought fhe could never 
enough acknowledge his Kindnefs in his 
Concern for her; but fhe affijred him, 
that by all fhe could obferve in Mr. Si^n- 
fle^s Behaviour, and fhe had narrowly 
examined all his Words and A6lions^ 
fhe could not but think he had as much 

Honour 



Chap. I. David Simple. 19 
Honour as he made an outward Profef- 
fion of. That indeed fhe could not deny 
but that fhe thought he had fome Regard 
for her ; but he feemed rather afraid to 
Jet her know it, than folicitous to make 
an appearance of it ; which (he imputed 
to his Dehcacy, left fhe lliould fufpe6l he 
took any advantage of her unhappy 
Circumftances, or thought what he had 
done for -us, ought to lay any reftraint 
on her Affections. Shedefireci her Bro- 
tiher not to be uneafy ; told him, that it 
was the repetition of what fhe could never 
remember without Horror, that had 
thrown her into the way he found her 
in ; affured him, if David mentioned 
any thing of Love to her, flie would tell 
him of it ; and condu6t herfelf by his Ad- 
vice. After this Promife, he took his 
leave of her, and went to bed. 

DAVID could get but little Sleep 
that Night, for the various Reflc6tions 
which crouded into his Mind, on the 
Story he had heard that Day. All the 
good Qualities Camilla intimated her Fa- 
tlTer was poffefled of, and yet his being 
capable of afting in fuch a manner, by 
fuch a Daughter, were melancholy Indi- 
cations to him, that a perfedt Character 

was 



20 Adventures Book III. 

was no where to be found. When he 
thought on Camilla's Sufferings, his In- 
dignation was raifed againft him : Then,, 
v/hen he remembered that all his Faults 
were owing to being deceived by a Wo- 
man of Livia^s Art, he could nor help 
having a CompafFion for him. But from 
this Scene, which he looked on with 
Terror, there was a fudden Tranfition in 
his Mind to the Idea of all Camilla^s 
Softnefsand Goodnefj. On this he dwelt 
v/ith the utmoft Rapture, but was often 
interrupted in this pleafing Dream, tho* 
much againft his Wili, by the Remem- 
brance of her owning fhe had fometimes 
been weak enough to triumph in her 
Heart, at feeing Livia teaze her Father ; 
but then fo many Excufes immediately 
prefented themfelves to plead in hisBreaft 
for Cmnilla^ that had her Frailties been 
much greater, they woukl not have pre- 
vented his thinking, that in her he had 
met with all he wilhed. He longed for 
an Opportunity of hearing the reft of her 
Story; for he wasnov/ perfeftly fjre that 
he fhould hear nothing in it but what was 
to her advantage. And the next um^ Va- 
lentine was gone out of the way, Camilla^ 
by his earned Defire, went on with her 
tliftory in the following manner. 

C H A P. 



Chap. 2. ^ David Simple. 21 



C H A p. IL 

A Continuation of the Hijlory of 
Camilla. 

I Ceased, Sir, at a Part, the Remem* 
brance of which always afFefts me in 
fuch a mann.T, that my Refolution is not 
ilrong enough to keep Life in me, at the 
repetition of it. It was the firft time my 
Father had ever ftruck me, tho' I had 
been bred up with him from my Infancy : 
I was ftunned with the Blow, but my 
Senfes foon returned, and brought with 
them that Train of horrible Thoughts, 
which it is equally impoflible for me ever 
to root from my Memory, or to find 
Words in any Language capable of ex- 
prelTing. When my Father faw me fall, 
I believe he was at firft frightened : He 
took me up, and fet me upon the Bed ; 
but the moment hivia faw there was no 
real Hurt done, fearing he fliould relent, 
and make it up with me again, Ihe hur- 
ried him out of tne Room, under the 
pretence of being frightened ac his Pdfiion, 
faying, She would not that he fhould 

have 



22 The Adventures Book HI. 

have ftruck me on any account, efpe- 
^' ciaily in her QLiarrel, for llie could 

bear it alJ/' And then fhe put him in 
mind again, of what fhe thought he 
would be moil: difpleafed at my faying. 
I had not fpoke one Word, nor was I 
able. The Moment they were gone, I 
threw myfelf back on the Bed, in greater 
Agonies than the ftrongeft Imagination 
can paint, or than I can comprehend 
how human Nature is able to furvivc. 
My Father's leaving me in this Condi- 
tion, without giving himfelf any farther 
Trouble about what IfufFered, or to find 
out v/hether I really deferved this Treat- 
ment, hurt me more than even his ftrik- 
ing me had done. 

In this miferable Condition Hay till 
Valentine came in ; it was his Cuftom 
always to come up immediately to me, 
after he had been abroad : The poor 
Creature found me almoft drowned in 
Tears, and unable to tell him the Caufe 
of them. He guefled Livia was at the 
bottom of whatever it was that made me 
ill this Situation. He at firft fwore, he 
would go and know from her what fhe 
had done to me. I caught hold of him, 
and Ihewed hira by my Looks, that no- 
thing 



Chap. 2. ^David Simple. 23 

thing would hurt me lb much ; and by 
that means prevailed with hu'n to fit 
down by me, till I could recover myfelf 
enough to fpeak ; when, with the Inter- 
ruption of Sighs and Tears, I told him 
every thing that had happened. Valentinej 
who is very far from being paffionate, 
(but the Paffions of Men who are not fub- 
je6l to be ruffled, are much more to b« 
dreaded, than thofe of a fort of People, 
who can have their whole Frame fhaken, 
and torn to pieces, about every Grain of 
Muftard-Seed or every Blaft of Wind) 
when he had heard me out, grew outrage* 
ous, " infilled that I would let him go, 
for he was refolved no RefpeCl, even 
for his 'Father, fhould prevent his tel- 
ing Livia^ fhe fhould not ufe me in 
that manner. Nay, and before her 
" Hulband's face, he would difplay all 
her Tricks, and fhev/ him how flie 
impofed on him.'' 

I WAS now frightenM to deadi, for I 
would not have had my Father and Bro- 
ther met, while he was in this Humour, 
for the whole World. I ftill kept hold 
of him, and begged him, with all the 
moft endearing Expreffions I was mi- 
ftrefs of, not to increafe my Mifery ; 

but 



3 



-24 TZ?^ Ad VENTURES Book 111. 
but to fit down till he was cool, that we 
might confult together, what was beft for 
us to do. He was fo good, in Confidera- 
tion for me, to comply with my Re- 
queft, and I did all I could to calm his 
PaflTion ; and when I found he was able 
to hearken to me^ 1 cried out, " Oh ! 
" Vale7itine^ in this Houfe I can live no 
longer ; the Sight of my Father, now 
I have fuch evident Proofs his AfFec- 
" tion is fo entirely alienated from me, is 
" become as great a Torment to me as 
ever it was a Bleffing. I value not 
what I ftiall go through in being a Va- 
gabond, and not knowing where to 
" go ; for I am certain, no Poverty, no 
Mifery can ever equal what I fufFer 
" here. But then, how fhall I leave you! 

Can I bear to be feparated from the 
" only Comfort I have left in the World, 
or can I be the Caufe of your leaving 
your Father's Houfe, and fubjeding 
you to, perhaps, more Afflidlions than 
you already endure ! 'Tis that Thought 
*^ diftradts my Mind ! for as to myfelf, 
" I am carelefs of every thing future, 
" and am fure nothing, when I am ab^ 
" fent from hence, can ever make me 
" feel what I do at this Moment ; nor 
would I have borne it fo long, had it 

not 



Chap. 2. g/' David Simple. 25 

not been for fear of bringing greater 
Mifchiefs on your Head, than what 
you now fufFer/* 

VAL E NTINE fwore he would never 
forfake me, that he would accompany 
me wherever I pleafed, and be my Sup- 
port and Guard to the utmoft of his 
power ; for that he valued his Life no 
" longer than it conduced to that end ; 

but he thought it advifeable we fhould 
" make one Effort, before we took fuch 
^ ' a Step, to convince my Father of Livia\. 

Treachery, and lay before him how 
^' (he had ufed us perhaps his AfFedriou 
might return for us, his Eyes might 
be opened, and every thing be right 
again/* 

I CONSIDERED a momcnt, and then 
replied ; My dear Brother, I am very cer- 
tain my Father's Pafiion for this Woman 
muft be without all Bounds, or he could 
never have been influenced by any Arts of 
her^s to ftrike me, and ufe me as he has 
done. Were we to attempt to open his 
Eyes on her Faults, he would not hearkea 
to us, and only hate us the more ; and, 
could we give him any Sufpicion of her, 
it would only make him unhappy, which. 

Vol, II. B let 



26 The Adventures Book III. 
let him ufe me ever fo cruelly, the W orid 
could not bribe me to wifh him ; for, as 
I take his Fondnefs for Livia to be uncon- 
querable, all the Eafe he has he owes to 
hisBhndnefs: and I am fure, if a Man 
was put in heavy Chains, which he had 
no means of taking off, and was mad 
enough to deceive himfelf, and farcy 
they were Bracelets made of the finell: 
Jewels, and Strings of the fofteft Silk, 
that Man would be very little his Friend, 
who fhould take pains to convince him 
they were made of Iron, till he felt all 
their Weight, and was fenfible of his own 
unhappy Condition. Nay, if I loved him, 
and was confined within his reach, and 
he fhould carry his Madnefs fo far as to 
ftrike me with the Iron, fancying it was 
fo foft I could not feel it, while the Hurt 
was not great enough to throw me off my 
Guard, I would not tell him of it. Indeed 
I wouid get from him, if it was in my 
power, as I will now from my Father, 
lefl I fliould be tempted to aft a Part I 
myfclf think wrong, and contrive fome 
Method of undeceiving him, to his own 
Mifery. 

VALENTINE was by this time 
quite cool, and approved of what I had 

faid. 



chap. 2. o/Daviu Simple. 27 
faid. We therefore took a Refolution of 
going from thence, tho* we knew not 
whither, nor who would receive us. We 
at laft recoiledled we had an old Aunt, 
who ufed to be very kind to us, and ap- 
peared to have taken a great fancy to Va- 
lentine : to her, therefore we went, and 
begged her, for fome httle time, till wc 
could fettle what to do with ourfelves, to 
let us remain in her Houfe. We told her 
as much of what had happened, as we 
thought juft neceffary to plead for us in 
going from our Father's Houfe ; but with 
the greateft Caution, that we might throw 
as little Blame on him as poffible. We 
could not avoid letting her a little into 
Livia"^ Behaviour, for we had no other 
Juftification for what we had done. She 
faid, fhe was very much amazed at 
what we told her, for Livia had a very 
good Charafter but fhe fuppofed this 
" was a paffioRate Quarrel, and fhe 
would take care of us, till fuch time 
as it could be made up again.*' We 
aflfured her that was ImpofTible, that we 
would on no account ever go back again 
to a Place we had fufFered fo much in : 
And only intreated as the greateft Fa- 
vour, that fhe would grant us fome little 
Corner of her Houfe to be in, and let no- 
body know we were there. She took 
B 2 little 



28 The Adventures Bock III- 
little notice of what we faid, but refolved 
to a6l her own way. 

The next day fhe went out, and at 
her return came into the Room where 
we were, with the greateft Fury imagi- 
nable in her Looks ; and afl^ed us, " What 
it was we meant, by telling her a Story 
of Livia^s ill Ufage, and God knows 
what ; and endeavouring to impofe on 
her, and make her acceflary to our 
wicked Converfation with each other : 
Brother and Sifter ! — it was unnatural, 
iht did not think the World had been 
*^ arrived at fuch a pitch of Wickednefs.'* 
-She ran on in this manner for a great while, 
without giving us leave to anfwerher. 

FJL ENTINE and I flood ftaring 
at one another, for we did not underftand 
one Word fhe faid : At laft, when fhe 
had talked herfelf out of breath, I beg- 
ged her to explain herfelf, for I was really 
at a Jofs to know what Ihe meant ; if Ihe 
had any thing to lay to our Charge, and 
would pleafe to let us know what it was, 
we v/ere ready to juftify ourfelves. Then 
flie began again, Oh ! undoubtedly you 

are very innocent People— ^ou don't 

know v/hat I mean/* 

THElf 



Chap. 2. of David Simple. 29 

Then flie launchM out into a long. 
Harangue on the crying and abominable 
Sin of Inceft, wrung her Hands, and 
feemed in the greateft Affliftion, that 
ever fhe Ihould live to hear a Nephew and 
Niece of hers could be fuch odious Crea- 
tures. At laft I gueffed whatflie would 
infinuate 5 but, as I knew myfelf per- 
fedlly innocent, could not imagine how 
fuch a Thought could come into her 
head. I begged her for God's- fake to 
let me know who could have filled her 
Ears with fuch a horrid Story 5 and by 
degrees I got it out of her. It feems this 
good Woman had been at my Father's 
that Afternoon, with a Defig.n of recon- 
ciling and bringing us together again : 
when fhe came in, ihe found Livia and 
her Hufband fitting together after the 
iifual Compliments of Civility were paft, 
fhe began to mention us, told them we 
were at her Houfe: and that fhe was 
come with an Intention of making up 
fome little Difputes fhe underftood there 
had been between us. Livia now aded 
a Piart, which perhaps fhe had not long 
intended ; but I am convinced, whoever 
is capable unprovoked to do another an 
Injury, will ftop at nothing to carry their 
Schemes through : and, if they find no 
B 3 Villainy 



30 T^he Adventures Book III. 
Villainy in the Perfon they thus unde- 
fervtdiy profecute, they will make no 
fcruple of inventing any thing, ever fo 
bad, for their own Juftification. 

The Moment my Aunt mientioned us, 
Livia fell into a violent Paffion of crying, 
and faid, fhe was fure fhe was the moft 
unfortunate Woman alive : She did not 
doubt but we had told her every thing 
vv^e could think of to vilify her ; for we 
were cunning enough to know, that Mo- 
thers-in-law were eafily believed by the 
World to be in fault, tho' flie was fnre 
Ihe had always afted by us, as if we had 
been her own Children. She faid, her 
chief Concern now v^zsfor us^ for that fhe 
was in the utmoft Confternation, to 
think what the World would fay of us ; 
a young Man and Woman running away 
together from their Father^sHoufe, with- 
out any reafon, (and llie was fure fhe 
knew of nonej had a very bad Appear- 
ance : And, as ail our Acquaintarxe knew 
we had alv/ays had a remarkable Fondnefs 
for each other, that Circumflance would 
corroborate the Sufpicion. - Then fhe 
mendoned feveral little Inflances in which 
Valentine and I had fhtwn our reciprocal 
Love ; adding, that altho* fhe had great 
reafon to believe we both hated her ; yet, 

as 



Chap. 2. ^David Simple. 31 
as we were fo nearly related to the Ma^ 
Jhe loved^ fhe could not help being con- 
cerned for our Welfare. As fhe fpoke 
this, fhe look*d at her Hufband with fuch 
an Air of Softnefs and Tendernefs, at 
fhe knew would be the ftrongeft Proof 
imaginable to him of her Sincerity. My 
Father ftood for fome little time in A- 
mazemenr, and was ftruck with the ut- 
moft Florror at the Thought Livia had 
fuggefted to him ; and then fwore he 
would fend for us home, and lock us up 
feparately from each other. This would 
utterly have fruftrated all Liviah De- 
figns ; for flie knew the Temper of die 
Man fhe had to deal with well enough to 
be fatisfied, if once we came home again, 
Time wouid bring about a Reconciliation 
between my Father and u?, which flie 
was refolved to prrvent ; and therefore, 
as fhe had gone fo far, fha thought her- 
felf now under a neccliity to go through 
with it. Few People ftop in the midft of 
Villainies, as the firftScep is much the 
hardeft to get over. 

LI VI A therefore, with the appear- 
ance of the greateft Perturbation of Mind, 
as if it was the utmoft Force to her in 
this Cafe, even to fpeak the Truth, and,- 
with. Tears in her Eyes, faid, Things were 
B 4 now 



52 The Adventures Book III" 

now come to fuch an Extremity, that, in 
order to prevent her Hufband^s having 
any Sufpicion of her giving his Children 
any Caufefor their Fiatred, flie was forced 
ag;ainft her Will to confefs fhe knew the 
r. afon of our Averfion to her. I have dif- 

covered a Secret, my Dear- Here flie 

made a Paufe and then defired to be ex- 
cufcd from proceeding any farther : But 
my Father, whole Soul was now on fire, in- 
lifted in the ftrongeft manner on knowing 
the whole. She then with an afFefted 
Confufion and a low Voice continued 
thus : I accidentally found out a Secret 
which they feared I might one time or other 
difcover ; and therefore ufed all the Me- 
thods they could invent, to give your 
Father an ill Opinion of me, that if I told 
it, it might be dilbelieved. She then 
turned to him^ and faid, I ought to afk 
your pardon. Sir, for fo long concealing 
from you a thing which is of the utmoft 
confcquence to your Family ; but it was 
the Fear of making you unhappy, was 
the reafon of it, and I could never bring 
jmyfelf to give you the Pain you muft 
have felt at the knowledge of it. Nay, no- 
thing but your abfolute Commands, v/hich 
I fliall ever obey, could even now enforce 
nie. — It is now fome time fince I found 
out there was a criminal Converfation be- 
tween 



chap. 2. of David Simple. 33 

tvveen your Son and Daughter ; to this^ 
was owing all that Love they talked of 
to each other ; to this may be imputed 
FaknUne's Melancholy, and this was the 
Foundation of aii the Paffions you have 
feen Camilla in, which ihe feigned to be 
owing to her Grief for our ufmg her ill : 
for on their Oaths and fo'emn Promifes 
of Amendment, I affured th:m you fliould 
know nothing of it. I don*t know whe- 
ther I am excufable for fo doings but i 
had fo great a Dread of difturbing your 
Peace of Mind^ that I could not prevail 
with myfelf to a£t otherwife, and was ia 
hopes to have preferved your Quiet, and 
by this Lenity have faved your Cbildreft 
from Ruin. I have watched them all I 
could, (thus (he artfully gave a reafoa 
for all her Aftions) and it was on mjr 
fpeaking to Camilla yefterday, becaufe I 
obfervcd fh^ ftill continued to contrive 
Methods of being alone with Valentine^ 
fhe fell into that Faffion in which yoisi 
found her. This,, if they will come be- 
fore you, I will affirm to their faces^ 
and I think they cannot even dare ta 
deny it. 

Perhaps, Sir, you wiil wonder how 
Livia could venture to go fo far as this^, 
ia a thing fhe knew to be utterly falfe 
B 5 buty 



34 Adventures Book III. 

bur, if v/e confider it ferioufly, (he ha- 
zarded nothing by it : On the contrary, 
this pretended Opennefs was the ftrongeft 
Confirmation of the Truth of what fhe 
aiFerted. She knew very well, there could 
be no more than our bare Words againft 
her's and that, before a Judge as partial 
to her as her Hufoand, there was no 
danger but fiie fhould be beheved. My 
Father now faw every thing maade clear 
before him, the reafon of all our Difcon- 
tents was no longer a Secret he was 
amazed at our Wickednefs, and faid, he 
was forry he had been the Caufe of fuch 
Creatures coming into the World ; that 
he would never fee us more, then con- 
cluded with a Compliment to Livia^ on 
her great Goodnefs^ and wondered how it 
w^as pofiible any thing could be fo bad, as 
to abufe fuch Soflnefs and Good-nature. 
On w^hich, Livia replied, flie did not va- 
lue our Behaviour, nothing but Nccefiity 
fliould have extorted from her what flie 
always intended to conceal ; and, if flie 
might advife, he Ihould fee us again, fc- 
parate us from each other, and make no 
noife in the World about fuch an Affair 
as this. She well knew my Father's 
Temper, and that his feeing Hie thus re- 
turned Good for Evil, would only raife 

his 



Chap. 2. David Simple. 55 

his Efteeni the higher for her, and exaf- 
perate him the more againft m. 

My Aunt was aftonifhed at our Wic- 
kedncfs, and in the higlieft Admiration of 
Livid s Virtue : From this Vifit fhe came 
diredlly home to us, with a Refolution 
fuch Wretches fhould find no Harbour m 
her Houfe, and talked to us in the man- 
ner already related. 

VALENTINE and I were like 
Statues, on the hearing of all this, and it 
was fome time before we could recollect 
ourfelves enough to fpeak : This was 
thought to be owing to our Guilt, and 
the Shame of being deteded, inftead of 
Amazement and Indignation at hearing 
our Innocence thus falfeJy accufed. It 
was in vain for m to endeavour at clear- 
ing ourfelves, for my Aunt was a very- 
good fort of a W Oman, as far as her Un- 
derllanding would give her leave ; but 
Ihe had the misfortune of having fuch a 
turned Head, that fhe was alv/ays in the 
wrong, and there was never any Poffibi- 
lity of convincing her of the contrary of 
any thing fl:^ had once refolved to be- 
lieve. She had run away warmly with 
the Thoughts of the terrible Sin of Inceft^ 
B 6 aiKi 



36 The Adventures Book III. 
and therefore we were to be condemned 
unheard, and be thought guilty without 
any Proof. 

DJFID could contain himfelf no 
longer, but looking at Camilla with an 
Air of the greatefl: Compaffion, cried 
out. Good God ! Madam, what have 
you fufFered ! and how was you able 
*^ to bear up in the midft of all thefe Af- 
" fliftions ? I would rather go and Jive 
in fome Cave, where I may never fee 
any thing in a human Shape again, 
than hear of another Livia : and how 
could your Aunt be fo barbarous, as 
not to give you leave to juftify your* 
felves ? 

So far from it, Sir, reply'd Camilla^ 
my Aunt would by no means fufFer fuch 
wicked Creatures, as flie now believed 
us, to remain under the fame Roof with 
hen Thus were we abandoned and de-^ 
ftitute of all means of Support, for we had 
but one Guinea in the World % and Livia. 
took care to make the Story that we were 
run from home, that we might have a 
better Opportunity to carry on pur In-* 
trigues, fly like Lightning through all 
our Relations and Acq^uaintance. So that^ 

altho' 



Chap. 2. of David Simple. 37 
altho' we tried to fpeak to feveral of them, 
it was in vain, no one would admit us, 
except one old Maiden Coufin, who, in- 
ftead of doing any thing for our Relief, 
faid all the ill-natured things (on the Re- 
port fhe had heard of us) the utmoft 
Malice could think of. She had always 
been very circumfpedl in her own Con- 
duft, and was radier a Devotee than o- 
therwife ; and I verily beheve fhe was 
glad of an Opportunity to vent her own 
Spleen, while Ihe was filly enough to 
imagine fhe was exerting herfelf in the 
Caufe of Virtue. 

W E knew not which w^y to turn our* 
felves but, as we happened to be tole- 
rably drefled, we thought we might pof- 
fibly be admitted into a Lodging, where 
we were not known : We happened on 
that very Houfe, Sir, where you found 
us, and took that little Floor you af- 
terwards had V but what to do for Money 
to pay for it, or to keep us, we could 
not imagine. While we were in this 
unhappy Situation, poor Valentine fell 
into a violent Fever ; this Misfortune 
made me almoft diftrafted : what to do 
to fupport him, I could not tell ; and 
to fee him want what was necefiary for 
him,, waa what I could not bear. Drove 

by 



38 The Adventures Book III. 
by this Necefllty, and urged on by my 
eager Defire to ferve my Brother, I took 
a Refokition of trying whether I coiild 
raife Compaffion enough in any Perfon to 
induce them to relieve me : I avoided all 
Places where I was known, but went to 
feveral Gentlemen's Houfes \ I told juft 
the Heads of my Story, concealing my 
Name, and all thofe Circumftances which 
might fix it on our Family ; fuppofing 
the Perfons I told it to fhould have heard 
any thing of my Father, or of our run- 
ning away. 

Amongst the People I went to, I 
I found fome Gentlemen who had Good- 
nature enough, as I then thought it^ to 
fupply me ib far, as to enable me to get 
Valentine Neceffaries. My Heart was 
full of Gratitude towards them, and I 
thought I could never enough acknow- 
ledge the Obligation ; but when I went 
to them a lecond time, (for they bid 
me come again, when that was gone) 
they feveraily entertained me with the 
Beauty of my Perfon, and began to talk 
to me in a Style, which gave me to un- 
deiftand they were not filly enough to part 
with their Money for nothing. In fliort, 
I found I had nothing farther to expeft 

from 



Chap. 2. of David Simple. #39 
from them, unlefs I would pay a Price I 
thought too dear for any thing they could 
do for me. Here I v/as again difappoint- 
ed, and obliged to feek out new ways of 
getting Bread for us both. By the Care 
I had tal<en, I had got my Brother out of 
his Fever ; but it had left him fo weak^ 
he was not able to ftir out of his Bed. I 
could not fhew my Head amongft any 
of my old Acquaintance, and I perceived 
all the Ladies I applied to looked on me 
with Difdain^ tho' I knew not for v/hat 
reafon ; and I found amongft the Men 
I had but one way of raifing Charity. 
My Spirits were now quite worn out, 
and I was drove to the lafl: Defpair : 
I was almoft ready to fink under the 
Weight of my Afflictions, and I ve- 
rily believe fhould have done ir, had it 
not been for the Confideration I had for 
Valentine. 

I T came into my head one Morning; 
as I was revolving in my Mind what Step 
I fhould take next, to difguife myfelf in 
fuch a manner, as that no one could be 
under any Temptation from my Perfon. 
I made myfelf a Hump-back, dyed my 
Skin in feveral places with great Spots of 
Yellow \ fo that;, Wihen I lookM in the 

Glafs, 



^he Adventures Book III. 
Glafs, I was almoft frighten'd at my own 
Figure. I drefs'd myfclf decently, and 
was refolved to try what I could procure 
this way. I now found there was not a 
Man would hearken tome: If I began 
to fpeak of my Mifery, they laugh'd on 
one another, and feem'd to think it was 
no manner of Confequence what d, Wretch 
fufFer'd, who had it not in her power to 
give them any pleafure. The Women, 
indeed, ceafed their Difdain^ and feem'd 
to take Compaflion on me ; but it was a 
very fmall Matter I got from them, for 
they all told me, They would ferve 

me, if it was in their power : and 
then fent me to fomebody elfe, who they 
faid was immenfely rich, and could afford 
to give away Money; bu-t when I came 
to thefe rich People, all I heard from 
them was " a Complaint of their Pover- 
" ty, and how forry they were they could 

not help me/' You muft imagine it 
could not be amongft Perfons in very 
High Life I went for I had no means 
of getting into their Houfcs but amongft 
thofe fort of People^ where being drefled 
like a Gendewoman is Pafs-port enough 
for being feen and fpoken lo. The Fi- 
gure I had borrowed availed me as little 
as that which Nature had given me.. I 

begaii 



chap. 2. of David Simple. 41^ 
began now to look on myfelf with Hor- 
ror, and to confider I was the Caufe that 
Valentine lay in fuch a Condition, without 
any hopes of being reftored to his Health 
again ; for his Weaknefs was fo great, it 
required much more than I was able to 
procure for him to fupport him. I re- 
Hefted, that if I could have commanded 
my Paffions, to have borne my Father's 
Slights, and Livia's ill Ufage, with pa- 
tience^ he might have had NecelTaries, 
tho* he would not have lived a pleafant 
Life \ and I had the inexpreflible Tor- 
ment of thinking myfelf guilty of a 
Crime, in bringing fuch Miferies on the 
beft of Brothers. This Confideration^ 
added to all my other Sufferings, had 
very nigh got the better of me ; and how 
I was able to go through ail this> I cannot 
conceive. If I had had nothing but my- 
felf to have taken care of, I certainly 
fhould have fat down and been ftarved to 
death, without making any Struggle to 
have withftood my hard Fate but when; 
I looked on Valentine^ my Heart was ready 
to burft, and my Head was full of 
Schemes what way I fhould find out to 
bring him Comfort. At lafl: a Thought 
came into my head, that I would put on 
Rags^ and go a begging. I immediately 

puc 



d2 The Adventures Book III. 
put this Scheme in extxution, and ac- 
cordingly took my Stand at a Corner of 
a Street, where I flood a whole Day, and 
told as much of my Siory, as they would 
hear, to every Pcrfon that paiTcd by. 
Numbers fiicok their Heads, and cried, 
it was a fliame fo many Beggars were 
fuffcrred to be in the Streets, tiiat People 
could not go about their Bufinef^, with- 
out being molefted by them, and walked 
on. widiout giving me any thing ; but 
amongit the Crouds that paffed by, a 
good many threw me a Penny, or Half- 
penny, till I found in the Evening my 
Gains amounted to half a Crown. 

When it grew dark, I wa? going joy fully 
home, and was very thankful for what litde 
I had got ^ but on afuddeni wasfurrounded 
by three or four Fellows^ who huftled me 
amongft them, fo that I had no way to 
efcape : one of them whifpered me in the 
Ear, That if I made the leaft Noife, 

I fhould be immiediately murdered/' I 
have often fince wondered how that Threat 
could have any Terror on one in my Cir- 
cumftances : but I don't know how it 
was, whether it was owing to the Timi- 
dity of my Temper, or that I was ftunned 
with the Suddennefs of the thing I let 

them 



Chap. 2. ^David Simple. 43 
them carry me where they would, with- 
out daring to cry out. They took me 
under the Arm, as if I had been of their 
Company, and pulled me into a Room ; 
where, the moment they had me fafr, 
they rifled my Bag, in which I had put 
all my little Treafure, and took it every 
Farthing from me, and then afked me. 
How I dared to ftand begging in their 
Diftrid, without their leave; they would 
have me to know^ that Street belo7iged 
to them.^^ And faying this, they every 
one ftruck m.e a Blow, and then led me 
through fuch Windings and Turnings it 
was impoffible I fhould find my way back 
again, and left me in a Street I did not 
know. But I inquired my way home ; and, 
as I was in my Rags and my borrowed 
Uglinefs, was not attacked by any one, 
I fuppofe it was owing to that Difguife, 
that I efcaped meeting with brutal Ufage 
of another kind from thofe Wretches. 

DAVID fliook with Horror at 
that Thought; and, altho' he had ne- 
ver curftd any body ; yet, w^hen he 
refleded on Camilla's Sufferings, he 
\ could hardly forbear curfing Livia ; 
and faid, no Punifhment could be bad 
enough for her : He was now afraid 

" every 



44 Adventures Book IIL 

every time Camilla opened her Mouth, 
what he fliould hear next ; for he found 
himfelf fo ftrongly interefted in every 
thing which concerned her, that he felt 
in his own Mind all the Mifery (he had 
gone through, and he then a(ked her, 
what fhe couM poffibly do in this un- 
" happy Situation.'' Towhich fhe replied, 
I knew not what to do, my Spirits were 
depreflfed, and worn out with Fatigue, 
and I felt the Effefts of the rough Blow 
thofe barbarous Creatures had given me. 
But this indeed was trifling, in compa- 
rifon of the Horror which filled my Mind, 
when I faw Valentine faint, and hardly 
able to fpeak for want of proper Nourifh- 
ment, and I had no Method of getting 
him any. 

The Landlady of the Houfe had been 
already clamorous for her Money, but I 
had, by Perfuafions and Promifes to get 
it for her as foon as ever I could, paci- 
fied her from time to time, I was afraid 
the laying open our ftarving Condition to 
her, would be the means of being turned 
out of doors and yet, defperate as this 
Remedy ippeared, I was forced to venture 
at it. I therefore called her up, and beg- 
ged her to give me fomething to relieve 



Ckap» 2. ^David S imple- 45 

the poor Wretch, whom (he faw fick in 
bed for that I was in the iitmoft Diftrefs 
to get fome Food for him. She fell a 
fcolding at me, and faid, She won- 
" dered how I could think poor People 
could hve, and pay their Rent, if fuch 
as I took their Lodgings, and had no- 
thing to pay for them ; why did not I 
" work as well as other People, if I had 
.no other means of fupporting myfelf- 
^' Sure! fhe did not underftand what 
People meant by fctting up for Gen-- 
tlefolks:^ I told her, if fhe would be 
fo good to get me any Employment, I 
w^uld work my Fingers to the Bone, to 
pay her what I owed her, and only begged 
her to give me fomething for my prefent 
Support. Yes, anfwered lhe, that is 
a likely matter truly ! then I fliould 
" have the Work to anfwer for, and be 
ftill a greater Lofer ; forIdon*t know 
who would truft any thing in the 
*^ Hands oi' Beggars J* 

Good God 1 faid David, have I 
Jived under the fame Roof with fuch a 
Monfter, a Creature who could be fo 
" barbarous as to upbraid, inftead of 
affifting her Fellow-Creatures, when 
drove to fuch a Height of Mifery.** 

Alas, 



46 The Adventures Book IIL 



Alas, Sir, faid Camilla^ there is no 
Situation fo deplorable, no Condition fo 
much to be pitied, as that of a Gende- 
woman in real Poverty. I mean by real 
Poverty, not having fufEcient to procure 
us Neceflaries ; for good Senfe will teach 
People to moderate their Defires, and 
leflen their way of living, and yet be 
content. Birth, Family, and Educadon, 
become Misfortunes, when we cannot at- 
tain fome Means of fupporting ourfelves 
in the Station they throw us into ; our 
Friends and former Acquaintance look 
on it as a Difgrace to own us. In my 
Cafe, indeed, there was fomething pecu- 
liarly unhappy ; for my Lofs of Reputa- 
tion gave my Relations fome Excufe for 
their Barbarity : tho' I am confident 
they would have afted near the fame part 
without it. Men think ourCircumftances 
give them a Liberty to fhock our Ears 
with. Propofals ever fo diftionourable and 
I am afraid there are Women, who do 
not feel much Uneafinefs, at feeing any 
one who is ufed to be upon a Level with 
themfeives, thrown greatly below them. 
If we were to attempt getting our living 
by any Trade, People in that Station 
would tnink we were endeavouring to 
2 take 



Chap. 2. David Simple. 47 

take their Bread out of their mouths, and 
combine together againft us y faying, we 
mufl: certainly deferve our Diftrefs, or 
our great Relations would fupport us. 
Men in very high Life are taken up 
with fuch various Cares, that were they 
ever fo good-natured, they cannot hear- 
ken to every body's Complaint, who ap- 
phes to them for Rehef. And the lower 
fort of People ufe a Perfon who was born 
in a higher Station, and is thrown amongft 
them by any Misfortune, juft as I have 
feen Cows in a Field ufe one another : 
for, if by accident any of them falls into a 
Ditch, the reft all kick againft them, 
and endeavour to keep them down, that 
they may not get out again. They will 
not fuffer us to be equal with them, and 
get our Bread as they do ; if we cannot 
be above them, they will have the plea- 
fure of cafting us down infinitely below 
them. In fhort, Perfons who are fo un- 
fortunate as to be in this Situation, are in 
a World full of People, and yet are as 
folitary as if they were in the wildeft De- 
fart no body will allow them to be of 
their Rank, nor admit them into their 
Community. They fee all the Bleffings 
which Nature deals out with fuch a lavifh 
Hand, to all her Creatures, without find- 
ing 



4S 75^ Adventures Book III, 
ing any Poffibilicy of fharing the Jeaft 
Part of them. This, Sir, was my mife- 
rable Cafe, till your Bounty relieved me. 

The Raptures Z)<^*z;/W felt at that Mo- 
ment, when Camilla had thus fuddenly 
turned his Thoughts on the Confideration 
that he was the Caufe fhe was relieved, 
from that moft miferable of all Condi- 
tions, which fhe had juft defcribed, arc 
not to be exprefled ; and can only be 
imagined by thofe People who are capa- 
ble of the fame Actions. He could not 
forbear crying out, " was he to live a 
thoufand Years, he could never meet 
with another Pleafure equal to the 
Thought of having ferved her : And 
faid, if Ihe thought herfelf any way 
" obliged to him, the only Favour he 
had to afk of her, in return, was never 
to mention it more.'* She was amazed 
at his Generofuy, however, took no fur- 
ther Notice of it, but went on thus with 
her Story. 

Whilst this hard-hearted Woman, 
Sir, was talking in this Strain, a Neigh- 
bour of her's, who accidentally came to 
fee her, hearing her Voice louder than 
ufual, (tho' fhe never fpoke in a very 
3 low 



Chap. 2. ^ David Simple. 49 

low Key) came up to us, to know what 
was the matter. I took hold of her the 
moment fhe entered the Room, and as 
foon as 1 could have an Opportunity (for 
the Landlady would hardly give me leave 
to fpeak) I told her my Cafe. The poor 
Woman, tho' flie worked for her Bread, 
was lb touched with what fhe heard, and 
with my Brother's pale languid Look, that 
fhe pulled out Six-pence, and gave it me ; 
this enabled me to fupport him two Days, 
for his Stomach was too weak to take any 
thing but Bifcuits. As to myfelf, I fwal- 
lowed nothing but dry Bread and Water, 
for I would not rob him of a Farthing 
more than juft ferved to keep me alive. 
The Miftrefs of the Houfe, as foon as this 
our Benefadlrefs was gone, began again 
in her old ftrain, and faid, fhe muft 

fend for the proper Officers of the Pa- 
" rifh to which we belonged, and charge 

them with us, for fhe could not ven- 

ture to bring any Expence on herfelf.'* 
I begged her, for God's fake, not to turn 
us out in that Condition : and at laft pre- 
vailed fo far on her Good-nature^ that fhe 
confented we fhould flay in her Houfe, 
provided we would go up into the Gar- 
ret, and be contented with one Room ; 
" for truly fhe could not fpare more to 

Vol. II, C " fuch 



50 72?^ Adventures Book III. 
fuch Creatures ; and if we could not in 
a Week find fome Method of paying 
her, flic was refolved no longer to be 
impofed on ; becaufe we had found out 
flie could not help being comfajftonate^^^ 
with many Hints, how happy we were 
to have met with her: For there were 
very few People in this hard-hearted 
World, could arrive at fuch a Fitch of 
Goodnefs, To thefe Terms we were forced 
to fubmit, and get up ftairs into that 
Hole, which you found us in. She did 
not fail coming up once a day, to inform 
us how much flie wanted her Money, al- 
tho' ihe knew it was impoflible for us tp 
pay her. 

The poor Woman who had relieved 
us laft, Ipared us one Six-pence more ; 
but flie happened to get a Service, and go 
into the Country, fo that now all our 
Hopes were loft. I have really feveral 
times, during this dreadful Week, wiflied 
Valentine dead, that I might not fee him 
thus languifli away in Mifery, before my 
face. 1 fat up with him the whole time. 
1 will not fliock a Nature fo tender as 
your's, Sir, with the Repetition of what 
Horrors pafled in my Mind, between my 
then prefent Sufferings, and the Expedla- 



Chap. 2. {?/David Simple. 51 
tion of feeing my dear Brother, in liis 
miferable Condition, foon turned into the 
Street. The time was juH: expired, and 
file was come up with a Refolution of 
turning us out of doors, when the Noife 
fhe made brought you up to fee, and re- 
' lieve our Mifery. What little things there 
were in that difmal Room when lirft we 
went up, fhe by degrees took away, urt- 
der the pretence of wanting them for fome 
Ufe or other, till flie left us nothing at all i 
and a poor Creature ill, as Valentine was, 
could not get even the coarfeft Clothes to 
cover him. I had managed the little that: 
good Woman fpared me, from her own 
Labour, in fuch a manner, he had been 
but one Day totally v/ithout any Sufte- 
nance ; but, for my part, I had for two 
Days tafted nothing but cold Water: 
And we muft both have periOied in that 
deplorable Mifery, had not you oppor- 
tunely come to fave us, and reflore us to 
Life and Plenty. 

CAMILLA ceafed fpeaking, and 
David after looking at her with Amaze- 
ment, -was ^oing to make fome Obferva- 
tions on the various Scenes of Wretched- 
nefs Ihe had gone through, when Valen- 
tine entering the Room, made them turn 
C 2 the 



52 T^he Adventures Bock III. 
the Convcrfation on more indifferent Sub- 
je6ts, they pafTed the Evening very agree- 
ably together. And vv^ith CamilW% Story, 
till flie met with David^ 1 fhall conclude 
this Chapter. 

CHAP. III. 

]A Jhort Chapter^ but which contains 
Jurprizing Matter. 

TH E next Converfation 'David had 
with Camilla^ after fome Obferva- 
tions on her own Story, he was natural- 
ly led into a Difcourfe on Cynthia. The 
moment Camilla heard her Name, (from 
a Sufpicion that fhe was her former Com- 
panion ) fhe fhewed the utmoft Eager- 
nefs in her Inquiries concerning her, 
which opened Davia*% Eyes ; and he im- 
mediately fancied, fhe was the Perfon 
whom Cynthia had mentioned in fo ad- 
vantageous a Light. This, confidering 
what he then felt for Camilla^ gave him a 
pleafure much eafier felt than defcribed 
and which can only be imagined by thofe 
People, who knov/ what it is to have a 
Paffion, and yet cannot be eafy unlefs the 
Objeft of it deferves their Efteem. 

DAVID 



chap. 3. ^David Simple. 



53 



D A VID was too much concerned, 
while Camilla was telling her own Story, 
with the Part fhe herfelf bore in it, to ob- 
ferve what Ihe faid of any other Perfon, 
and over-looked the Circumftance of her 
Friend's going abroad with a Lady of 
Fafhion, who had taken a fancy to her : 
But now they were both foon convinced, 
that fhe was the very Perfon whom Camil- 
la had been fo fond of. 

D A VID therefore related to her Cyn- 
thia\ Story ; the DiftrelTes of which, 
moved Camilla in fuch a manner, fne 
could not refrain from weeping. David 
was melted into Tendernefs at the fight of 
her Tears; and yet, inwardly, rejoiced at 
the Thoughts of her being capable of 
fliedding them on fo juft an C)ccafion. 
He then faid, he thought it would be pro- 
per to acquaint Valentine with the Hopes 
fhe had of feeing her Friend again. Ca^ 
milla^ with a Sigh, replied, flie never con- 
cealed any thing from her Brother, which 
gave her pleafure. This Sigh, he thought, 
arofe from reflefting on Cynthia^ Misfor- 
tunes ; but in reality fomething that more 
nearly concerned her, was at the bottom 
of it. For fhe remembered enough of 
C 3 Valentine^ 



54 Adventures Book III. 

Valenline^s Behaviour to Cynthia before fhe 
went abroad, to be well affured he could 
not hear of any Probability of f: eing her 
again, without great Perturbation of 
Mind : However, the next time they 
inet, flie by degrees opened to him, what 
David had told her. But the Palenefs of 
his Countenance, and the Anxiety which 
appeared in his Looks, while fhe was 
fpeaking, cannot be exprefledv Davidj 
who, from his own Goodnefs of Heart, 
required the ftropgeft proofs to convince 
him of any 111 in another, from the fame 
Goodnefs eafily perceived all the Emo- 
tions which arife in the Mind from Ten- 
dernefs and confequently was not long 
in fufpenfe at Valentine^ s extraordinary Be- 
haviour on this Occafion. 

CAMILLAh^d. afted with great 
Honour \ for altho' fhe had told Davidj 
as her Benefa6lor and Friend, the whole 
Hiftory of her own Life, fhe had faid no 
more of her Brother than what was ne- 
cefTary thinking fhe had no Right, on 
any account, to difcover his Secrets, un- 
lefs by his Permiflion. 

VALENTINE, after feveral 
Changes of Countenance, and being in 

fuch 



Chap. 3. of David Simple. 55 

fuch a Situation he could not utter his 
Words, at laft recovered himfelf enough 
to beg Banjtd to tell him all he knew of 
Cynthia^ which he generoufly complied 
with, even fo far as to inform him of her 
Adventure with my Lord — — , and 
her Refufal of himfelf ; but as I think it 
equally as unneceflTary as it is difficult to 
attempt any Defcription of what Valen- 
tine fclc during David^s Narration, I lliall 
leave that to my Reader's own Imagina- 
tion. 

Th e Refult of this Converfation, was 
Valentine^ earneft Requeft to his Sifter 
immediately to write to Cynthia: fhe 
knew where Cynthia's Coufin lived, and 
as fhe was perfedly a Stranger to the re- 
fufing her Brother any thing he defired, 
it was no fooner afked than complied 
with ; but when Davidj Valentine^ and 
Camilla feparated that Night to go to 
bed, various were their Reflexions, va- 
rious were their Situations. Camilla^ 
Mind was on the Rack, at the Confide- 
ration, that David had offered himfelf to 
Cynthia ; he was pleafmg himfelf with the 
Thoughts of the other's refufing him, 
fince he was now acquainted with Camil- 
la \ and Valentine fpent the whole Night 
C 4 in 



56 The Adventures Book III. 
in being tofifed about between Hopes and 
Fears. Cynthia s Refufal of my Lord 

5 and David^ fometimes gave him 

the utmoft Pleafiire, in flattering his Hopes 
that he might be the Caufe of it ; but the 
higher his Joy v/as raifed on this account, 
the greater was his Torment, Vv^hen he 
feared fome Man fhe had met with, jfince 
he faw her, might poflefs her Heart. In 
fhort, the great Earneftnefs with which 
he wifhed to be remembered by her, 
made him but the more diffident in be- 
lievjng he was fo ; and his Pains and 
Pleafures were increafed or leffened every 
moment by his own Imagination, as much 
as Objefts are to the natural Eye, by al- 
ternately looking through a magnifying 
Glafs, and the other End of the Perfpec- 
tive. But here I muft leave him to his 
own Refleftions, to look after the Objedl 
of them, and fee what became of Cynthia 
fince her leaving David. 

On her Arrival in the Country, w^here 
fhe propofed to herfelf the enjoying a 
Pleafure in feeing her old Acquaintance, 
and a little to recruit her funk Spirits, af- 
ter all the Uneafinefs fhe had fuffered ; 
the firfl; News fhe heard, was, that her 
Coufin had been buried a Week, having 

loft 



Chap. 3- c/^David Simple. 57 
Joft her Mother half a Year before. How- 
ever, (lie went to the Houfe where fhe 
had hved. Here fhe was informed, that 
the young Woman had left all the little 
fhe v/as worth, amounting to the Sum of 
thirty Pounds a Year, to a Coufin of her's, 
who was gone abroad with a Woman of 
Fafhion. Cynthia foon found by the Cir- 
cumftances, that this Coufin was herfelf. 
This, inftead of lefTening, increafed her 
Affliftion for her Death \ for the Confi- 
deration, that neither Time nor Abfence 
could drive from the poor young Crea- 
ture's Memory the fmall Kindneffes fhe 
had received from her formerly, made the 
good-natured Cynthia but the more fenfi-^ 
ble of her Lofs. 

She could bear the Houfe no longer 
than was juft neceflary to fettle her Af- 
fairs, and then took a Place in the Stage- 
Coach, with a Refolution of returning to 
London ; being, like People in a burning 
Fever, who, from finding themfelves 
continually uneafy, are in hopes by every 
Change of Place to find Relief. 



CHAR 



58 7^<f Adventures Book III. 



CHAP. IV. 

Which treats of Jome remarkable Dif- 
courfe that pajfed between Pa[Jen^ 
gers in a St age --Coach ^ 

THREE Gentlemen were her Fel- 
low-Travellers : it was dark when 
they fet out, and the various Thoughts in 
Cynthia^ Mind prevented her entering 
into any Converfation, or even fo much as 
hearing what her Companions faid ; till at 
the Dav/n of Day a grave Gentleman, 
who> fat appofite to her, broke forth in fo 
fine an Exclamation on the Beauties of the 
Creation, and made fuch Obfervations on 
feeing the rifing Sun, as awakened all her 
Attention, and gave her hopes of meet- 
ing with both Improvement and Pleafure 
in her Journey. The two other Gentle- 
men employed themfelves, the one ia 
groaning out a Difapprobation, and the 
©ther in yawning^ from a Wearinefs at 
every Word the third fpoke. At.laft he 
who yawned, from a dcfire of putting an 
end to what he undoubtedly thought the 
duEeit S'tujf he ever heard, turned about 
to Cynthiay^ and fw earing he never ftudied 
any atlicr Beautiea of Nature, but thofe 

goffeflhd 



Chap. 4. of David Simple. 5^9 

poffeffed by the Fair Sex^ offered to take 
her by the Hand ; but (he knew enough 
of the World to repulfe fuch Imperti- 
nence, without any great difficulty ; and,, 
by her Behaviour, made that Spark very 
civil to her, the remainder of the Time 
Ihe was obliged to be wich him. 

The very Looks and Dreffes of the 
three Men were fufficient to let her into 
their different Charafters : The grave Ma^, 
whofe Difcourfe flie had been fo pleafed 
with, was dreft in the plainefty tho' in 
the neatefl manner ; and, by the Chear- 
fulnefs of his Countenance, plainly Ihowed 
a Mind filled with Tranquillity and Plea- 
fure. The Gentleman who fat next him^ 
w^as as dirty as if he had fat up two or 
three Nights together in the fame Clothesv 
he then had on ; one Side of his Face 
was beat black and blue, by Falls he had 
had in his Drink, and Skirmifhes he 
had met with by rambling about. \n 
fliort, every thing without was an Indica- 
tion of the Confufion within, and he was. 
a perfecft Object of Horror. The Spark 
who admired nothing but the Ladies^ 
bad his Hair pinned up in blue Papers,, 
a laced Waiftcoat, and every thing, 
which is neceffary to fliew an Attention 
C 6 tO' 



4 

6o 716^ Adventures Booklll. 

to adorn the Perfon, and yet at the 
fame time with an Appearance of Care- 
leflhefs. 

The firft Stage they alighted at to 
breakfaft, the two laft-mentioned Gen- 
tlemen made it their bufinefs to find out 
who the third was and, as he was very 
well known in that Country, having lived 
there fome Years, they foon difcovered 
he was a Clergyman. For the future, 
therefore, I fhall diftinguifh thefe three 
Perfons by the Names of the Clergyman^ 
the Atheift^ and the Butterfly \ for, as 
the latter had neither Profeffion nor Cha- 
raderiftick, I know not what other Name 
to give him. 

As foon as they got into the Coach 
again, the Atheift having recruited his 
Spirits with his ufual Morning-Br aught ^ 
accofted the Clergyman in the following 
abrupt and rude manner : Come on, 
Mr. Parfon, now I am for you ; I was 
not able to fpeak this Morning, when 
you fancied you was going on with all 
ihat Eloquence^ to prove there muft be 
an infinite Wifdom concerned in this 
Creation. As he fpoke thefe Words, 
there happened to be fo violent a Jok of 



Chap. 4. ^David Simple. 6r 
the Coach, they could hardly keep their 
Seats. Ay ! there, continued he, with a 
fort of Triumph in his Countenance, 
an Accident has proved to my hand, 
that Chance is the Caufe of every thing, 
otherwife I would fain know how the 
Roads fliould become fo very rugged, that 
one cannot go from one place to another, 
without being almoft dijlccated. (Indeed, 
to have judged by his Looks, any one 
would have thought the lead Motion 
would have fhook him to pieces.) For 
my part, faid he, confidering the num- 
berlefs Evils there are in the World, it is 
amazing to me how any one can have 
the AfTurance to talk of a Deity ; efpe- 
cially when I confider thofe very Men, 
who thus want to perfuade us out of our 
Senfes^ at the fame time take our Money ^ 
and are paid for talking in that manner. 
I am fure now, whilft I am fpeaking, 
I feel fuch Pains in my Head, and fuch 
Diforders all over me, as is a fufficienc 
Proof that there was no Wifdom con- 
cerned in the forming us. It is true in- 
deed, that I have fat up whole Nights^ 
and drank very hard lately : But if a good 
Being, who really loved his Creatures, 
had been the Caufe of our coming into 
this World, undoubtedly wx fliouId have 

been 



62 72?^ Adventures Book III. 

been made in fuch a manner, that we 
fhould neither have had I'emptations, nor 
Power to injure ourfelves. The whole 
thing appears to me abfurd : fornotwith- 
ftanding all our boafting of fuperior Rea- 
fon to the reft of the Creation, in my 
opinion we are Jiich loiv groveling Crea- 
tures^ that I can eafily conceive we were 
made by Chance. It is certainly the Cler- 
gy^ s Interejl to endeavour to govern us^ 
but I am refolved I will never be Pricjl- 
rid^ whatever other Folly I give into. In 
this Style he went on a great while, and 
when he thought it time to conclude, that 
is, when the Spirit of the Liquor he had 
drank was evaporated^ he flared the Cler- 
gyman full in the Face, with a Refolu- 
tion, as he fiw he was a modeft Man, 
that if he could not get the better of hira by 
his Arguments^ he would put him out of 
Countenance by his Impudence. 

The Butterfly, who had been filent,. 
and hearkened v/ith the utmoft Attention 
while the other was fpeaking, now began 
to open his Mouth ; he was full as irre- 
ligious as the Atheift, altho' the Caufe 
ot it was very different : for as the latter, 
from a natural Propenfity to Vice, and a. 
Refolution to fuffer all the Confequences 
of ic, rather than deny himfelf any thing 

he 



Chap. 4- ^David Simple. 63 
he liked, drove all ferious Thoughts as 
much as poffible from his Mind, and en- 
deavoured to make ufe of all the Falla- 
cies he could think on, to impofe on his 
ozvn Underfianding ; fo the former, who 
v/as naturally difpofed to lead a regular 
Life, and whofe Inclinations prompted 
him to nothing, vvhich he might not have 
been allowed in any Religion whatever^ 
put on all the Appearance of Vicioufnefs 
he could, becaufc he was filly enough to 
imagine it proved his Senfe. And, as he 
could not think deep enough to confult 
on which fide Truth lay, he never con- 
fidered farther than whc:;t would give him 
the beft Opportunity of difplaying bis Wit. 
He openly profeflfed himfelf a great Lover 
of Ridicule^ and thought no Subjedl fo 
fit to exercife it on, as Religion and the 
Clergy : he therefore, as foon as the other 
had done fpeaking, ran thro' all the trite 
things which have been ever faid cm that 
head fuch as the Pride of Priefts, their 

being greedy after their Tythes, 

This he Ipoke with an Air, which at once 
proved his Folly, and the ftrong Opinion 
he had of his own Wifdom. 

The Clergyman heard all the Atheift's 
Argumemsy and the Butterfly's Jejis^. 

without 



64 The Adventures Book III. 
without once offering to interrupt them ; 
and, had they talked fuch Nonfenfe on 
any other Subjed, he would not have 
taken the pains to anfwer them ; but he 
thought the Duty of his Profefllon in this 
cafe called upon him to endeavour, at 
leaft, to convince them of their Error. 
His good Scnfe eafily faw, that to go too 
deep would be only talking what they did 
not underftdnd, and conlequently throw- 
ing away his own Labour ; he therefore 
kept on the Surface of things, and to the 
Atheift: only proved, that the Unevennefs 
of the Roads^ or a Man*s having the 
Head-ach after a Debauch^ (which were 
the two Points he had infilled on) were 
no Arguments againft the Exiftence of a 
Deity and then had Good-nature enough 
to try to bring him off from the Courfe 
of Life he faw he was in, by iliewing 
him how eafy it would be for him to 
attain Heakh and Eaie, if he would only 
do what was in his own power, /. e. lead 
a regular Life, for the fake of enjoying 
thofe Benefits : and that then he would 
find as much Caufe to be thankful to the 
Author of his Being, as he now fancied 
he had to complain of him. 

To the Butterfly, (whofe Difpofition 
was not hard, for a Man wl>a knew the 

World, 



Chap. 4. of David Simple. 65 

World, to find out) he did nothing more 
than iliew him how very httle Wit there 
was in a repetition of what had been faid 
a hundred times before and, for his En- 
couragement, to alter his way of think- 
ings (or rather of talking) affured him, 
that he might learn much more real Wit, 
on the other fide of the oueftion, and 
repeat ic with lefs danger of having the 
Theft found cut. 

Every Word this Gentleman fpoke, 
and his Manner of fpeaking, convince^ 
Cynthia he was not endeavouring to fhew 
his own Parts, but ading from the true 
Chriftian rrmciple of defiring to do good. 
She was perfeftly filent the whole time 
he was fpeaking \ but, when he had con- 
cluded, could not forbear railying the 
Butterfly, on his ftrong Defire ot having 
Wit ; and told liim, flie knew feveral 
Subjefts he could talk on, fo much better 
than Religion, that flie would advife him 
to leave that entirely off\, and take up with 
thofe he was much fitter for, fuch as GaU 

layttry Gaming Drefjing^ &'c. 

This drew a loud Laughter from both 
the Atheift and Butterfly. The latter re- 
plied, Ay ! Ay ! I warrant you, I never 
knew an Inftance where the Parfons did 
not get the Women cn their fide with 

feverai 



66 Adventures Book III. 

feveral coarfe Jefts not worth repeating. 
And now they had nothing to do, but to 
roar and make a noife ; reiblving, if they 
could not confute their Adverfaries, to 
perfecute them, by putting their Ears on 
the rack, in hopes, by that means, for 
jthe fake of Quiet nefs, to extort a Con- 
fcrflion from them, of whatever they 
pleafed. In this Confufion of Noife and 
Nonfenfe, Cynthia and the Clergyman 
were obliged to continue, till they arrived 
at the Inn in the Evening, when, on pre- 
tence of being weary and indifpofed, they 
left their Fellow- Travellers, and retired 
to their feparate Rooms. 

The Atheift had been forming a 
Scheme in his Mind, from the time he 
firft faw Cynthia^ in what manner he 
fhould addrefs her for, as he had per- 
fuaded himfelf there was no fuch thing as 
any one Virtue in the World, he was un- 
der no Apprehenfion of being difappointed 
in his hopes. Cynthia's^ Contempt of the 
Butterfly was a convincing Proof to him 
of her Underftanding, and confequently 
encouraged him to believe, that fhe muft 
ht pkafed with himfelf. The only diffi- 
culty ttiat he feared he fliould meet v/ith, 
was the finding an Opportunity of fpeak- 
ing to her alone : but v/hile he was per- 
plexing 



Chap. 4- of David Simple. 67 
plexing his Brains how he IhouJd accom- 
plifh his Defigns, Accident threw that in 
his way, which he knew not how to bring 
about for himfeJf. 

It was a fine Moon-light Night ; and, 
as the various things labouring in Cynthia s 
Mind inclined her to be penfive and me- 
lancholy, when ftie fancied the two Gen- 
tlemen were fafe at their Bottle for that 
Evening, flie went down a pair of Back- 
ftairs into a little Garden belonging to the 
Houfe, in which was an Arbour. Here 
fhe fat down, wandering in her own 
Fancy through all the paft Scenes of her 
Life. The Ufage fhe had met with from 
almoft all her Acquaintance ; and their 
different Behaviour^ according to her dif- 
ferent Circumflances^ gave her but an un-- 
eafy Senfation : but by giving way to the 
Bent of her Mind, at length all unpleaf- 
ing Thoughts were exhaufted, and her 
Imagination began to indulge her with 
more agreeable Ideas. But, as if it had 
been impofTible for her to enjoy one mo- 
ment's Fleafurc, no fooner had her 
Thoughts taken this turn, than fhe faw 
the Atheift-, who foftly, and unperceived 
by her, (fo fix'd was fhe in her own Con- 
templations) was come near enough to fit 
down by her. He had drank his Compa- 
nion 



68 TZv Adventures Book III. 
nion to fleep ; and, as it was not his 
ufua! time of going to bed, (which he 
feldom did till four or five in the Morn- 
ing) accidentally roved into the Garden. 
Cynthia firft was flartled, but endea- 
voured as much as pofTible to conceal her 
Fear, thinking that the Appearance of 
Courage and Refolution, was the beft 
means fhe could make ufe of in her pre- 
fent Situation. 

He began at firft with talking to her 
of indifferent things, but foon fell on the 
Subje6t of his own Happinefs, in thus 
meeting with her alone. She immediately 
rofe up, and would have left him ; but 
he fwore fhe fhould hear him out, and 
promifed her, if fhe would but attend 
with Patience to what he had to fay, fhe 
fhould be at hberty to do as fhe pleafed. 
He then began to comphment her on her 
Underjlanding^ infifted that it was im- 
poflible for a Woman of her Senfe to be 
tied down by the common Forms of 
Cujlom^ which were only comphed with 
by Fools ; then ran through all the Ar- 
guments he could think of, to prove 
that Pleafure is Pleafure, and that it is 
better to be pleafed than difpleafed. 
Talked of Epicurus' s faying, Pleafure is 



Chap. 4« ^ David Simple. 69 
the chief Good, from which he very 
Wifely concluded, that Vice is the great- 
eft Pleafiire, In fliort, his Head na- 
turally not being very clear, and being 
always confufed wich Liquor when it 
came to be Night, he made fuch a 
medley between Pleafure and Pain, Vir- 
tue and Vice, that it was impolnble 
to diftinguifli what he had a mmd to 
prove. 

CTNTHIJ could not help fmiling, 
to fee a Man endeavouring to perfuade 
her, that fhe might follow her Inclina- 
tions without a CrimiC, while fne knew 
that nothing could fo much oppofe her 
gratifying him, as her f leafing herfelf. 
However, flie thought it her wifeft way 
to be civil to him ; for altho' fhe was not 
far from the Houfe, yet nothing could 
have fhocked her more, than to have 
been obliged to make a noife. She tlicre- 
fore told him, fhe did not doubt but 
what he had faid might be very rcafona- 
ble, but fhe had not Time now to con- 
fider of it, being very ill, and therefore 
begged fhe might go in for that Night, 
and flie would talk more to him the next 
day. The Atheift was fo much pleafed 
to think ihe gave any Attention to v/hat 

he 



70 The Adventures Book III. 
he faid, that for fear of difobliging her, 
he left her at liberty to retire ; which flie 
did with the utmoft Joy. 

CHAP. V. 

In which is plainly proved^ that it is 
pojjtble for a TV Oman to be fo ftrongly 
Jixd in her AffeSlion for one Man^ 
as to take no pleafure in hearing 
Love from any other. 

THE next Morning, Cynthia and 
the Cler^man^ who had neither of 
them any Fumes arifing from Intempe- 
rance to fleep off, got into the Coach 
with Chearfulnefs and Good-humour ; 
they had all the Converfation to them- 
felves the firfl: Stage, for the Atheifb and 
Butterfly both flept all the way till they 
came to breakfafb. There, with Hands 
Jhaking in fuch a manner, that it was 
with difficulty they could carry the Liquor 
to their Mouths, they at laft contrived 
to revive their drooping Spirits^ and be- 
gan to be as noify as ever. The Atheifi 
looked at Cynthia with an afllired Air, as 
if he did not doubt of Succefs, till he often 

put 



Chap.5' ^David Simple. 71 
put her out of Countenance. But the 
Butterfly paid her the greateft: Refped: 
imaginable ; being convinced, that as flie 
would not fufFer any Famiharity from 
him^ fhe muft be one of the moft vir- 
tuous Women ever born. The Cler^ 
gyman was fo tired with their Imperti- 
nence, he certainly would have got out 
of the Coach, and walked a-foot, had it 
not been for his Confideration for Cynthia ; 
for fhe had no Relief but in his Conver- 
fation. 

I N this manner they went on, till 
they came to the Place where they were 
to dine, when the Poftilion giddily taking 
too little Compafs, overturned the Coach 
and as it was on a Flat, they were all in 
great danger of being killed, or breaking 
their Limbs, However, they were all 
taken out fafe, except the Atheiji^ who 
had ftupified his Senfes in fuch a manner 
by the Breakfaft he chofe to drink^ that he 
had no Command of his Limbs, and 
broke his Leg under him in the Fall. 

CriVr/Z/yf was terribly frightned, 
and begged the Clergyman to be lb good 
as to contrive fome Method of having 
the poor Wretch taken care of, and the 

Bone 

+ 



72 T/?^ Adventures Book III. 

Bone fet again. Her Caution was per- 
fectly unnecc^lTary ; for from the Moment 
the good Man faw the Accident, he was 
confidering wiiich would be the beft Me- 
thod of taking care of him. He prefent- 
ly inquired for the bed Sui^eon in the 
Town ; and luckily there was one lived 
the very next door, who was both a 
Surgeon and an Apothecary. To his 
Houfe therefore he had him carried ; he 
went with him, and (laid with him while 
the Operation was performing ; during 
which time, he alternately prayed and 
curfed, which ftruck the Clergyman with 
the utmoft Horror. However, he car- 
ried his Chriftianity and Compaffion fo 
far, as to inquire, whether he had any Mo- 
ney in his Pocket to defray his Expences, 
while he was confined there ; and on be- 
ing anfwered in the Negative, ofrered to 
leave him what was neccllary. But on 
the Apothecary's afTuring him, that he 
knew him very well, and would take 
the utmofl care of him, he returned to 
Cynthia^ who rejoiced to hear the poor 
Creature was in fuch good hands. 

The Butterfly^ whofe Journey was at 
an end, he being to go no farther, took 
his Leave of them, humming the end of 

an 



5 



Chap. 5. of David Simple. 73 
an Italian Song, without once enquiring 
what was become of the poor Man, with 
whofe Sentiments he had fo heartily con- 
curred the whole Way. 

They were now about fixteen Miles 
from London. The Clergyman had wifhed 
froni the firft Morning for an Opportu- 
nity of being alone v^'w^cvCynthia : but the 
Hurries which attend Travelling in a 
Stage-Coach, with his own Inexperience 
in all Affairs of Gallantry, and his great 
Fear of offending, had prevented his gra- 
tifying that Wifh. And now that Ac- 
cident had thrown what he defired in his 
Way, his great Modefly, Diflruft of him- 
felf, and his Efteem for Cynthia^ rendered 
him almoft incapable of fpeaking to her ; 
he went on two or three Miles in the 
greateft Fright imaginable, for every Step 
the Horfes took, he condemned himfelf 
for lofing his Time, and yet could not 
bring himfelf to make ufe of it. At laft, 
he fell into a Difcourfe on Love ; all his 
Sentiments were fo delicate, and the 
Thoughts he expreffed fo refined, that 
Cynthia not only agreed with him, but 
could not forbear ftiewing by her Smiles, 
and Good-humour, that fhe was greatly 
pleafed to meet with a Perfon who had fo 

Vol, 11. D much 



74 755^ Adventures Book III. 
much her own Way of thinking. This 
encouraged the Gentleman to fpeak, and 
from talking of Love in general, he be- 
gan to be more particular : He begged 
Pardon for being fo abrupt ; for v/hichhe 
alledged as an Excufe the fhort Time he 
had before he fhould lofe Sight of her for 
ever, unlefs ifhe would be fo good to in- 
ibrm him where flie lived. 

C TNT' HI A was greatly furprized 
at this Declaration, which fhe neither ex- 
pefted, or wifhed ; the Clergyman s Be- 
haviour for the fhort time fhe had in a 
manner lived with him, had given her 
great Reafon to efteem him, and his Con- 
verfation would have been a great Pieafure 
to her on any Terms, but that of being 
her Lover j but her Heart was already fo 
fixed, that flie refolved never to fufFer any 
other Man to make Love to her ; and fhe 
would on no Account hav£ endeavoured 
to increafe the AfFedion of a Man of 
Merit, with a View of making him un- 
eafy. She therefore very ferioufly told 
him, that {he was infinitely obliged to 
him for the Affection he had exprelTed 
for her ; but, that as in her Circum- 
ftances it was utterly impofiible fhe 
could ever return it ; fhe muft: be ex- 

" cufcd 



Chap. 5- of David Simple. 75 
cufed from letting him know where flie 
" lived, as the converfmg with her, if he 
" had really an Inclination for her, would 
only make him unhappy."^' She fpoke 
this with fuchan Air of Sincerity, that the 
Clergyman^ who had no Deceit in himfelf, 
nor was he apt to fufpcd others of it, re- 
folved to believe her, and whatever he 
fuiFered, not to fay any thing which might 
give her Pain ; and from that Moment 
was filent on that Head : They foon ar- 
rived in Town, where they parted. 

CTNTHIA took a Lodging, for 
flie knew not at prefent what to do with 
herfclf. The Clergyman's having put 
things on fuch a footing, that fhe could 
not converfe with him, made her very 
iineafy ; for flie v/as in nopes before he 
fpoke to her of Love, that he would have 
been a great Comfort to her, when Ihc 
came to Town. She almoft made a Re- 
folution never to fpeak to any Man again, 
beginning to think it impoffible for a Man 
to be civil to a Woman, unlefs he has 
fome Defign upon her. But now having 
brought Cynthia to Town, I think it 
Time to take Leave of her for the prefent, 
and look after my Hero. 



CHAP. 



76 Adventures Book III* 



7/^ 7/^ f/^V/S vU 7U 7M\7j*i^ ?Ji^7ji^ vJi^7^. 7^V*k^^'^ 7^ /m* 

CHAP. VI. 

Containing an Account of federal ex- 
traordinary TranfaBions. 

TH E Morning after David had in- 
formed Valentine and his Sifter, of 
what he knew concerning Cynthia^ he 
perceived a Melancholy in them both ; 
which, although he imputed Camilla'^ 
Thoughtfulnefs to her Love for her Bro- 
ther, and was not ignorant whence his 
Concern arofe, fat fo heavy on his Mind, 
as gave him great Uneafinefs : for he felt 
all the Pains of his Friends to a much 
greater Degree than he did his own. He 
therefore did all he could to comfort Va- 
lentine^ told him, he did not doubt but 
Cynthia would immediately anfwer Camil- 
Ja\ Letter, with fome Hints, that he him- 
felf might be the Caufe of her rcfufing all 
Offers ; and affured him, if his Fortune 
could any way conduce to his Happinefs, 
whatever fliare of it was neceflary for him, 
fliouid be intirely at his Service. 



Chap, 6. of David Simple. 77 



VALENTINE was ftruck dumb 
with this Generofity. Tendernefs and Gra- 
titude for fuch uncommon Bcnevoknce, 
was to be anfwered no other way, but by 
flowing Tears. David faw his Confufion, 
and begged him not to fancy he was un- 
der any Obligation to him, for that he 
Ihould think his Life and Fortune well 
fpent in the Service of a Man, whom 
lx)th Nature and Goodnefs had fo nearly 
allied to Camilla. Valentine at laft with 
much difficulty found a vent for his 
Words, and iwore no Paffion of his 
Ihould ever make him a greater Burden 
than he already was to fuch a Friend. 
Camilla^ between the Concern for her 
Brother, and the Pleafure David'^ Words 
gave her, was quite overcome. But as 
Tendernefs, when it is come to the height, 
is not to be defcribed, I (hall pais over 
the reft of this Scene in Silence. 

VALENTINE'S Impatience in- 

creafed every Day to hear from Cynthia ; 
a Week pafled over, and no News of her: 
At laft, one day as David was walking 
through JVefiminfier^ he heard a Voice 
which called him by his Name 5 and when 
D 3 he 



78 The Adventures Book III. 
he looked up, he faw Cynthia looking 
out at an Upper-window ; he immediate- 
Jy ran into the Houfe, and great were 
iris Raptures at the Thoughts of the Plea- 
iure he fhould carry home to his Friends. 
When he was feated^ he began to tell 
Cynthia^ that he had met with Camilla 
and Valentine : He -.had no fooner men- 
tioned their Names, than fhe a^ked him a 
thoufand Qiieftions concerning them ; 
which quite puzzled him, and he knew 
not what to anfwer. This Confufion fhe 
imputed to his having heard the Story of 
their running away together, in an in- 
fomous manner^ which fhe had been told 
at her firft Arrival in Town with my La- 
dy — ,but had never fpoke of it to JDavid^ 
as flie was unwilhng tofpread the Report. 
At ]aft fhe cryed out : Sir, I beg, if 
f ' you have any Compaflion for me, tell 
me what you know of my Camilla^ {/he 
/poke not a Word of Valentine^ ) for there 
IS nothing I fo much long to know, 
as whether fhe is innocent of what fhe 
is accufed of: for if fhe is, how hard 
is her Fate, and what vnu^ fhe have 
f'.fufFered by lying under fuch an Im-. 
*^ putation !*'^ 



DAVIU 



Chap. 6. of David Simple. 79 



DJFID defired her to have a little 
Patience, and he would tell her all : He 
had not time then to repeat all Camilla^s 
Story, but faid enough to clear her Inno- 
cence. Cynthia knew fo much of the 
World, Ihe eafily obferved by his manner 
of talking of her, that he was in love 
^ith her. This gave her the greatefl: 
Pleafure flie could have received, as it 
was the ftrongeft Proof he could not think 
her guilty. And when fhe was farther in- 
formed in what manner they lived toge- 
ther, and David (who was always con- 
triving Methods to give pleafure) invited 
her to go home with him, and told her 
there was room for her in the fame 
Houfe ; it is impoffible to defcribe her 
Raptures : She immediately paid her 
Lodgings, put her things into a Hackney- 
Coach, and then they fat out together, 
to find all which either of them valued iii 
this World. 

VALENT INE^s Joy was greater 
than he could bear, and almoft overcame 
his Senfes. The Extacy thus fuddenly 
viev/ing Cynthia before him, threw him 
into, almoft made him forget the Refpeft 
he had always paid her 5 and it was as 
D 4 much. 



8o Tloe Adventures Book III. 
much as he could do to forbear flying and 
catching her in his Arms. Camilla^ al- 
though flie could no ways blame Cyn- 
thia for her Behaviour, and really loved 
her with a fincere Afi^edion ; yet fuch is 
human Frailty, that the firil: Sight of her 
flruck her with the Idea of David's hav- 
ing liked her ; and this Thought, in 
fpite of herfelf, was a great damp to the 
Pleafure of meeting with her Friend, 
But Cynthia's Thoughts were fo much 
employed, Ihe did not perceive it fhe 
ran and embraced, and expreflfed the ut- 
mod Joy to fee her. This flie really fek 
without that Allay, which the leaft Mix- 
ture of Rivalfliip or Jealoufy gives to 
Friendfiiip in either Sex. While they were 
together, fhe addrefled moft of her Con- 
verfation to Camilla ; but her Eyes fpon* 
taneoufly rolled towards Valentine : for 
tho* Ihe often endeavoured to remove 
them, they inftandy return^ to the Objedl 
which principally attracted them. 

That Evening, and all the enfuing 
Day, they fpent in informing each other 
of every Accident which had befallen them 
fince their Separation ; and, on the Day 
following, Cynthia propofed at Break- 
faft the taking a Coach, and riding thro* 



Chap. 6. 1^ David Simple. 8i 

all the Parts of this great Metropolis, to 
view the various Countenances of the dif- 
ferent forts of People who inhabit it. Da- 
vid faid nothing could be more agreeable 
to him, if Camilla approved of it : for, 
as he had travelled through it in a more 
attentive manner, than what was propofed 
at prefent, he fhould be the better Judge 
of People's Thoughts by their Manners 
and Faces. Valentine had no Objedion 
to any thing propofed by Cynthia^ on 
which they called a Coach ; and this 
agreeable Party, and fuch another I believe 
is not eafily to be found, got into it. 

They had no occafion to make the 
Coach heavy, by loading it with Provi- 
fions, there being many hofpitabie Houfes 
by the way open for their Entertainment ^ 
tho' I did once fee a Coach, which fet 
out from the Tower, flop in the middle 
of St. James^S'ftreet^ and the Company 
that were in it take a fmall Repajte of 
Ham and cold Chicken ; but that per- 
haps was owing to a Weaknefs in fom@ of 
the Stomachs of the Paffengers, which 
difabled them from fajiing ahove an Hour 
at a time. 

As David and his Company paffed 
through the polite Parts of the Town 
D 5 early 



8 2 The Adve n tu r es Book HI", 
early in the Morning, they faw but few- 
People worthy their Oblervation ; all: 
there v/as hufhed and ftilJ, as at the dead, 
of Night ; but, when they came to the 
more trading Part of the Town,, the 
Hurry was equal to the Scillnefs they had 
before obferved. 

As they drove through Covent-Gardeny 
they faw a Company of Men reehng along^ 
as if they in a manner had loft the ufe of 
their Legs ; each of them had fomething, 
in his Right-hand, which he had picked 
up in the Market ; fome had Flowers^, 
others Cabbages^ and fome chofe for Nofe- 
gays^ a Bunch of Onions or Garlick ; but 
all their Hands fhook, as if it was with 
difficulty they could hold any thing in 
them. As foon as they faw the Coach, they 
ran, or rather tumbled up to it, with the 
utmoft Speed their Condition would ad- 
mit them, and fiammered owt^. Defire, that 
the Ladies would accept of their Gar^ 
lands. 

Poor Camilla was frighted ; but Cyn- 
thia^ who had feen more of the World, 
and perceived they were Gendemen, (tho* 
they had, as Shakefpear fays, put that 
*v into their Mouths, which had flolen 

^way their grains'') took a Bunch of 

Flowers. 



chap. 6. of David Simple. 83 

Flowers ii'om a- very young FelJow who 
was foremoft, and thanked him for her 
Garland ; after which they all fl:aggered> 
away again, huzzaing her for her Good^ 
humour. 

DAVID called to a Man who was 
paffing by, and aflced him, if he knew any 
of thofe Gentlemen, for that he thought it 
pity fomebody fhould not take care of 
them home, for fear they fhould come to 
any Mifchief. Alack [ Sir !— -replied the 
Man, there is no danger of them, drun- 
ken Men and Children you know 

the Proverb. I have kept a Shop in that 
Street thefe twenty Years : and it is very 
^' few Mornings, unlefs it be very bitter 
cold Weather, but that a parcel of them 
pafs by: Th^t young Gentleman v/ho went 
firft, I am told, would make a very fine 
Gentleman, if he did not drink fo hard,-- 
and I had it from very good hands, for I 
am acquainted with Mother^ s Cham-- 
hermaid^ zx\d fhe mttft knoiv to be fure. 
And then that Hatchet-face Alan- who< 
came next, I think he had better take 
care of his Wifeand Children, than run^ 
about fpending his Money in fuch a man- 
ner ; he owes me a Bill of one Pound 
irihree Shillings and two pence: But no 
P 6. wonder 



84 The Adventures BookllL 
wonder he can't pay his Debts, while he 
leads fiich a fort of Life. That Ihort 
Man who waJks by his Side,, to my cer- 
tain Knowledge was arretted laft Week ; 
and I was told, iffome of his rakilh Com- 
panions had not balled him, he would 
have found it a difficult matter to have 
got out of the Bailiff's hands ; for faith 
end troths Matter, if once they lay hold 
of any one, it is not an eafy matter tO' 
get from them again. He is but poor ; 
I don't believe he is much richer than 
one of we, that do keep Shops to get 
our Livelihood : and yet, they fay, his 
elder Brother rides in his Coacb and Six. 
I think he might relieve him, when he is 
in Diftrefs ; indeed it is nothing to me, 
and I never tremble my head about other 
Folks Bujinefs. There is a Man lives in 
that Houfe yonder; he pretends to fet up 
for aGentleman, and yet I don*c hear he 
has any Ettate ; forfooth, he mutt have 
Servants, though he can't tell where to 
get Money to pay them ; but they ferve 
him as he deferves, they won't over- work 
themfelves, I warrant them. But it is 
time for me to go home, for I have e- 
nough to do \ befides, / hate goffiping^ 
and never talk cf my Neighbours. He 
fpoke all this fo faft, he would not give 

himfelf 



Chap. 6. cf David Simple. 85 
himfelf time to breathe, and kept his 
Hand on the Coach-Door the whole time, 
as if he was afraid it would drive away 
from him. When he ceafed fpeaking, 
Cynthia applauded him for minding his^ 
own Bujinefs^ and not troubling himfelf 
about other People on which, he was 
going to begin again, but Valentine bid 
the Coachman drive on, and fo left 
him. 

They went on fome time mufing, 
without fpeaking one Word, till at laft 
Cynthia faid, fhe fliould be glad to know 
what they were all fo" thoughtful about, 
and fancied it would be no ill Entertain- 
ment, if every one of them were to tell 
their Thoughts to the reft of the Com- 
pany. They all liked the Propofal, and 
defired Cynthia to begin firft. 

She faid, fhe was conridering> amongft 
the variety of Shops fne faw, how very 
few of them dealt in Things which were 
really neceffary to preferve Life or Health ; 
and yet that thofe things which appeared 
moft ufelefs, contributed to the general 
Welfare : for whilft there was fuch a 
thing as Property in the World, unlefs it 
could be equally diftributed, thofe People 

who 



86 The Adventures Book III. 
who have little or no fhare of it, muft 
find out Methods of getting what they 
want, from thofe whofe Lot it is to have 
more than is neceffary for them ; and,, 
except all the World was fo generous, as 
to be willing to part with what they think.. 
they have a right to, only for tfie plea^ 
fure of helping others y the way to ob- 
tain any thing from them is to apply to 
their PalTions. As, for inftance, when a 
"Woman of Fafliion goes home with her 
Coach loaded with Jev/els and Trinkets, 
which, from Cuftom, fhe is brought to 
think ihe cannot do without, and is in- 
dulging her Vanity with the Thoughts of 
out-Jbining fome other Lady at the next 
Ball, the Tradefman who receives her 
Money in Exchange for thofe things 
which appear fo trifling, to that Vanity per- 
haps owes his own and his Family's Sup- 
port. Here Cynthia ceafed, and called 
on Camilla to tell what it was her Mind 
was fo earneftly fixed on. 

She faid ftie did not know v/hether 
fhe ought not to be afhamed to own her 
prefent Refledions, for flie was not fure 
they did not arife from Ill-nature ; for 
flie was thinking, in all that number of 
Houfes they pafled, how many miferable 
3 Creatures 



chap. 6. ^ David Simple, 87 

Creatures there were tearing one another 
to- pieces, from- Envy and Folly-, how 
many Mother s-in-haw^ working under- 
hand with their Hufbands, to make them 
turn their Children out of Doors to Beg^ 
gary and Mifery : She could not but own 
the pleafing Senfations fhe feit, for being 
delivered herjelf from thofe Misfortunes, 
more than over-balanced her Sorrow for 
her Fellow-Creatures ; and fhe defircd 
David to tell her his Sentiments, whether 
this was not in fome meafure triumph- 
ing over them. I ihould have trembled: 
in fome Companies at fuch a Que- 
ftion, for fear the Eagernefs to decide it 
fliould prevent the hearing any one 
Perfon's fpeaking at a time for half an 
Hour together, but here it was other- 
wife ; and David^ after a little Confide- 
ration, replied,. 

Not h ing can be more worthy of Ad- 
miration, than to obferve a young Wo- 
man thus fearful of giving way to any 
Frailty \ but what you now exprefs, I be- 
lieve has been felt by every Mortal. To 
rejoice indeed at the Sufferings of any In- 
dividual, would be a Sign of great Ma- 
lignity ; or to fee another in Mifery, and 
be infenfible of it, would be a Proof of the 

want 



88 Ty^^' Adventures BookllL 
want of that Tendernefs I fo much ad- 
mire : but to comfort ourfelves in any 
Afflidion, by the Confideration that it is 
only the common Fate of Men, and that 
we are not marked out as the peculiar 
Objeds of our Creator's Difpleafure, is 
certainly very reafonable. This is what 
Shakefpear calls, bearing our own Mif- 
fortunes on the Back of fuch, as have 
before endured the like,'* On the 
other hand, to rejoice with Thankfulnefs, 
when we efcape any Mifery, which gene- 
rally attends our Species, with a Mixture 
of CompafTion for their Sufferings, is ra- 
ther laudable than blameable. Camilla 
was happy to find David did not condemn 
her Thoughts, and then defired him to 
tell what his were. 

I WAS mufing, faid he, on the Scene 
we faw, and what that Man told us in 
Covent 'Garden, with the Oddnefs of his 
Character ; he feemed to take fuch a plea- 
fure in telling us the Faults of his Neigh- 
bours, and yet looked with fuch a good- 
humoured Countenance, as if railing 
would be the laft thing he could delight 
in. Cynthia replied, it was very likely he 
was a good Man, but that there is in 
fome Natures a prodigious Love of talk- 
ing i 



Chap. 6. of David Simple. 89 
ing ; and, from a want of any Ideas of 
their own, they are oWiged to fall on the 
Actions of their Neighbours ; and as, it 
is to be feared, they often find more III 
than Good in their Acquaintance, that 
Love of talking naturally leads them into 
Scandal. She then turned to Valentine^ 
and defired to know what had taken up 
his Thoughts in fuch a manner as to make 
him fo filent. Valentine anfwered, he 
was revolving in his Thoughts the mife- 
rable Situation the Man was in, who was 
in love with a Woman, whom his Cir- 
cumftances in Life debarred him from all 
hopes of its ever being reafonable for him 
to acquaint with his Paffion. While he 
fpoke this, he fixed his Eyes ftedfaftly o.m 
Cynthia % flie obferving it, bluflied, and 
made him no Anfwer. 

While they were difcourfing in 
this manner, David obferved a Woman 
behind a Counter, in a Httlc Shop, fobbing 
md crying as if her Heart would break : 
he had a Curiofity to know what was the 
matter with her, and propofed the going 
in, under the pretence of buying Ibme- 
thing in the Shop, and by that means in- 
quiring into theCaufe of all this terrible 
Grief. The Woman did not feem at all 

{by 



90 72v Adventures Book III. 
fiiy of talking to them of her Misfor- 
tunes ; but faid, her Hufband was the 
moft- barbarous Man in the Work!. They 
all began to pity her, and aficed if he had 
beat or abufed her. No, no, fiie faid, 
much ucorfe than that; fhe could fooner 
have forgiven /i?;^^ Blon s^ than the Cruelty 
he had been guiJty of towards her. Atlait 
with the Interruption of many Tears, it 
came out, that all this complaining was for 
nothing more, than that her Hufband hav- 
ing received a Sum of Money, had chofe 
to fay his Debts with it, inftead of buying 
her and her Daughter fome new Clothes. 
And fure, faid jQie, there is Neighbour 
fuch-a-one (pointing to a very handfomc 
young Woman, who fat in a Shop oppo- 
fite to her) can have every thing new, as 
often as ftie pleafes ; and I am fure her 
Hufband is more in debt than mine. I 
think a Man ought to take care of his 
own IVife and Children^ before he pays 
his Money to Strangers. Cynthia could 
not forbear burfting into a loud Laughter, 
when Ihe heard the Caufe of this Tra- 
gedy. The Woman feeing that, fancied 
flie made Sport of her ; and turned her 
melancholy Tone into a fcolding one. She 
was not very young, and the Wrinkles 
in her Face v/cre filled with drops of 

W^ter 



Chap. 6. ^David Simple. 91 

Water which had fallen from her Eyes ^ 
which, with the Yellownefs of her Com- 
plexion, made a Figure not unlike a Field 
in the decline of the Year, when Harvelt 
is gathered in, and a fmart Shower of 
Rain has filled the Furrows with Water* 
Her Voice was fo fhrill, that they all jump- 
ed into the Coach as faft as they could, 
and drove from the Door. 

CTNtHIA and Valentine talked of 
this Accident in a ridiculous Light ; but 
David, in his ufual way, was for enquir- 
ing into the Caufe of this Woman's Paf- 
fions ; and wondered how it was poffibIe,\ 
for fuch Trifles to difcompofe any one in 
fuch a Manner. Camilla had lately, I 
don't pretend to fay from what Motive., 
been very apt to enter into David's way 
pf Converfation, and looked very grave, 

CrNrHI^ikld, flie was at no lofs 
to find out the Reafon of the Scene, they 
had juft now been WitneflTes of ; for fhc 
knew the common Caufe of moft Evils, 
i. e. Envy was at the bottom of it.„ The 
old Woman would have been contented 
with her old Clothes, had not her. hand- 
fome Neighbour had new ones ; for fhe, 
no doubt, had obferved this young Wo- 
man. 



92 The Adventures Book III. 
man was taken moft notice of, and fron^ 
a ftrong Refolution not to impute it ta 
her own Age, or any Defcft in her Per- 
fen, flattered herfelf it was owing to the 
o therms being better dreffed : For I have 
known, continued Cynthia^ fomething 
very hke this, in People of a much higher 
Station. I remember once, I was with a 
Lady who was trying on her Gown, her 
Shape was but indifferent, for fhe was 
fomething awry, (he fcolded at her 
Manteau-Maker two hours, becaufe fhe 
did not look fo ftreight and genteel as 
another Lady of her Acquaintance, who 
had one of the fineft Shapes that ever was 
feen. And yet this Woman in other 
things did not want Senfe, but flie would 
not fee any Defed: in her own Perfon, and 
confcqucntly refolved to throw the blame 
on any other thing which came firft in her 
way. 

This little Set of Company pafled the 
Remainder of that Day in amufing them- 
felves with their Observations on every 
Incident which happened t, and as they 
were all difpofed in their own Minds 
to be pleafed, every Trifle was an addi- 
tion to their Pleafure. When they re- 
turned home in the Evening, they were 

weary 



Chap. 7. ^David Simple. 93 
weary with their Jaunt, and finding 
themfelves inclined to Reft, retired to 
Bed : Where I will leave them to their 
Repofe, and keep the next Day*s Adven- 
tures for a fubfequent Chapter. 



CHAP. VIL 



Which introduces n Lady of Cynthia'i 



\^ cuftomed for many Years to be 
ftartled from her Sleep at every Morning*s 
Dawn, with all the uneafy Refleftions of 
the feveral Infults and Indignities, Ill- 
nature and a Love of Tyranny had bar- 
baroufly made her fuffer the day before, 
was at prefent in fo different a Situation, 
that the returning Light, which ufed to 
be her greateft Enemy, now as her Left 
Friend brought back to her Remem- 
brance, all thofe pleafing Ideas her preknt 
Companions continually infpired her with. 
Therefore inftead of endeavoudpg to 
compofe herftif again to fl umber, (the 
ufual method of the UnfartpnatCj or- 



Acquaintance to the Company. 




who had been ac* 



94 72^^ Adventures Book III. 

der to lofe the Senfe of their Sorrows) 
the Chearfulnefs of her Mind induced her 
to Jeave her Bed, and indulge herfelf with 
all thofe various Flights of Fancy, which 
are generally the Reward of Temperance, 
and Innocence. She ftole foftly into Ca- 
■miliars Room, that if fhe was awake, fhe 
might increafe her own Pleafures by 
lharing them v/ith her Friend ; but find- 
ing her fail: afleep, was again returning to 
her own Chamber, when by a Servant's 
opening the Door of an Apartment, by 
which fhe was obliged to pafs, fhe had 
a tranfient View of a young Lady, with 
whom fhe fancied ihe was very well ac- 
quainted, but could not recolleft where, 
or by what Means Ihe had feen her. 
This raifed fo great a Curiofity in Cyn- 
thia^ to know who fhe was, that fhe 
could not forbear immediately inquiring 
of the Maid of the Houfe, who lodged 
in that Apartment, The Maid re- 
plied, Truly fhe did not know 
who fhe was, for fhe had not been 
there above a Fortnight, fhe was very 
handfome, but fhe believed a very 
Jtupid kind of a Body^ for that fhe 
never drefTed fine, or vifited hke other 
Ladies, but fat moping by herfelf all 
Day : but, continued fhe, there is no 

" Reafon 



Chap. 7« ?/David S iMPLE. 95 
Reafon to complain of her. I think 
Jbe is very honeji^ for Jhe don^t feem to 
want for Money to pay for any thing fhe 
has a mind to have \ flie goes by the 

" Name of Ifahelle^ and they fay flie is 
a French Woman.'* 

The Moment Cynthia heard her 
Name, {lie remembered it to be the fame 
with that of tht Marqins de Stainville^s 
Sifter, whom fhe knew very weil when 
ftie was in France with my Lady — But 
then fhe could not imagine what Accident 
or Turn of Affairs could poflibly have 
brought her into that Houfe, and have 
caiifed fo great an Alterarion in her Tem- 
per, as from a gay fprightly Girl, to fall 
into fo melancholy a Difpofition. 

W HEN David and his Companions 
met at breakfaft, Cynthia told them all 
which had pafled, and by what means fhe 
had difcovered an Acquaintance in that 
Houfe ; and faid fhe Ihould be very glad 
of this Opportunity of waiting on Ifa- 
belle ; but that fhe feared by the retired 
Life ftie feemed to chufe. Company 
would be troublefome to her. 



DAVID 



^6 T^he Adventures BookllL 

DAVID immediately fancied, it muft 
be fome terrible Diftrefs, which had thus 
thrown this young Lady into a fettled 
Melancholy; therefore begged Cynthia 
with the utmoft Eagernefs to vifit her, 
and find out, if pcffible, if there was any 
Method could be thought on for her Re- 
lief; and it was agreed by them all, that 
after breakfaft, Cynthia fhould fend to 
know, if ftic would admit of a Vifit from 
her* 

In the mean time the whole Conver- 
fation was taken up in Conjedlnres on 
Ifahelle^s Circumfl:ances. Camilla could 
not forbear enquiring of Cynthia^ if this 
young Lady had not a Father alive^ and 
whether it was not probable his marrying 
a fecond Wife might be the caufe of her 
Misfortunes : But before there was time 
for an Anfwer, David faid, / thinky 
" Madam^ you fnentioned her Brother \ 
he pojftbly may have treated her in fuch 
a manner y as to make her hate her own 
Country^ and endeavour to change 
" the Sceney in hopes to abate her Mi- 
fery,''^ In ftiort, every one gueflTed at 
fome Reafon or other, for a Woman 
of IfabeUti*^ Quality leading a Life fo 

un- 



Chap. 7- of V)avid Simple. gy 
unfuitable to the Station Fortune had 
placed her in. 

The Marquis de Stainville^s Sifter^ 
although at this time fhe would have 
-made it greatly her Choice to have been 
quite alone yet, as fhe had always had 
a great liking to Gynthio}^ Company^ 
would not refufe to fee her. Their 
Converfation turned chiefly on indiflferent 
things ; for Cynthia would not fo far 
tranlgrefs the Rules of Good-Breeding, as 
to afk her any Queflions concerning her 
own Aflfairs ; but in the midft of their 
Difcourfe, fhe often obferved Tears to 
flow from Ifahell/% Eyes, though fhe ufed 
her utmoft Endeavours to conceal them, 

DA FID waited with great Impatience 
while Cynthia was with Ifahelle^ in hopes 
at her return to learn, whether or no 
it would be in his power to gratify his 
favourite PalTion (of doing Good) on this 
Occafion : but when Cynthia informed 
him, it was impoflible as yet, without ex-- 
ceeding all Bounds of Good-Manners, to 
know any Occurrences that had happened 
to Ifahelle ; he grew very uneafy, and 
could not forbear refleding on the Ty- 
ranny of Cuftom) which often fubieds 

Vol.. IL E the 



98 Adventures Book HI, 

the Unfortunate to bear their Miferies ; 
becaufe her fevere Laws will neither fuf- 
fer them to lay open their Dillreffes, with- 
out being tliought forward and imperti- 
nent \ nor let even thofe People who would 
relieve them, enquire into their Mifery, 
without being called by the World mad- 
ly curious^ or ridtculoujly meddling. Where- 
as he thought, that to fee another uneafy, 
was a fufficient Reafon for any of the fame 
Species to endeavour to know, and re- 
move the Caufe of it. 

^TNTHIA on reflexion was con- 
vinced, that what, on fome Occafions, 
would be .tranfgrefling the Laws of De- 
cency, in. this Cafe would be only the Ef- 
fe£l of a generous Compaflion. She there- 
fore fought all Opportunities of converfing 
with Ifabelle^ till at length by her amiable 
and tender Behaviour fhe prevailed with 
'her to let her introduce her to David and 
lis Company. They were all furprized 
at the Grandeur of her Air and Manner, 
and the perfed Symmetry of her Fea- 
tures, as much as they were concerned 
at the DejeAednefs of her Countenance, 
and the fixed Melancholy which vifibly 
appeared in every thing ftie faid, or did. 
For feveral Days they i^iade it their whole 

Bufmefs 



Chap. 7. of David Simple. 99 

Bufinefs to endeavour to divert her but 
(as is ufually the Cafe where Grief is real- 
ly and unaffeftedly rooted in the Heart) 
(he fighed at every thing, which at an- 
other time would have given her pleafure. 
And the Behaviour of this Company feem'd 
only to make her regret the more fome- 
thing fhe had irrecoverably loft. She 
begged to be left to her own private 
Thoughts whatever they were, rather 
than difturb the Felicity of fuch Minds as 
flie eafily perceived theirs to be. 

But David would not, nor indeed 
would any of the Company fufFer her to 
leave them, without informing them, whe- 
ther or no they could do any thing to 
ferve her. As to her faying, fhe perceived 
by the Tendernefs of their Difpofitions, 
file fliould only make them feel her Af- 
fli6tions, without any poffibility of reliev- 
ing them \ they looked on that to be the 
common Refledion of every generous 
Mind weighed down with prefent Grief. 
At laft, by their continual Importunitiesi 
and the Uneafmefs flie was convinced fhe 
gave to People, who fo much deferved 
her Efteem, ftie refolved, whatever Pain it 
would occafion her, to comply with their 
Requefts, and relate the Ilic^ory of her 
E 2 Lifei 



too Adventures Book III. 

Life ; which fhe accordingly began, as 
follows : 

IW A s bred up from five Years of 
Age in a Nunnery j nothing remark- 
able happened to me during my Stay 
there : but I fpent my Time fometimes 
'with my Companions in innocent Amufe- 
ments and childifli Pleafures, fome- 
times in learning fuch things as v/ere 
thought by m.y Governefs to be mod 
for my Im-provement. At Fourteen, my 
Father fent for me homiC, and indulged 
tne, in bringing with me a young Lady, 
named Juliiy for whom I had taken a 
great fancy. I had not been long there, 
i>efc>re a Gentleman, who often vifited 
iand^dined with my Father, made him 
a Propofal of marrying me. He foon 
informed me of it ^ and although he did 
not abfolutely command me to receive 
'him as my Lover, yet 1 plainly faw he 
^'as^^very much inclined to the Match. 
This was the firft timie I had any Op- 
poirtunnky ; of afting; or that I l^tad ever 
'i^6hfidered of any thing farther than how 
to fpend my time moll agreeably from 
one Hour to another. I immediately ran 
and'-toM fn'y CoftipQnion what had pafTed^ 
- oril(?f^'^^ GOfoMlt with her in what 
i 'ALi r 1: Method 



Chap. 7* ^David Simple. lor 

Method I ihould aft ; but was very much 
furprized, whenlfawher, from the Mo- 
ment I mentioned the Gentleman's Name^ 
alternately blufh and turn pale ; and that 
when fhe endeavoured to fpeak,. her Voice 
fiiultered, and fhe could not utter her 
Words. When flie was a little recovered, 
fhe begged me to call for a Glafs of Wa- 
ter, for fhe was fuddenly taken very ilL 
I was in the utmoft Confufion, and knew 
not what to fay ; but was refolved how- 
ever for the prefent not to begin again on 
a Subjeft which had fhocked her fo miuch.. 
We both endeavoured to turn the Con- 
verfation on indifferent things but were 
fo perplexed in our own Thouglit-V 
that it was impoffible for us to conti:- 
nue long together without running into 
a Difcourfe of what we were both fa 
full of. I therefore foon made fome tri^- 
fling ExGufe, and left her and I believe 
this Separation at that time was die moll 
agreeable thing which could have hap- 
pened to her. 

The Moment I was alone, and had 
an Opportunity to reflect on dhe fore- 
going Scene ; young as I then was, I 
could not avoid feeing the Caufe of Ju- 
Ms Behaviour : it appeared very odd 



102 The Adventures Book III. 
to me, that a Girl of her Senfe fhould 
in fo Ihort a time be thus violently at- 
tached to a Man and had it not ap- 
peared fo very vifibly, the Improbability 
of it would have made me overlook it. 
For my ov/n part, I neither liked nor 
difliked theGendeman^ but v/as perfectly 
averfe to Marriage, unlefs I had a ten- 
der Regard for the Man I was to live 
with as a Hufband. But I began now to 
think, that a Man who v/as capable of 
making fiich a Conquefl, without even 
endeavouring at it, muft have fomething 
very uncommon in him ; and was re- 
folved therefore to obferve him more nar- 
rowly for the future. I begged my Fa- 
ther would give me leave to converfe with 
him a little while longer, without being 
thought for that reafon engaged in Ho- 
nour to live with him for ever : for 
certainly^ it is very unreafonable that any 
Perfon Jloculd be obliged immediately to 
determine a Point cf fiich great Impor- 
tance. 

JJJLIK now avoided me, as much 
as formerly Ihe ufed to contrive all ways 
of being with me ; and whenever we 
were together, her downcaft Eyes, and 
anxious Looks, fufRciently declared her 

Un- 



Chap. 7. of David Simple. 103 

Uneafinefs at my having difcovered a Se- 
cret flie would willingly have concealed 
within her own Bofom. 

My Lover being now admitted to con- 
verfe with me, feemed to make no doubt 
but that he fhould foon gain my Affec- 
tions, and grew every day more and more 
particular to me. I don't know what was 
the Reafon of it, (for he was far from be- 
ing a difagreeable Man) but now he look'cl 
on himfelf as an accepted Lover, my In- 
difference turned into a perfcdl Averfion 
to him. I believe the feeing poor Julie's 
continual Unhappinefs, was oneCaufethat 
I could not bear him to. come near me. 
Befides, I fancied that he f iw her Love> 
(notwithftanding all her Endeavours to 
conceal it) and did not treat her in the 
manner a good-natured Man would have 
done in that Cafe. In fhorr, I fbon re- 
folved to declare to my Father, that nOr 
thing could make me lb unliappy as tiu^ 
marrying this Gentleman, and to dcfire hi.^. 
Permiffion to refufe him. But before I 
took this Step, I was willing to talk to Ju- 
lie about it ; for as I faw her unhappy Si- 
tuation, I dreaded doing any thing that, 
might make her more miferable. I was 
very much perplexed, in what manner I 
E 4 could 



104 ^n?^ Adventures BookllT. 

could bring about a Converfation on aSub- 
jeft, the very inentioning of which had fo 
violent an Effeft on her. But one Day^ as 
we were fitting together, it came into my 
Head to tell her a Story parallel to our 
Cafe ; where a young Woman, by an obdi- 
nate concealing from her Friend that fhe 
was in love with the Gentleman by v/hom 
this Friend was addreffed, fuffered her in- 
nocently and ignorantly to marry the Man 
for whom fhe had not fo violent a Paffion^ 
but that fhe could eafily, and would have 
controuled and conquered it, had fhe 
known the Paffion of her Friend, and the 
dreadful Confequences which it. afterwards 
produced to her. 

JULIE immediately underftood my 
Meaning, and after feveral Sighs and 
Struggles with herfelf, burft out into the 
following Expreffions : Oh, Ifabelle^ 
what frefh Obligations are you every 
Minute loading me with ! The generous 
Care you take of my future Peace, is. 
fo much beyond my Expeftation, that 
it is impofTible for me to thank you 
in any Words adequate to the ftrong 
Idea I have of your Goodrefs. I am 
fatisfied, moft Women in your Cafe 
would hate me as a Rivals although 




the Man contended for. 

-I 



Chap. 7. of Da'v I d Si mp x f. la 
I muft own to you, from the time I 

" firft faw Monfieur Le Buijfon^ I always 
liked him and I flattered myfelf that 
he treated me with a peculiar Air of 

" Gallantry, which I fondly imputed to a 
growing Paflion. If ever I accidentally 
met him walking in the Garden, or in 
any other Place, he feemed to feek 
Occafions to keep me with him. But 
alas ! 1 have fmce found out, that it 
was his Love for you,, which made him 
endeavour to be acquainted with me, 
as he faw we were generally together r 
If you like him, I will go and bemoan, 
my own wretchedFate in any Corner o/' 

*^ the Earth, rather than be the leaft Ob- 
ftacle to, your Happinefs."^ 

Here Ihe ceafed, the fwelling Tear3 
flood ready to ftart from her Eyes, and 
flie feemed almoft choaked for want of 
Utterance. I really pitied her, but knew 
not. which way to relieve her : To tell. 
Monfieur Le Buijfon of her PalTion, did not 
appear to me, by what I could obferve o£ 
his Difpofttion^ to be a hkely means of 
fucceeding. I tried all manner of ways, ta- 
find if ther^ was a polTibility of making, 
her eafy, in cafe there fhould be any un- 
conquerable Obftacle to the gratifying her 
Inclination : but when at lait I found fhe^ 
E 5 WQuUb 



Io6 TZ?^ Adventures Booklll. 

would hearken with pleafure, to nothing^ 
but the talking of Methods to make Mon- 
fieur Le Buijfon in love wkh her, I began 
to thmk ferioufly which way I could bring 
it about. I imagined, if I kept him on 
without any determinate Anfwer what I 
would do, that I might by a difagreeable 
Behaviour, joined to Juliets Good -nature 
and Softnefs, make him turn his Affectr- 
ons on her. But it was fome time before 
I could bring miyfelf to this I thought it 
was not afting a fincere part, and I ab- 
horred nothing fo much as Diffimulation. 
But then, when I confidered on the other 
fide, that it v/ould be making my Friend 
happy, and doing no injury to Monfieur 
Le Buijfon J as it would be the means of his. 
having the befl: of Wives, I overcame all 
my Scruples, and engaged heartily in it. 
Every time I had ufed him ill enough to 
w^ork him into a Rage, Julie purpofely 
threw herfelf in his way, and by all the 
mild and gentle Methods fhe could think 
on, endeavoured to calm his Mind, and 
bring him into Good -humour again : Irk 
fhort, we did this fo often, that at laft we 
fucceeded to our wifh I got rid of my 
Lover, and Julii engaged the Man, whole 
Love was the only thing flie thought 
could m.ake her happy. 



Chap. 7- ^David Simple. 107 

The Match was foon concluded, for 
her Friends all greatly approved of it : I 
was forced to tell my Father the whole 
Truth, to prevent his thinking himfelf 
injured by his Friend. He chid me ati 
firft, for not informing him of it fooner ; 
but as he always looked with a favourable 
Eye on what I did, he foon forgave me. 
My Friend and I, both thought ourfelves 
now quite happy ^ Julie in the Comple- 
tion of her WiPnes, and I in having beert 
inftrumental in bringing them about. But 
alas ! better had it been for us both, had. 
fhe for ever fhut herfelf from the World, 
and (pent her time in conquering, inftead 
of endeavouring to gratify and indulge 
her Paffion : for Monfieur Le Buijfon^ in 
a very fhort time, grew quite tired of 
her. For as flie had never been really 
his Inclination, and it was only by. work- 
ing on the different Turns of his Paffion,. 
that he was at firft engaged to , marry her, 
he could not keep himfelf from fallings, 
at leaft, into a cold Indifference : How- 
ever, as he was a polite Man, it was 
fome time before he could bring himfelf 
to break through the Rules of good 
Breeding, and he treated her with the 
Scfped aftd Civility, he thought due to a 
E6 Woman.. 



ic8 The Adventures Book III. 
Woman. This, however, did not pre- 
vent her being very miferable for thp 
great Tendernefs fhe felt for him, required 
all thcfe foft Senfations, and that Delicacy 
in his Behaviour, which only could have 
completed the Happinefs of fuch a Heart 
as her's ; but uhich it is impojfible ever 
to attain^ where the Love is not ferfe^Iy 
mutual. 

I DENiET) myfelf the Pleafure of ever 
feeing her, left I fhould be the Caufe of 
any Dilturbance between them, but my 
Caution was all in vain ; for fhe, poor 
Soul, endeavoured to raife his Gratitude 
and increafe his I.ove, by continually re- 
minding him of her long and faithful Paf- 
fion, even from her firft Acquaintance 
with him, till at laft, by thefe Means, 
fhe put it into his head, that my Love 
for my Friend^ v/as the Caufe of my 
refufing and treating him ill. This 
Thought rcuzed a Fury in his Breaft 
all Decency and Cerem.ony gave way to 
Rage, and from thinking her Fondnefs 
had been his Curfe^ by preventing his 
iiaving the Woman he liked, fhe foon 
became the Cbjeft of his Hatred rather 
tlian his Love; and he could not forbear 
renting continual Reproaches againft her,. 



Chap. 7- ^David Simple. io$ 

for having thus gained him. Poor Julit 
did not long furvive this Ufage, but lan- 
guillied a ftiort time in greater Mifery 
than I can exprefs, and then loft her* 
Life, and the Senfe of her Misfortunes 
together. 

This was the firfl real Afflidion I had 
ever felt ; I had loved Jidu from her In- 
fancy, and I now looked upon myfelf to 
have been the Caufe of all her Sorrows % 
nor could I help in fome meafure blaming 
my own Aftions, for I had always dreaded 
the Confequence of thus in a manner be- 
traying a Man into Matrimony. And al- 
tho* perhaps it may be fomething a more 
excufable Frailty^ yet it certainly is as 
much a F'ailure in point of Virtue, and as 
great a want of Refolution, to indulge 
the Inclination of our Friends to their 
Ruin, as it is to gratify our own : or, to 
fpeak more properly,, to People who are 
capable of Friendfhip, it is only a more;, 
exquifite and refined way of giving them- 
felves Pleafure. But I will not attempt to^ 
repeat all I endured on that occafion, and 
fhall only tell you, that Monfieur Li 
Biiiffon^ on the Death of his Wife, think- 
ing now all Obftables were removed be* 
Cween us, would again have been my^ 

Lover % 



110 The Adventures Book III. 
Lover ; but his Ufage of my poor Julto 
had raifed in me fuch an Indignation 
againft him, that I refolded never to fee 
him more. 

But here, at the Period of my firft 
Misfortune, I muft ceafe ; for I think no- 
thing but the ftrong Defire I have to 
obhge this Company, could poffibly have 
fupported my funk and weak Spirits to 
have talked fo long at one time. 

The whole Company begged her 
not to tire herfelf, and exprelfed their 
hearty Thanks for what flie had already 
done. She infilled now on retiring to 
her own Apartment ; and promifed the. 
next Day, if her Health would give her. 
leave, to condnue her Story, in order to, 
fatisfy their Curiofity ^ or rather to con-- 
vince them, that their Compaflion in her 
Cafc, muft be rendered perfectly fruitlefs^. 
by the invincible Obitinacy of her Mifr 
fortunes. 

After Ifahelle had left them, they 
{pent the remainder of the Day in Re- 
marks on that part of her Story fhe had 
already imparted to them. David could. 
2)01 help exprefling the utmoft Indigna-- 

tion. 



Chap. 7- ^David Simple, hi 

tion againft Monfieur Le BuiJJ'on for his 
barbarous and ungrateful Treatment of 
Julie : He defired Cynthia to engage Ifa^ 
belle as early as it was poffible the next 
Morning, that fhe might reaflume her 
Story ; which he faid muft have fome- 
thing very extraordinary in it ; as the 
Death of her firft Friend, and that in fo 
fhocking a manner, feemcd to be but the 
Prologue toiler increafingMiferies. Had 
not Cyfithias own Inclinations exadly 
agreed with his, fhe would have been 
eafily prevailed on, to have obliged the 
Man who had generoufly faved Valentine'^ 
Life^ and was tlie only Caufe of her pre- 
fent happy Situation. In fhort, as foon as 
Ifabelle was ftirring the following Day^ 
flie was perfuaded to join the Company, 
and after Brcakfafl: went on with her Sto- 
ry, as follows. 




CHAP; 



1 12 7he Adventures Book IIL 



CHAR VIII. 

^he Continuation of the Hijlory of 
Ifabelle. 

AFTER the Death of my favourite 
Companion, I had an Averfion to 
the Thoughts of all i / 'vers, and altho* 
my Father had fev( : Propofals for me, 
yet I utterly rejefte r.hem, and begged 
him, as the only ay ans to make me go 
through Life witli any tolerable Eafe^ 
that I might be permitted to fpend my 
Time at his Villa in Solitude and Retire- 
ment. His Fondnefs for me prevailed 
bn him to comply with my Requeft, and 
Time began to make my late Affliction 
fubfide. I had befides a Dawn of Com- 
fort in the Company of miy Brother, who, 
notwithftanding his Youth, and being a. 
Frenchmariy was of fo grave and philofo- 
phical a Temper, that he having now fi- 
nifhed his Studies, Hke me preferred the 
enjoying his own Thoughts in Eafe and 
Quiet, to all the gay Amufements and 
noify Pomp which were to be met with- 
in Paris. TliQ* we had never been bred?' 

together^., 



Cfiap. S. of David Simple, ri j 

together, yet the prefent Sympathy of 
our Tempers (for I was become as grave 
from the late Accident which had be- 
fallen me, as he was from Nature) led us. 
to contraft the ftrifteft Friendfhip for 
each other. AU Sprightlinefs was now 
vanifhect, and I had no other Pleafure 
but in my Brother's indulging me to- 
converfe with him on ferious Subjects : 
With this Amufement I began to be con- 
tented, and to find returning Eafe flow 
in upon my Mind ; but this was more 
than I was long permitted to enjoy, for 
whilft I was in this Situation, one Eve- 
ning, as my Father was coming from. 
Paris^ he got a Fall from his Horfe, by 
which Accident he bruifed his Side in fuch 
a manner, that it threw him into a Pleu- 
rify, of which he died. Thus was I only 
to be cured of the Senfe of one Mifery, 
by the Birth of another ; he had always 
been to me a moft indulgent Parent^ and 
the Horror I felt at the lofs of him^ 
rendered me for feme time inconfolable \ 
nor do I think any thing could have ever 
made me overcome my Grief, but that 
my Brother, now Marquis de Stainvtllcy^ 
fiotwithftanding I am certain he felt the 
Lofs equal with me, had Greatnefs of 
Mind enough to enable him to ftifle all 



114 Adventures Book III. 

his own Sorrows, in order to comfort and 
fupport me under mine ; till at length I 
was afhamed to fee fo much Goodnefs 
thrown away upon me, and I was re- 
folved (at leaft in appearance) to fhake off 
my Melancholy, that I might no longer 
be a Burthen to Juch a Brother. This 
Confideration, and the Agreeablenefs of 
his Converfation, affifted me by degrees 
to calm my Mind, and again brought me 
back into a State of Tranquillity : He 
often ufed to entertain me with Stories of 
what had happened to him at School, with 
his Remarks (which were generally very 
judicious) on them. One Evening, as 
we were talking of Friendfliip, he related 
to me the following Inftance of a Boy's 
unufual Attachment to him, which I will 
give you in his own Words. 

When I was at School, I contradled 
" a warm Friendfhip with the young 

Chevalier D union t : indeed it was im- 
" poffible for me to avoid it, for the 

Sympathy of our Tempers was fo very 
" ftrong, that Nature feemed to have 

pointed us out as Companions to each 

other. It is ufual amongft every num- 
" ber of Boys, for each of them to fin- 
^' gle out fome one or other with whom 

they 



Chap. 8. g/* David Simple. 115 

they more particularly converfe than 
with the reft ; but we not only loved 
one another better than all our other 
School- fellows, but I verily believe, 

" if we had had our Choice throughout 
the whole World, we neither of us 
could have met with a Friend to 
whom we could have been fo fin- 
cerely attached. Notwithftanding our 
Youth, we were both fo fond of 
Reading and Study, that the Boys of 
gayer Difpofition ufed to laugh at us, 
calling us Book-worms, and fhun us, 
as unfit for their Society : This was 
the moft agreeable thing that could 
have happened to us, as it gave us an 
Opportunity to enjoy each other's 
Company undifturbed, and to get Im- 
provement by continually reading to- 
gether. In fhort, we fpent our time, 
till we went to the Academy, as plea- 
fantly as I think it poflible to do in 
this World ; there all our Scenes of 
Pleafure were deftroyed by the Vil- 
lainy of a young Man, (one Monfieur 
Le Neuf) whofe Father was fo penu- 
rious, that he would not allow him 
Money enough to be on a footing 

" with the reft of the young Gentlemen. 

<^ This put him on all rnanner of Strata- 
gems 



ii6 7^^ Adventures Book III. 
gems to fupply his Expences, which as 
much exceeded the Bounds of common 
Difcretion, as his Father's Allowance fell 
fliort of what was neceffary. He foon 
found out that I had great plenty of 
Money, and therefore refolved fome 
way or other to get an Intimacy with 

*^ me : He afFefted the fame Love of. 
Learning, and Tafte for Study, with 
the Chevalier and myfelf ; till at lafb, 
by his continual endeavouring to oblige 
us, we were prevailed on often to ad- 
mit him into our Company. He faw 

" I had no great Fondnefs for Money, 

" and was willing to fhare what I had 
with my Friends i this put it into his 
head to try if he could make a Quarrel 
between Dumont and me, that he might 
poffefs me wholly himfelf : And you 
muft know, Ifabelle^ nctwithftanding 
the prefent Caiminefs that appears in 

^' my Temper, I am naturally exceffively 
paffionate, and have fuch a Warrr.tli 
in my Difpofition, that the leaft Sufpi- 
cion of being ill ufed by my Friends^ 
fees my whole Soul in a flame, and. 

" enrages me to madnels. Now the 
fortrof Mind in the World beft fuited 
for Villainy to work its own Ends cut;^ 

" of, is this ; and happy for m.e was if, 
that Dumont is of a Temper entirely 

oppofite : 



Chap. 8. (9/^ David Simple. 117 

oppofite : for tho' I have experienced 
his Bravery, yet he even fights with 
the Calmnefs of a Philofopher. 

LE A^^fTF would often takeOppor- 
tunities to tell Stories of falfe Friends ; 
of People, -who under tiie pretence of 
Love, had betrayed, and made their own 
' ' Advantage of the undefpgnmg^ind artlefs^ 
^ and would always conclude wich fonie 
Remarks on the Folly of People's con- 
fiding too ftrofigly in others, unlefs a 
long Experience had convinced them 
of their Sincerity, We neither of us 
had the leaft Sufpicion of his Aim ; 
and, as he had an entertaining manner 
*' of telling Stories, ufed to hearken to 
him with the utmoft Attention. 

" There was a Boy belonging to 
the Academy, who had a Voice fo hke 
Dumonf%^ that in another Room it was 
very difficult to diftinguifli them from 
each other. Le Neuf one day got 
this Lad into a Chamber adjoining to 
mine, and, when he had given him 
his Leflfon, began to talk very loud, 
and mentioned my Name with fuch an 
Eagernefs, as gave me a Curiofity to 
" hear what they were talking of : But 
5' what was my Surprize, when I heard 
^ ' " Bumont^ 



n8 T'Z^^ Adventures Book III. 
Dumcnt^ (as I then thought) ufe mc 
with great Contempt ; fwear he would 
never have had any thing to fay to fuch 
aFoo], if my Comn^and of Money had 
not put it in his power to make a pro- 
per ufe of me. And then endeavoured 

" to inveigle Le Neuf^ that they two 
might join together, in order to make 

" me the greater Dupe ; but faid, he muft 
ftill keep up the appearance of Gene- 
rofity, and Unwillingnefs to take any 
thing from me, left I fliould fufped: 
him ! Le Neuf immediately anfwered, 

^* that he would not for the World de- 
ceive me \ but would let me know what 
a Friend I had in Durncnt^ if it was not 
for fear that he would have Art enough 
to make him appear only a Mifcbief- 
maker^ and ftill impofe the more on me. 
But, conunucd he, I will endeavour all 
the ways I can to open his Eyes, and 
to let him fee the regard you have for 
him. 

I HAD no\V heard enough, and was 
going haftily to break open the Door, 
but found it locked. Le Neuf well 
knev/ who it was, and fent the Boy out 

" at another Door, down a Pair of Back- 
ftairs, and then let me in. The Fury 

" of my Looks fufiiciently declared that 



Chap. 8. of David Simple, i 19 

" I had been witnefs of all that hadpafled 
" between him and thQ fancied Dumont. 
I flared wildly about the Room, in 
hopes to find him, but in vain. LeNeuf 
<^ was in the higheft Satisfaflion imagina- 
ble at this Succefs of his vile Scheme^ and 
faid, That by my Aftions and Manner 
he was convinced, Accident had unde- 
ceived me with regard to my Opinion 
of Dumont \ that indeed he had a long 
time been thinking of a Method to let 
me know the Truth but was always 
" afraid my fixed Love for my Friend, 
would have put it in his power, to 
blind my Eyes enough to make him 
appear the only guilty Perfon. You 
" may remember, Sir, continued he, 
" how much my Converfation has turn'd, 
" ever fince I have had the Pleafure of 
knowing you, on the great Caution 
that is neceffary (if we would preferve 
our own Peace) before we intirely place 
a Confidence in any Man. What you 
have now over-heard, will prove this 
to you better than all I could fay : But 
let me add another piece of Advice, 
" which is no lefs proper for you upon 
^ this Occafion : Break off your Friend- 
fhip with Dumont by degrees, without 
ever telling him the real Caufe ; that 

would 



T20 "The Adventures Book III. 
wmild only produce a Qiiarrel between 
you, which might have bad Confe- 
quences and when the Subjeft of it 
comes to be known in the World, it 
might bring fome Difgrace upon you, 

*^ for having been duped by him fo long, 
and give you the Air of a Bubble. It 
is therefore much more prudent to let 
your Connexion with him quietly 
drop, than to come to any difagreeable 

" and publick Explanations upon this 

y- Affair. 

''Thus did this artful Villain cn- 
deavour to guard againft any Eclair- 

^' ciflement between me and my Friend, 
which might produce a Difcovery of th^ 

*' Trickhe had played and had my Tem- 
per been cooler, he would have fucceed- 
ed J but I was then quite incapable of 
attending to any Confiderations of Pru- 
dence : And, in the height of my Rage, 
ran down flairs to feek Satisfa£tion of 
the injured Dumont^ for the Wrongs I 
falfly imagined he had done me. 
Upon inquiry I found he was gone 
out through the Garden into a Field, 

*' the propereft place in the World fdf 
my prefent Purpofe. He was alone, 
out of either the hearing or fight of 

any 

I 



Chap. 8. ^David Simple. 121 
" any Mortal. The Moment I came 
near enough to be heard, I drew my 
Sword, aiid called on hiin to defend 
himfelf ; it was in this Inftant that 
" Dumont (notwithftanding the Surprize 
" he muft undoubtedly be in) colle6ted 
all his Refolution, and exerted the 
" higheft Friendfliip, to prevent the hap- 
" pening of an Accident fo fatal, as muft 
either have coft me my Life, or de- 
" ftroyed all my future Peace. In fliort, 
all the opprobrious Language I could 
give him could not provoke him to 
draw his Sword ; but with the warm- 
eft Entreaties 4ie begged me to put up 
" mine, till we could come to fome E- 
clairciffement.'' 

''I NOW began to think he added 
Cowardice to Treachery, and in my 
Rage had not Command enough of 
" myfclf to forbear adding the Name of 
" Coward to the reft of my Reproaches. 
Still he bore it all : At laft he fwore, If 
/ would but have Patience till he knew 
what it was that had thro sen me into 
" this Pajfion^ if he could not clear hiin- 
felf he would not refufe to fight with me^ 
^' whenever Ipleafed. My Fury beinga ht- 
" tie abated by thefe W ords, I put up my 
Vol. n. F Sword, 



122 T/?^ Adventures Book III. 
Sword, and then told him all I thought 
I had over-heard between him and Le 
Neuf, It is impoflible to defcribe his 
Amazement at hearing this ; I thought 
there was fomething fo innocent in his 
Looks, that all my former Love re- 
turned for him, and I began to fancy 

^' I had been in a Dream : He at length 
got fo far the better of me, that I con- 

*' fented to make a ftricler Enquiry into 
this Affair, before we proceeded any 
farther. 

W E walked fome time together, 
but every Word Dumont fpoke put me 
fo much in mind of xh^zlVretch's Voice 
who had deceived me, that I could 
hardly keep myielf from burfting into 
" frefli Paffions every Moment: he per- 
ceived it, and kindly bore all my In- 
firmities. 

As foon as we came home, we called 
Le Neuf\ and the Chevalier afked him 
what Villainy he could have contrived 
to impofe fo much on my Underftand- 
ing, as to make me believe he had 
ever mentioned my Name but with 
the greateft Refpeft and Friendfliip ; 
he was too much hardened in his 

Wicked- 



Chap. 8. ^/David Simple. 123 

Wickednefs to recede from what he 
had begun ; and faid, I was the bed 
Judge whether I knew Dumont^s Voice 

" or no : and then pretended to be in 

" the greateft Aftonifhment, that a Man 
could in fo fliort a time deny his own 
Words, to the face of the very Pcrfun 
to whom he had fpoke them. Wc all 
three ftood looking at one anothc'r in 
great Perplexity ; and, for my part, 
I knew not which way to come at the 

" Truth. At laft D^^mt?;// begged me to 
hare Patience till the next Day, and, 
by that time, he did not doubt but he 
Ihould make every thing clear before 
me to which, with much Perfuafion, 

*M at laft confcntcd. 

" The Chevalier knew Le Neuf ufed 
to go every Night to walk in a folitary 
Place, in order, as he fuppofed, to plot 
the Mifchiefs he intended to perpe- 
trate ; thither he followed him a little 
after Sun-let, and catching hold of 
him by the Collar, fwore, that Mo- 
ment fliould be his laft, unlefs he con* 
felTed who it was that he had bribed to 
fpeak in his Voice, in order to impofe 
" upon me. The Villain had not the 
Courage to draw his Sword, but fall- 
ing down on his Knees, confcffed the 
F 2 " whole, 



124 Adventures Book III. 

^' whole, and fhewed the Bafenefs of Kis 
Nature no lefs in begging Pardon, 
than he had done in committing the 
Crime. But Dumont refufed to forgive 

" him, unlefs on condition of his going 
with him to m.e, and repeating the 
fame Confeffion, to which the mean 
Creature fubmitted. 

Think, my Ifabelle^ (continued my 
Brother) what 1 muft feel, when I 
found I had wrong'd the Man, who 
was capable of afting in the generous 
and uncommon manner the Chevalier 
*^ had done v he faw my Confufion, and 
" kindly flew to my Relief. Now, faid 
he, 1 . hope my dear Friend is con- 
vinced ot my Innocence; and at the 
flime time embracing mc, afilired me 
he would im.pute the Violence of my 
PafTion to the Vehemence of my 
Love, and never mention this Acci- 
dent more. 

" L £ NE U F begged we would 
keep this Affair a Secret, but that we 
could not confent to, for the fake of 
others. We afked him how it was 
poiTiblc, that at his Age he could think 
of fuch Villainy, for the fake of a 

little 



Chap. 8. of David Simple. 125 
little Money ; to which he replied^ 

^' that he had been from his Infancy bred 
up with a Father, who had amaffed 

" great Wealth, by never flicking at any 
thing, from which he could gain any 
Advantage ; and altho' indeed, con- 
trary to his Father, he loved to fpend 

" it, yet he had always laid it down as a 
Maxim, that all Confiderations were to 
be facrificed to the getting it. 

We made him produce the Boy he 
had employed, and he really fpoke fo 
like the Chevalier, we could not difti4^- 
guifli one Voice from the other ; on 
which the good-natured Bumont told 
me, I ought not to be angry with my- 
" felf for not avoiding an Impofitici], 
" which muft have deceived all the 
World : This was Generofity, this 
" was beicg a true Friend \ for the Man 
who will bear another's Frailties, in my 
Opinion, is the ofily Perfon who de- 
ferves that Name. Thofe People who 
" let their Pride intervene with their 
" Tendernefs, enough to make them 
" quarrel with their Friends for their 
" Miftakes, may fometimes make an 
appearance of loving another, but in 
reality they never enter into Engage- 
F 3 ments 



126 T/^^ Adventures Book III. 
ments from any other Motive than 
Seififhnefs : and I think the Perfon 
v/ho forfakes his Friend, only becaufe 
he is not perfect, is much upon the 
fame footing with one, who will be no 
longer faithful to his Friend, than 
while Fortune favours him. I have 
told you this Story, Sifter, only to let 
you into the Chara6ler of the Man I fo 
defervedly efteem ; that, as you are 
my chief Companion, when I talk of 
him, (as I am fond of doing) you may 
not be an intire Stranger to him : I left 
him at the Academy, where I have 
fince written to him, and am furprized 
I have had no Anfwer As to Le 
Neuf^ we publiflied his Infamy, which 

" obliged him to leave the Academy.'* 

Here my Brother ceafed. 

A s foon as Ifabelle had related thus 
^ much of her Story, Cynthia defired her to 
reft herfelf before ftie proceeded : And, 
in the mean time, 'David could not for- 
bear ft^ewing his Indignanon ag?inft Le 
Neuf^ and declaring his Approbation of 
the Marquis de Stainville^s Sentimjcnts, 
that nothing but finding fome great Fault 
in the Heart, can ever excufe us for aban- 
doning our Friends. The whole Com- 
pany ' 



Chap, 8. <p/David Simple. 127 
pany joined in their Admiration of the 
Chevalier Dumoru^Sy Behaviour ; but, per- 
ceiving that turning the Converfation a 
little on indifferent Subjects, would be the 
beft means of enabling Ifabelle to relate 
v/hat remained, they endeavoured to a- 
mufe her as much as lay in their power ; 
and, as foon as flie had a littl? recovered 
herfelf, Ihe went on, as will be feen in 
the next Chapter. 




CHAP. 



128 TZ?^ Adventures Book IJL 



CHAP. IX. 

T'be Continuation of the Hi/iory of 
Ifabelle. 

AFTER my Brother had told me 
this Story, his favourite Subjeft of 
Converfation Vv^as the Chevalier Dumont ; 
but this lafted not long, before the acci- 
dental Sight of a young Lady at a Neigh- 
bour's Houfe turned all his Thoughts 
another way ; her Name was Dorimene^ 

Daughter to the Count de . 

As the Marquis de Stainville never con- 
cealed any thing from me, he imme- 
diately told me the Admiration Dorimene 
had infpired him with ; his whole Soul 
was fo filled with her Id^a, he could nei- 
ther think nor talk of any thing elfe ; Jfhe 
was to ftay fome time with the Gentle- 
man^s Lady where my Brother faw her ; 
and, as I had a fmall Acquaintance with 
her, at his Requeft 1 went to wait on her, 
in order to get an Opportunity to invite 
Dorimene to our Houfe. I was a little 
furprized at the great and fudden EfFcd 



Chap. 9. of David Simple. 129. 

her Charms had had on my Brother ^ 
but at the firft: fight of her all my wonder 
vanifhed for the elegant Turn of her 
whole Perfon, joined to the regular Beau- 
ties of her Face, would rather have made 
it matter of Aftonifhment, if a Man of 
my Brother's Age could have feen her 
without being in love with her. In fliort,. 
a very little Converfation with her quite 
overcame him^. and he thought olnothing 
but marrying her. 

The Marquis de Stainville was^ in the- 
pofl^effion of fo large a Fortune, that he 
was a Match for Dorimene which there 
was no danger of her Friends refufing *r 
and the Gentleman with whom fhe then 
was, being very intimate with her Fa- 
ther, immediately wrote him word of the 
particular notice my Brother took of his 
^Daughter. On the receipt of this Letter 

the Count de came to his Friend's 

rioufe, under the pretence of fetching^ 
Dorimene home, but in reality with a de- 
fign of concluding the Match between her 
and my Brother. She was very young,, 
had never had any other Engageaienc 
and, as the Cuftom in France makes, 
moft Ladies think a married Life moft 
F 5 agreeable^ 



130 Ti?^ Adventures l^ookllL 
agreeable, flie implicitly obeyed her Fa- 
ther. 

The Marquis de Stainville's Paflion 
for her was fo violent, that it could not 
bear any Delay. In a Month's time they 
were married, with the Confent of all 
Parties ; and, in the poffeffion of Dori- 
mene^ my Brother's Happinefs was com- 
pleat, nor did he know a Wifh beyond it. 
On her Requeft I continued to live with 
them, and we fpent our Time very agree- 
ably, for Borimene was really an amiable 
Companion ; fhe was not of a Temper to be 
rufried with Trifles, and, as to the genera- 
lity of things, was very indifi^erent which 
way they went. I never faw her but once 
in a Paflion, but then indeed flie perfectly 
frightned me for ftie was quite furious^ 
and her Mind was agitated with much 
more Violence than thofe which are eafily 
put into Diforder can ever be. My Bro- 
ther doated on her to Diftraftion, the 
leaft Intimation of any Inclinadon of her's 
was enough to make him fly to obey her ; 
at her Defire we fpent a few Months in 
the Winter at PmV, but then fhe gave 
no farther into the Gayeties of that Place 
than her Hufband approved of. 



The 



Chap. 9- ?/^David Simple. 131 



Th e Count de had a fmall Vil^a 

about fix Leagues from Paris^ which was 
as pleafantly fituated as any in France ; 
in this Place my Brother took a fancy to 
fpend the next Summer after he was mar- 
ried. In a httle while after we had been 
there, as my Sifter and I were fitting one 
day in a Grotto at the End of a Parterre, 
we faw the Marquis de Stainville and 
another Gentleman coming towards us ; 
we rofe up to meet them, and as foon as 
we were near enough to join Companies, 
my Brother took the Gentleman by the 
Hand, and prefented him to us under the 
Name of the ChevaUer Dumont. Dori- 
mene and I (for fiie had alfo heard his 
Hiftory) were both rejoiced at thus meet- 
ing with the Man my Brother had given 
us fo advantageous a Character of. She 
politely faid, That nothing could be 
more welcome to her than the Marquis 
" de Slainville^s Friend.'' We walked 
fome time in the Garden ; but my Bro- 
ther obferving the Chevalier grow faint, 
propofed the going in ; faying, That 
as he was but jull recovered of a Fit of 
Sicknefs, it would be advifeable for 
him to be in the Houfe.'' And, in- 
deed, he looked fo pale and thin, that it 
F 6 was 



132 The Adventures Book III. 
was rather wonderful how it was poffible 
fcf him to bear being out of his Bed, than 
that Reft fhould be neceflary for him : he 
was in fo weak a State of Health, that we 
fpent two or three Days together before 
the Marquis would afic him any Particu- 
lars ; but as foon as he thought he had 
gained Strength enough, to enable him to 
relate all that had happened to him, from 
the time of d:eir Separation, the Marquis 
eagerly defired Dumont not to let him re- 
main in ignorance cf w^hatever had be- 
fallen fo dear a Friend during that Inter- 
val : which Requcft both my Sifter and 
I earneftly joined in, and the Chevalier 
obligingly began, as follows : 

The Day, Sir, after you left the A- 
cademy, when I was in the height of 
my Melancholy for your Lofs, to 
compleat my Affiiclion, I received a 
Letter from my Mother, That my 
Father w^as taken very ill, and defired 
me to haften Home, as I valued ever 
feeing him again." I did not delay 
*^ a Moment obeying his Commands ; 
but immediately took Horfe and rode 
with full Speed tilll reached his Villa : 
he was yet alive, but fo near his End, 
that it was with difficulty he uttered 

his 



Chap. 9- ^ David Simple. 133 
" his Words. The Moment I entered 
his Chamber, and he was told by his 
fond and afflifted Wife that I was there 
" to attend his Commands, he raifed him- 
" felf lip in his Bed, and feemed to keep 
" Life in him by Force, in order to give 
me his lafb Bleffing. He then defired 
to be left fome few Minutes with me 
alone ; and as I approached his Bed- 
" fide, he took me by the Hand, and 
" fighing faid, " Oh! my Son, I have 
ruined you and the beft of Wives at 
" once, you know the long and faithful 
^' Friendihip I have had for Monfieur 

4' ^ and the great Obligations I 

" ov/e to him. After you was feparated 
" from me, in order to follow your 
Studies, he married a young and beau- 
tiful Lady, whom he was fo fond of, 
" he could deny her ncthing. She was 
one of thofe gay Ladies, who never 
" thought herfclf lb happy, as when flie 
was lavifhing her Hufoand's Fortune 
on her own Extravagance ; by this 
Means fhe foon brougnt him into the 
moft diftrc-ffed State irijagiiK.ble ; he 
had a growing Family, and no Means 
of fupporting them. I could not bear 
to fee his [Vlifery, and prefently re- 
lieved it : I did this once or twice but 

he 



134 Adventures Book III. 
he had fo much Generofity, and fo 

^' ftrong a Rtfolution, that he abfolutely 
refufcd to drag me down to Ruin and 
Perdition with him. He obftinateiy 

'* perfifted in what he thought right, 

" and I on the other hand was as fully 

^- bent never to let him fmk, without 
fharing his Misfortunes. In fhort, 
I by degrees underhand fold almoft 

" every thing I was worth, and convey'd 
it to him in fuch a manner, that he 
never knew from whom it came. If 
God had been pleafed to have fpared my 
Dfe, I intended to have got you a Poft 
in the Army, and had a Scheme in 
my Head, w^hich I thought could not 
fail to have made fome Provifion for 
your Mother ; but it is now at an end, 

^' my Strength fails me, and I can no 
more. Farewell for ever : As you are 
young, if you can make any Struggle 
in the World, cherifli, and rake care 
ofmiyWife. At thefe Words he ceafed 
fpeaking, and breathed his laft in my 
Arms.'* 

At this Defcription Dorimene and 
I both burft into Tears, in fpire of our 
iitmoft Endeavours to prevent it j which 
ilopt the Chevalier Dtmont^ Narration 



Chap. 9- ^^/'David Simple. 1^5 

for a few Minutes, when on our earneft 
Intreaties he thus proceeded. 

" I SEE I need not explain to thefeLa- 
dies, what I felt on this dreadful Oc- 
cafion ; they feem too fenfible of the 
Miferies that attend Human Kind, not 
to imagine it all without my Affillance; 
nor will I fhock the Tendernefs of any 

" of this Company, with the Repetition 
of my Mother's Grief; but fhall only 
fay, it was as great as the fofteft Heart 

" could feel on the Lofs of a Hufband, 
whom flie had lived with, and tenderly 
loved for Thirty Years together. Per- 

" haps as my Father had a Family, he 
may be thought blameable for fuch a 

" Condudl y but for my part, notwith- 
(landing I am the Sufferer, I fhall al- 

" ways honour his Memory the more 
for it ; when I refleft that I have 

^' often heard him fay, that to the Gen- 
tleman's Father (for whom he at laft 
ruined himfelf) ht owed all that he had 
in the World. 

I WAS afraid of revealing to my 
" Mother, what my Father had told 
" me, and delayed it fome time for no 
other Reafon but from want of Refo- 

" lution 



136 7Zv Adventures Book m. 
lution to add to the Load of Affiiftions 

" fhe was already burdened with ; at laft, 
Neceffity forced me to undertake the 
Talk, however uneafy it was to me : 
for the Perfon who had bought the 
Houfe we were then in of my Father,., 
was to enter upon it the next Week. 

" I really believe the Uneafinefs the poor 

*^ Man fuffered on that account, and 
chiefly for his Wife's fake, haftenedhis 
Death. When I difclofed to my Mo- 

" ther the prefent Situation of our Af- 
fairs, inftead of burdening with 
Complaints and Lamentations, fne at 
firft fhevved a perfed: Indifference, and 

*' faid, as fhe had loft her only Comfort 
in lofing my Father, fhe cared very 
little what became of her; but then 
looking at me with an Air of the 
greateft Tendernefs, flie fighed, and 

" faid. Why did I bring into the World 
a Creature with your generous Senti- 
ments ! who after being educated hke 
a Gentleman, mufl be thrown on the 
wide World without any Means of 
fupporting that Station in Life. She 
faw how much her Difcourfe affected 

^' me, and therefore faid no more. 



As 



Chap. 9- ^/'D AVID Simple. 137 



As foon as I had time to refled 
<^ by myfelf on the prefent Condition of 
my Affairs, I began ferioufly to con- 
^' fider what I fhould do ; for I was re- ^ 
folved in fome fhape or other to fiip- 
port my Mother. My .Thoughts im- 
mediately turned on you, my dear 
^' Marquis de Stainville^ and I made no 
^' doubt, but in your Friendfhip I fhould 
" meet with an Afylum from all my Cares 
and Affliflions. I then wrote the Let- 
ter I have already mentioned to you ; 
it was not at all in the Style of a poor 
Man to his Patron, but rather re- 
joicing that I had an Opportunity of 
giving you what I thought the higheft 
Pleafure in the World, that of relieving 
your Friend from the infupportable 
" Calamity of having a helplefs and dif- 
treffed Mother upon my hands, 
without its being in my power to help 
" her. 

*^ When I had fen t away my Letter, 
I got Credit for a little Houfe, where 
" I placed my Mother ; but as foon as I 
" thought it polTible for me to have an 
" Anfvver, I cannot defcribe the anxious 
Hourslpaffed: every Moment feemed 

" a 



138 T/r?/f Adventures Book III. 
a thoufand ; day after day was I in 
this Situation, and no Letter came to 
comfor: nie. Forgive me, my dear 
Friend ; nothing could have given me 
any Sufpicion of you at another time : 
but now every thing feemjcd fo much 
my Enemy, that I thought you fo too. 
' When I remembered our tender part- 
ing. Tears would ftart into my Eyes, 
' and I thought, to have you forfake nic, 
' becaufe I wanted Fortune, was more 
' than I could bear : Yet in the midft 
' of all this Trouble, I was obliged to 
' ftruggle and appear chearful, to keep 
* up my poor Mother's finking Spirits. 
' To tell you the Variety of Mifery I 
^ went through, would make my Story 
' tedious, and be fhocking to your Na- 
' tures ; When I thought my Stainville 
had forfaken me, the Negled of all 
my other profefled Friends was tri- 
fling. The Infults of my Creditors 
I could have fupported with tolerable 
Patience ; but my Father's laft Words, 
^ake care of wy Wife^ continually re- 
founded in my Ears ; and I faw daily 
" before my Eyes, this Wife — this Mo- 
ther — and found myfelf utterly void 
of any Power to fave her from De- 

flrudlion ; 



Chap. 9- David Simple. 139 

ftrudion and now fruitlefs Lamcnta- 
^' tions were the only Refuge kit me. 

When I was almoft driv^en to the 
iitmoft Defpair, at laft, by often re- 
volving in my Mind various Schemes 

" to extricate myfelf out of the deplo- 
rable Condition of feeing a tendc:r Pa- 

" rent languifh away her little Remains 

" of Life in want of NeceflTaries, I re- 

colk(5led the young Duke de , 

who you know, Sir, left the Aca- 

*^ demy about two Months after we 
came to it. The little while he was 
there with us, he was particularly civil 
to me ; and I refolved now as my laft 
Effort to wrice him my Cafe in the 
moft pathetick Terms I could think of, 

*^ and try if I could prevail on him to de- 
liver me out of my Mifery. It was 
fome time before I obtained an An- 
fwer, and when it came, it was per- 

" fedly in the Style of a great Man to 
bis Dependant : However at the Bot- 

" tom he told me he had procured a 
Place for me, which would bring in 

" about 50 Louis-d'ors a Year ; if I 
would accept this, I muft come imme- 
diately to Paris. 



^* Though 



140 TZ?^ Adventures Book III. 



" Though this was not a thing fit 
" to be offered a Gentleman ; yet it was 
not a Time for me to confider my Sta- 
tion in Life ; this would be fome httle 
Support to my Mother, and I did not 
fear bufthng in the World for myfelf. 
I was going to Paris^ when I was taken 
ill of a violent Fever in the Houfe 
" where you found me. 1 had but juft 
enough in my Pocket to have carried 
me to my Journey's End ; this was 
fcon fpcnt in Sickncfs, and I was in a 
*^ Place where I was an utter Stranger, 
confined to my Bed, without a Penny 
to help myfelf : And though Death 
would have been very welcome to me, 
as it would have put an end to my 
^' Misfortunes ; yet when I confidered 
" my Mother, I looked on it with great 
Dread. 

My Landlord happened to be a 
very humane good-natured Man, 
and on my telling him my helplefs 
" Condition, defrred me not to make 
myfelf uneafy, for that he would for 
" the prefent bring me Neceflaries, and 
he did not doubt, but by the Repre- 
" fentation of my Circumftances, to a. 

" very 



Chap. 9- David Simple. 141 
very charitable Gentleman, who was 

lately come to the Count 's, 

he lliould get me fome Relief. 

My Diftemper became fo violent, 
that I was hardly fenfible but by the 
great Care that was taken of me, it 
abated by Degrees ; and as foon as I 
came to recoUeft how long I had lain 
there, 1 afked who was the generous 
Benefa6lor to whom I owed the Prefer- 

" vation of my Life ; and was imme- 

^ ' diately told by my Landlord, that he had 
found a Method of making my Cafe 
known to the Marquis de Stainville^ 
who had given ftridl Orders to have 
the utmoft Care taken of me, and fent 

" Money for that Purpofe. At the 
Sound of that Name I flatted up in my 
Bed, and ftared fo wildly, that the 
poor Man was quite frightned. At 
laft I cryed out. Are you fure it is the 
Marquis de Stainville ? Are you po- 
fitive you don't miftake the Name ? 

" No, no. Sir, rephed the Man, I know 
I am right in what I fay, he married the 

" Count de 's Daughter, and is 

here at his Houfe. I had lived fo re- 

*' tired from the time of my Father's 
Death, and had been fo little inqui- 

fitive 



142 Adventures Book III. 
fitive about any thing that paffed in the 

" World, that I had never fo much as 
heard of your Marriage : However, 
on the Man's pofitive Affurance, that 
he was not miftaken, I began to think 
this Goodncfs was like the Nature of 
my old Friend but then it feemed 
to me improbable, that a Man who 
was capable of being fo charitable to 

" Strangu's, could abandon his Friend in 
the higheft Diftrefs. This put it into my 

" Head, that pofTibly my Letter might 
have mifcarried, and you were yet ig- 

^' norant of all 1 had fuffered. This 
Thought infufed fuch inexpreflible and 
fudden Joy all over me, it haftened 
my Recovery fo much, that in two 
Days time I was able to walk about my 
Room. 

As I was fitting and confidering with 
niyfelf which way I fhould bring about 
an Interview with you, without dire6lly 
fending my Name, my Landlord faid ; 
Now, Sir, if you have a mind to fee 
your Benefaftor, the Marquis de Slam- 
" vilky at that Window you may fadsfy 
your Curiofity, for he is coming this 
way. I immediately placed myfelf in 
fuch a Pofition, that it was impoffible 

" for 



5 



Chap. 9- ^ David Simple. 143 

for you to pafs by without feeing me : 
" But how. Ladies, fhall I defcribe my 
Raptures, when I faw the Marquis de 
" Stainville ftart at the firil Sight of me j 
" fly in a moment back to the Door, 
and run into my Arms, with all the 
" Joy which attends the unexpffted 
Meeting of a long abfent Friend ! 
This fudden Tranfport, with the 
" Shame 1 felt for having ever fufpefled 
his Affe6lion, joined to the great 
Weaknefs of my Body, quite over- 
came me, and it was fome time before 
my Words could find an Utterance : 
but as foon as I was able to fpeak, I 
a^ked him ten thoufand Qucllions at 
once, talked confufedly of a Letter ; 
in fhort, we could not prefently un- 
" derftand one another : But at laft I 
found out, that all I had endured was 
t* owing to accidentally directing my 
" Letter to the Marquis at Paris^ when 
he was at his Father's Villa, which oc- 
cafioned its being loft ; nor did I ever 
receive that my Friend wrote to me at 
the Academy, having left that Place, 
as I at firft told you, the Day after we 
" were feparated. 



Here 



144 Adventures Book III. 



Here my Brother interrupted the 
Chevalicr Dumont^ and faid, there had 
nothing more happened worth mention- 
ing, till they met us in the Garden ; but 
we were fo pleafed with this happy Meet- 
ing of the two Friends, that we begged 
to know every thing that had paffed be- 
tween them ; and, on our Requeft, the 
Chevalier proceeded. 

" It is the Marquis's Generofity, La- 
dies, which makes him willing that I 
fliould flop here, as what remains is 
" a Proof that I owe him the greateft 
" Obligation imaginable. In our Walk 
home, altho', as he faw me weak, he 
would not inquire into more Particu- 
lars, than he thought neceffary to find 
" out in what manner he could beft ferve 
me ; yet his Impatience, to prove by 
^' all ways how much he was my Friend, 
led him to afk me by what means I 
could have been brought into fuch a 
Condition; and I in broken Sentences 
explained myfelf fo far to him, that, 
" with his Penetration, he found out, 
" that to fend an immediate Relief to my 
Mother was the only thing capable 

" of 



Chap. 9. of David Simple. 145 
of giving me Eafe, This he has al- 
ready done/* 

The Marquis would by no means ad- 
mit him to go any farther ; but faid, I 
beg, my dear Dumont^ you will talk no 
more of fuch Trifles, from this time for- 
ward, the only Favour I beg of you, is 
to make my Houfe your own, nor fhall 
you accept of that pijiful thing the Duke 
4e — defigned for you. 

Th e Chevalier's Heart was too full to 
make any Anfwer^ and my Brother art- 
fully turned theConverfation another way. 
Politenefs and Good-humour reigned 
throughout this our little Company, and 
the agreeable and lively manner in which 
we fpent our Time, joined to his being 
convinced of the Sincerity of his Friend, 
had fuch an immediate EfFed: on the 
tender-hearted Dumont^ that it is almoft 
incredible how foon he was reftored to 
perfeft Health. This was by much the 
-happieft Part of my Life, and on thislir- 
I tie Period of Time, I wifli I could for 
I ever fix my Thoughts : but our Tran- 
quility was foondifturbed, by an Accident 
which I muft paufe, and take breath 
i a while, before I relate. 
! yoL.II, G In 



146 TheADYENTUKESy Book III. 

I N the mean time, David and Valen- 
tine both expreffed their great Admiration 
of the Marquis de Stainville and the Che- 
vaUer Dumo7if% fincere and faithful Friend- 
Ihip ; and by their Looks and Geftures 
plainly declared the inward Exul tings of 
their Minds, at the Thought that they 
had met with the fame Happinefs in each 
other. But Ifabelle^s laft Words had raifed 
the Curiofity of the whole Company to 
fuch a degree, that fhe was refolved fhe 
would keep them no longer in fufpenfe 
than was neceffary to enable her to grati- 
fy them ; and then proceeded, as will be 
feen in the next Chapter. 




T H £ 



THE 

ADVENTURES 

O F 

DAVID SIMPLE. 



BOOK IV. 



C H A P. L 

A Continuation of the Hijiory of 

ISABELLE* 

MY Brother's great Fondnefs for 
Borimene made him, and con- 
fequently the whole Family, un- 
happy at every the leaft Indifpofition of 
hers. She had hitherto been in the main 
very healthy ; but now flie fell into aDif- 
temper, with which, of all others, it 
is moft terrible to fee a Friend affiidted. 
I know not by what Name to call it ; but 
it was fuch aDejedlion on her Spirits, that 
it made her grow perfectly childilli. She 
G 2 could 



148 T/j^ Adventures Book IV. 
could not fpeak without fliedding Tears ; 
nor fit a Moment without Sighing, as 
if fome terrible Misfortune had befallen 
her. You may imagine the Condition 
my poor Brother was in, at feeing her 
thus fuddenly changed ; for from being 
of the moft chearful Difpofition that 
could be, flie was become perfectly me- 
V lancholy. He fent for the moft cele- 
brated Phyficians in France ; and flie, to 
comply with his Requeft, took whatever 
they ordered : But all Medicines proved 
vain, and rather increafed, than abated her 
Diftemper. 

We all three endeavoured totheutmoft 
of our power to divert and amufe her ; but 
fometimes flie infifted fo ftrongly on being 
left alone, that as we found the contra- 
difting her made her worfe, we were 
obliged to comply with her Defire. 

My Brother was fo anxious about his 
Wife, that when flie would not fuffer 
him to be with her j as he hated to bur- 
den his Friends with his Afflidions, he 
ufed in a manner to efcape from us, that 
he might be at liberty to indulge his own 
uneafy Thoughts, without having any 
Witnefies of them. By this means the 

Che- 

J 



chap. I. ^David Simple. 149 
Chevalier Dumont had often an Opportu- 
nity of entertaining me apart. 

He at firft treated me with an eafy 
agreeable Air of Gallantry and Addrefs ; 
which, as it feemed to tend to no Con- 
fequence that could give me a ferious 
Thought, gave me great PJeafure. But 
this did not laft long ; for his Behaviour 
was foon turned into that awful Refpeft, 
which feemed to arife from both Efteem 
and Fear. Whenever we were together 
alone^ his Thoughts appeared fo fixed^ 
that as he was fearful of faying too much, 
he remained in fiience ; and when he ap- 
proached me, it was with fuch a Confufion 
in his Looks, as plainly indicated the great 
Diforder of his Mind. I have obferved 
him when he has been coming towards 
me, faddcnly turn back, and haften away, 
as if he was refolved to fiiun me in fpite 
of any Inclination he might have to con- 
verfe with me : in fhort, in his Eyes, in 
his whole Condudt, I plainly read his Love, 
and his great Generofity in being thus 
fearful of difclofing it. For he thought in 
his Circumftances to indulge a Paffion for 
me, and endeavour to make me fenlible 
of it, would be but an ill Return to his 
t>iend for all his Goodnefs. But this 
Q 3 Gratitude 



150 Adventures Book IV. 
Gratitude and Honour, with which his 
whole Soul was filled, efFedted that for 
him, which they forbid him to attempt , 
for I caught the Infeftion, and added In- 
clination to the great Efteem his Chara5ler 
alone had infpired me with, before I knew 
thim : but the great Care we took on both 
fides to conceal our Love, made it only 
the more vifible to every judicious Eye. 
«Now Dorimene faid, flie found herfelf 
fomething better \ and inftead of wifhing 
to be alone, fhe feemed always incHnedto 
have us with her. The Marquis de Stain- 
ville^s Joy was inexpreffible at her lead 
Appearance of Chearfulnefs. and for the 
prefent he could think of nothing elfe. 

Whilst we were in this Situation, 
young Vieuville^ Dorimene* % Brother, hav- 
ing heard of her ill State of Health, came 
to pay her a Vifit : he was as handfome 
for a Man, as his Sifter was for a Woman, 
had a remarkable good Underftanding, 
and a lively Wit \ all which rendered him 
perfedly agreeable, and I think it would 
have been very difficult for any Woman 
difengaged in her Alfedlions to have re- 
fifted his Love. Dorimene was fo pleafed 
with her Brother's Company, that her 
Diftemper abated every day ; and her 

fond 



Chap. I. ^ David Simple. 15^1 

■fond Hufband, feeing how much he con- 
tributed to her Amufement, prevailed 
with him to ftay there fome time. Vieu- 
ville^ although he loved his Sifter very 
well, and would wilhngly have done any 
thing in his power to have fcrved her ; 
yet, in this Cafe, had another ftrong Rea- 
fon to induce him to yield to the Marquis's 
Requeft : for, from the firft Day of his 
Arrival, the Effeft I had on him was very 
apparent ; he was feized with as fudden 
and violent a PalTion for me, as the Mar- 
quis had been for his Sifter. This was 
an unexpefted Blow ; poor Tyumont fiw 
it, and yet luch was the Force of his un- 
conquerable Virtue, that even the Thoughts 
of fuch a Rival could not provoke him to 
be guilty of fo great a Breach of Friend- 
fliip, as the endeavouring to gain my Af- 
feftion^ and prevent my being better mar- 
ried. I was fo miferable to think what 
he would feel, if I took any notice of 
Vieuville^ that I could hardly prevail with 
myfelf to be commonly civil to him, but 
fhunned him with the greateft AlTiduity 
in my power. 

Although my Brother did not at firft 
feem at all difpleafcd at feeing me refo- 
lutely bent not to hearken to Vieuville^ 
.i G 4 and 



152 T^he Adventures Book IV. 
and often dropt Words, how little For- 
tune fhould be valued in any tender En- 
gagements infonmch, that I fomedmes 
fancied he faw and approved Dumont^s 
Love : yet I was not left at liberty to a6t 
as I pleafed in this Cafe ; for Borimene 
faid, her Brother's Complaints at my 
avoiding him, pierced her Heart fa 
deeply, that unlefs I could contrive fome 
Method of making him eafy, it would oc- 
cafion her relapfmg into all her former 
Illnefs : for that while fhe faw Vieuville la 
miferable, it was impoflible for her ever 
to recover. She took all Opportunities 
of leaving us together^ but notwithftand- 
ing his Agreeablenefs, it was PerfecudOa 
to me to hear him talk of Love ; nor 
could I think of any thing, but what the 
Chevalier muft necelfarily fufFer whenevei: 
he knew we were together. I often con- 
demned myfelf for not having before con- 
feffed my Love for Dumont to my Bro- 
ther, and afked his Confent to have been 
for ever joined to his Friend. I had no 
Rcafon to fufpedl he would not have 
granted it ; for I had had Experience enough 
of him, to know he was not of a Temper 
to have made us both unhappy for any 
Grarification of his own Vanity : but I 
could never bring myfelf to it, unlefs 



Chap. I. of David Simple. 
Bumont had made fome open Declara- 
tion of his Love. I knew it was now in 
vain ; for the Marquis de Stainville was 
fo exceflively fond of his Wife, that to 
have given me to another in open Defiance 
of her Brother, while /he perfifted in fay- 
ing it would make her miferable, was 
utterly impoflible for him ever to con- 
fent to. 

D U MONT's. great Modefty, and 
bad Opinion of himfelf, Winded him (o 
far, that he did not even fee how much 
I preferred him in my Choice to Vieu* 
ville. He fometimes indeed fancied I faw 
his Love, and pitied him \ but as it is 
ufual for moft Men to have a good Opi- 
nion of the Woman they like, he only 
imputed it to the general Compaffion of. 
my Temper. In fliort, he could not bear 
to be a Witnefs of my confenting to be^ 
another's and yet when he looked at my 
Lover, or heard his Converfation, he did 
not doubt but that muftbe the Cafe : He 
therefore refolved to quit the Place where 
he foon expedled to fee his Mifery com- 
pleated. 

He made an Excule to the Marquis, 
4«hat he had a Defire to vifit his Mother, 
G 5 and 



154 Adventures BooklV. 
and with his Confent (for he never pre- 
tended a Right to contradict his Friends, 
becaufe they were obliged to him) fct out 
in three Days. I fhall never forget the 
Look he gave me when w^e parted ; Good- 
nature, Tendernefs, and yet a Fear of 
Difpleafing, were all fo mixed 5 that had 
I not feen it, I fhould have thought it 
impoffible for any Perfon, in one Mo- 
ment, to have expreffed fuch various 
Thoughts. 

When he was gone, I could not com- 
mand myfelf enough to fit in Company, 
bfcit got away by myfelf into a folitary 
Walk," where I might be at hberty to 
give a Vent to my Sorrows, and refledt 
in what manner I fhould aft, to extricate 
myfelf out of thefe Difficukies. I refolved, 
let what woukl be the Confequence, ab- 
folutcly to refufe Vieiroille ; but then I 
feared, if he jhould perfift in his Love^ 
what my Brother would fufFer in his 
Wife's continual Importunities. At laft 
it came into my head to try if he was ge- 
nerous enough to. conquer his own Paf- 
lion, rather than be the Caufe of my 
being unhappy. 



Chap. I- ^ David Simple. 155 



I ACCORDINGLY took the firft Oppor- 
tunity that offered of fpeaking to Vieuville 
alone, and told him, as he had often pro- 
feiTed a great Love for me, it was now in 
his power to prove whether thofe Profef- 
fions were real, or only tlie Fhghts of 
Youth, and the Eife£b of a warm Imagi- 
nation ; for that my Happinefs or Mifery 
depended on his Conduft. He began to 
fwear, That he would fly to obey m.y 
Commands, and fliould think it tha 
greateit Pleafure he was capable of en- 
joying, to be honoured with them." \ 
defired him to hear me out, and told him,, 
that for Reafons I could not then inform 
him, it was impoffible for me ever to 
marry him, without making myfclf the 
moft wretched of all Mortals and akho^ 
it was indeed in my own power to refufe 
him, yet in Confideration of his being 
D^nVi^/^d-'s Brother, and that the feeing, 
him uneafy made her fo,, I: intreated it 
as the greateft Favour of him, imme- 
diately to leave me, and return to his 
Father's, which would be the only Means 
of preventing the whole Family from be- 
ing miferabk\ 



^ 156 TZ/^ Adventures BooklV. 

He looked fome time ftedfaftly on me, 
and then afked, If I thought his Love 
had no ftronger a Foundation than 
to give me up fo eafily." As foon as 
he had fpoke thefe few Words, he left 
me without waiting for a Reply, with an 
Indignation in his Countenance, which 
plainly fhewed I had not fucceeded in my 
Scheme ; and indeed the Event proved 
how much I was miftaken, when 1 had 
flattered myfelf with the vain Hope of 
meeting with any Greatnefs of Mind from 
hiai. 

As he faw the only thing which in the 
leaft ftaggered my Refolution was, the 
Fear of making his Sifter uneafy, he went 
dirc6liy to her, and inficad of acting as I 
had defired him, he irxreafed his Com- 
plaints, and fwore, Fie could never 
have the leaft Enjoyment in Life, un- 
lefs fhe could prevail on mt to be Jefs 
cruel to him." In fhort, I was his 
prefent Paflion, and he was vciy carelefs 
what the Confequcnce of it was to me^ 
provided he could gratify himfclf. Had 
1 before had any Inclination for him, this 
would entirely have conquered it ; for 
the Contraft was fo great between his 

Beha- 



Chap. I. of David Simple. 15-7 

Behaviour, and that of the generous Du* 
mont^ who vifibly facrificed his own Peace 
to his Love for me, and his Friendfhip 
for my Brother, that my Love for the 
latter increafed equally with my Detefta- 
tion of the former^ 

As I was fitting in my Chamber, the 
next Morning, mufing and reflecting on 
my own hard Fate \ that when I feemed 
fo near my Happinefs, fuch an Accident 
as this fhould intervene to throw down all 
my Hopes, and make me more wretched 
than ever ; my Brother fuddenly entered 
the Room, and feeming eager to fpeak 
to me, began by faying, Oh Ifabelle — 

Vieuville I had not Patience to 

let him go on, but interrupted him, cry- 
ing out, that I would Hicrifice my Life at 
any time for his Service ; but if he was 
Gome to intercede with me to fpcnd my 
whole time with a Man whom I muft al- 
ways defpife, I could not confent to it. 
He replied, that this Accident had thrown 
him into a Dilemma, in which he knew 
not how to aft ; that he was going to fay, 
when I interrupted him, that Vieuville 
had deftroyed all the fancied Scenes of 
Pleafure he once imagined he fhould en- 
joy, in. the Love and Unity of his little 

Family, 



158 The Adventures Book IV. 
P'amily, for he faw the Avcrfion I had to 
this Lover ; and yet his Dorimene (whofe 
every Tear pierced his Soul) feemed fo 
refolute to abandon herfelf to Defpair, if 
her Brother was made unhappy, that ei- 
ther way it was impoffible for him to 
avoid being miferable. 

I FANCIED by the Emphafis he laid 
on fome of his Words, that he knew the 
whole Truth, and was therefore refolved 
to take this Opportunity of difclofmg my 
Mind to him and yet a kind of Shame 
with-hckl my Tongue ; and it was with 
difficulty, and in broken Accents, I at 
laft pronounced the Word Dumont, He 
flopped me fliorr, and told me there was 
no occafion for faying any more, for that 
from the very firft, he with pleafure faw 
our growing Love : That he had always 
wifhed to fee me married to the only Man 
he really efteemed : That indeed, juft be- 
fore the Arrival of Vieuville^ his Wife's UK 
nefs had employed moft of his Thoughts ; 
befides, he artfully intended to let his 
Friend's Paffion come to the height, that 
he might increafe his Happinefs, by gra- 
tifying him when he leaft expefted it. You 
know, Ifabelle^ continued he, your For- 
tune of itfelf is enough to make the Man 

you 



Cliap. I. of David Simple. 159 
you love happy ; but I always intended a 
confiderable Addition, to- it \ and as Du-* 
mont is your Choice, (hould be defirous 
that we might all continue one Family. 
This Misfortune of Vieuville*% being your 
Lover, has difconcerted all my Schemes. 
1 was quite overwhelmed with my Bro- 
ther's Goodnefs, and almoft ready to fa- 
orifice myfelf to his Wife's Humour, ra- 
ther than he fhould bear a Moment's Pain^ 
Hov/ever, we fcparated for that time, and 
faid we would confider and talk farther of 
k another Day. 

But Accident foon delivered us out 
of all our Perplexities, for fuch fort of 
Love as Vieuville^s is feldom fo fixed, but 
every new Obje6l is capable of changing 
it ; and I verily believe he had lately per- 
fifted more, becaufe his Pride was piqued 
at being refufed, than from any Continu- 
ance of his Inclination towards me. I fhall 
not dwell long on this Circumftance \ but 
only tell you, there came a young Lady 
one day to dine with Dorimene^ who was 
really one of the greateft Beauties I exox 
faw, Vieuvilh was in a moment flruck 
with her Charms, and fhe prefently made 
a Conqueft of his Heart : fhe lived very 
near us, and foon became as enamoured of 

her 



i6o Hoe Adventures Book IV. 

her new Lover, as he could poflibly be of 
her. She had a great Fortune, which 
was at her own difpoial, and they only 
defer'd the Celebration of their Nuptials, 
till he had an Anfwer to a Letter he wrote 
his Father: He foon carried his Wife home, 
and I am certain, he could not have more 
Joy in the Poffeffion of one of the fined 
Women ever feen, than I had in being 
rid of his troublefome Importunities. 

Now all my Hopes began to revive 
again, and there feemed to be no Bar to 
my Happinefs \ I pleafed myfelf with the 
Thoughts of the Raptures Dumont would 
be infpired with, when he found his dear 
Stainville approved his Love. It was 
not long before my Brother fliewed me 
a Letter from the Chevalier,, which I 
found was written in Anfwer to one from 
him juft after Vieuville^^ Marriage and 
Departure, which he had acquainted him 
with, only as a Piece of News. He ex- 
prefled himfelf with great thankfulnefs 
for his preffing Invitation to return, and 
concluded with faying, he Ihould be with 
iiim the beginning of the next Week. 

When I gave my Brother back his 
Xetter, Words would have been unne- 

ceifary. 



chap. I. David Simple. i6r 

ceflary, for my Looks fufficiently (hewed 
how much I thought myfelf obhged ta 
hmi for thus taking care of my Happinefs 
we never kept any thing a Secret from 
Dorlmene^ and the Marquis talked before 
her of his Intention concerning me and 
Dumont^ juft as if we had been alone. 
But I obferved flie changed Colour, and 
look at me with an Air quite different 
from what fhe ufed to have, (for we had 
always Jived together in great Friendfhip) 
Ihe at laft faid,. " She fuppofed this was. 
the reafon her Brother had been treated 
with fuch Contempt/* I thought this 
might arife from her Pride, becaufe I had 
refufed Vtemillc^ and fiid ali I could 
mollify, rather than exafperate her. 

I WAS now perfeftlyeafyin my Mind I 
had no manner of Doubt, but that my Bro^ 
ther's Goodnefs would accomplifh all my 
Wiflies, without my appearing in the Af- 
fair. At the appointed d ay Bumont arrived ^ 
the Mourning was out for his Father, he 
was dreffed very gay, and his Perfon ap- 
peared with all the Advantages in which 
Nature had adorned him for altho' he 
eould not be faid to be a regular Beauty,^ 
yet the mixture of Softnefs and Manli- 
m% which were difplayed in his Coune, 

tenauQ 



j62 T/^^ Adventures Book IV 
tenance, joined to his great Genteelnefs, 
juftly made him the Objeft of Admira- 
tion. 

Whe N he difmounted, my Brodier re- 
ceived him at the Gate, and Dorimene 
and I waited for him in the Parlour : he 
made his CompRments to her wiih great 
Refpeft 5 but when he came to fpeak to 
me, we were both in fuch Confufion, we 
coi»!d not utter cur Words. But our 
common Friend, the Marquis, on feeing 
the fame Paffion, and the fame Refolu- 
tion to conceal it, continue in the Che- 
valier^ would not leave us long in this 
anxious Situation \ but two Days after 
DumGnf% Arrival, took him into a Room 
by himfelf, and told him, He was no 
Stranger to his Love for his Sifter." 
On which the other, without giving him 
leave to proceed, replied, " He could not 
*^ imagine by what Accident he had dif- 
" covered it ; for he would defy any one 
to fay he had ever dropped the leaft 
" Complaint, notwithftanding all the Mi- 
fery he had fufxered \ nor could even 
the daily, nay hourly Sight of a Per- 
fon he then thought his fuccefsful Ri- 
val^ extort from him a Confeflion, 
" which his Gratitude to fuch a Friend 

" forbad 



Chap. I, Simple. 163 

forbad him ever to make." My Bro- 
ther begged him to hear him out, and 
then faid, My dear Dumonl^ I am fo 
far from accufing you, that had not 
*^ your Honour been fixed in my Opi- 
nion as ftedfaftiy as poffible before, 
your Behaviour on this occafion would 
have been the moft convincing Proof 
imaginable, that altho' our Friendfliip 
commenced in our Youth, yet nodiing 
can ever fliake or remove it. And, 
by my own Experience, I am fo cer- 
" tain there cannot be any Enjoyment 
equal to that of living with a Pcrfon 
" one loves 5 that I blefs my good For- 
tune, which has put it in my power to 
beftow that Happinefs on my Sifter, 
*^ and on my Friend. In ftiort, Ifabelle 
fhall be your's, and I fhall have the 
inexpreffible Pleafure of calling you 
Brother.'-' 

D UMONTiiood for fome time like 
a Statue, no Words could exprefe his 
Thoughts, nor would the Emotions of 
bis Mind give him leave to fpeak. The 
firft Signs he fh^v/ed of any remaining 
Lite was, when Love, Gratitude, and 
Joy worked too ftrongly in his Soul to 
be contained V and forced their way in 

gufliing 



164 Adventures BooklV^ 

gufhing Tears. He at laft ran and em- 
braced the Marquis, crying out, You 
muft imagine my Thanks, for 1 can- 
^* not utter them/* 

After a little more Converfation be- 
tween the two Friends, my Brother called 
me down ^ and as foon as I entered the 
Room, taking me by the Hand, he led 
me to the Chevalier, faying, " Here, 
*^ my Friend, in Ifahelle I make you a 
Prefent which you only are worthy of, 
and to your Merit I am obliged for 
" the great Plcafure I enjoy, in thinking 
I have beftowed her, where it is im.- 
poflible I Ihould ever have any reafon 
to repent my Choice/* 

It was no Force upon me to give my 
Hand to Dumont ^ and I did it in focK a 
manner, that he eafily perceived my 
Brother had not difpoi'ed of me againft 
my Inclinations. I fhall not pretend to 
defcribe the Chevalier's Tranfports, nor 
irepeat all he faid on this Qccafion ; it is 
fufficient to fay, that his whole Beha- 
viour, and every Word he fpoke, was 
yet a ftronger Propf of both his Gratitude 
^nd 1^0 ve,. 



Chap. I. of David Simple, 165 



We now both looked on ourfelves as 
in the Poffeffion of our utmoft Wifhes ; 
all Obftacles to our Happinefs feemed to 
be removed, and the Profpeft of pafling 
the reft of my Life with fuch a Compa- 
nion, and fuch a Friend as the Chevalier 
Dmnont^ indulged me in all the pleafing 
Ideas imaginable. Dorimene heard from 
her Hufband what he had done, feemed 
to have forgot my Ufage of her Brother, 
and congratulated us with more than 
ufual Softnefs on the occafion. 

The Marquis was impatient to con> 
pleat his Friend's Happinefs, and appoint- 
cd a Day for our Marriage. But, in the 
mean time, Dorimenewas taken fo violently 
ill of a Fever, that her Life was defpair- 
€d of. My Brother's Diftradlion on this 
account, baniflied from our Minds all 
other Thoughts, but how to comfort 
him: Dumont had too much Delicacy, 
and too fmcere a regard for his Friend, 
to think it a proper time to talk of Love, 
while he was in fuch Afflidion. 

This Grief, however, was foon didi- 
pated, and Joy fucceeded by the Recove- 
ry of Dorimene. The Day was again ap- 
pointed 



r66 The x'\d v e n t u r e s Book I V . 
pointed for the Celebration of our Niip« 
rials, when, on a fudden, the whole Face 
of Affairs v/as changed, all Dumont^s Joy 
and Chearfulnefs was vaniflbed, a fixed 
Melancholy feemed to overfpread liis 
Countenance ; and now, inftead of em- 
bracing every Opportunity to converfe 
wath me, he fhunned me with great Af- 
fiduity ; and if I unavoidably fell in his 
way, he fixed his Eyes on mine with 
fuch Horror, as perfeftly frightened me. 
He himfelf, on fome trifling Excufe, put 
oflf our Wedding. Dorimene was often 
in Tears, and feemed. relapfing into her 
former Diftemper, This, indeed, we im- 
puted to the Weaknefs her Fever had left' 
upon her ; but my Brother too foon caught 
the Infedlion, and his Mind feemed to' 
labour with fome Grief, v/hich he could 
neither perfeftly ftifle, and yet w^as un- 
willing to reveal. I obferved he v/ent 
abroad more than ufual, and I was often 
left in the Houfe with only Servants. 

- One - Evening when I came into my 
Chamber, 1 found a Letter on my Table 
in an unknown Hand but how was I 
furprized to read thefe Words ! " What- 
ever you do, Ifahelle^ zvdid Dumo^t \ 
for the marrying him will certainly 



Chap. I. of David Simple. 167 
prove fatal to you both.'' Guefs, La- 
dies, what I muft feel to have all my 
Happinefs thus fuddenly deftroyed, and, 
in its place, to fee this dreadful Scene of 
Confufion. Conjeftures would have been^ 
endlefs, I could not bring myfelf to fuf- 
pe6t the Chevalier's Honour ; befides, 
v/hat I faw him daily fuffer, convinced 
me there was fomething very extraordi- 
nary at the bottom, which it was impof- 
fible for me to fachom. But now, in or- 
der to make you underftand the remain- 
ing Part of my Story, I mull go back, 
and let you into the Caufe of this terrible 
Alteration in our Family, which I after- 
wards learned from the Mouth of the 
Perfon who was the occafion of it. But 
this I lliall defer till to-morrow : For al- 
tho' my Refolution has hitherto kept up 
my Spirits, fo as not to interrupt the Nar- 
ration, and trouble you with what I feel, 
yet am I often fo racked with the Remem- 
brance of paft Scenes, that I really grow 
faint, and am able to proceed no farther 
at prefent. Ifahelle retired for that Even- 
ing, with a Promife of coming to them 
again the next Morning. 

She left the whole Company very 
anxious to know the Event of all the 

Diforder 

3 



i68 Adventures Bbok IV. 

Diforder fhe had defcribed in her Family : 
But as foon as ftie had breakfafted the next 
Day, flie gratified their Curiofity, by 
proceeding as follows : 




CHAR 



Chap. 2. Simple. 169 



CHAP. IL 

The Contifmatio?t of the Hiftory of 
Ifabelle. 

I Informed you at firft, that Dorimene\ 
having no other Engagement, the 
Advantage of the Match, and her Father's 
Commands, were the Reafons which in- 
duced her to give her Hand to the Mar- 
quis de Stainville ; his exceflive Fondnefs 
for her, and making it his whole Study- 
to promote her Happinefs, worked fo 
ftrongly on her Mind, that in return ftic 
did every thing in her power to oblige 
him, and he flattered hijmfelf, that all her 
Affeftions were centered in him ; nor in- 
deed did ilic ever feem fo much inclined 
to be pleafed with the Admiration of other 
Men, as the Cuftom of France would 
even allow her without Cenfure. But 
when the Chevalier Dumont firft told us 
his Story, ihe was affefted with it to an 
incredible degree ; whole Days apd Nights 
palled, and fhe could fix her Thoughts 
on no other Subjed. 

Vol. II. H The 



170 Tbe Adventures Book IV. 

The Tendernefs he exprefled for his 
Mother, his juftifying his Father, not- 
withftanding all he fufFered by his Con- 
du6l, with his fincere Friendfhip for the 
Marquis her Hufband, worked fo ftrong- 
ly on her Imagination, that flie thought 
giving way to the higheft Efteem for him 
would be the greateft Proof imaginable of 
her Virtue : but it was not long before 
Ihe was undeceived, for Ihe found her In- 
clination for the Chevalier was built rather 
on what we call Tafte, (becaufe we want 
a Word to exprefs it by) than any Ap- 
probation of his Condudt. The great 
Agitations of her Mind, between her En- 
deavours to conquer her Paflion, and the 
continual Fright fhe was in, left by any 
Accident ftie fhould difcover it, threw her 
into that lingering Illnefs which I have 
before mentioned. 

The Good- nature of the Chevalier 
Dumont^ with his Friendfliip for the Mar- 
quis de Stainville^ led him (o ufe his ut- 
moft Endeavours to amufe and divert her ; 
befides, there is always a higher Refpeft 
paid by every Man to fuch Beauty as Do- 
rimene^s^ than what other Women meet 
with. This, with the Melancholy which 

then 



Chap. 2. David Simple. 171 
then pofTefled hirh on my account, fome- 
times inclined her to flatter herfelf that 
their PafTion was reciprocal ; but then, in 
a moment, the utmoft Horror fucceeded, 
and fhe refolved rather to die than facri- 
fice her Virtue, or be guilty of the leaft 
Treachery to fuch a Hujband, This was 
the Reafon fhe fo often intreated to be 
alone ; for every frefti View of Dumont 
ferved only to increafe her Agony, and at 
that time (he heartily wifhed to fly the 
Sight of him for ever. 

All my Brother's afllduous Cares to 
pleafe her, only aggravated her Sorrows, 
as they continually loaded her with Re- 
proaches, for not returning fuch uncom- 
mon, fuch tender Love. However, while 
fhe remained often alone, and her Refo- 
lution enabled her to deny herfelf the Plea- 
fure of feeing the Chevalier, as much as 
was poflible without being rude, fhe fan- 
cied whatever flie fufFered, Ihe ftiould com- 
mand herfelf enough not to tranfgrefs the 
Bounds of Decency, or the Laws of Virtue. 

But one Evening, when the Marquis 
prevailed on her by great Entreaties to 
liifFer us all to flay with her, hoping by 
that means to diffipate her Melancholy, 
H 2 and 



172 The Adventured Book IV. 
and make her more chearful ; her watch- 
ful Eyes (altho' we had never any other- 
wife than by our Looks difclofed it to 
each other) found out the Secret of our 
Love. This overfet all her Refolutions, 
and from that moment her Torment was 
fo great, whenever fhe thought v/e had 
an Opportunity of being alone, that fhe 
refolved to pretend an Amendment in her 
Health, and put on a Chearfulnefs, (which 
was far from her Heart) in order to make 
it probable, that Company was now agree- 
able to her, and fo to keep us always in 
her Apartment. 

But her Pafiions were too violent to be 
artful, and fhe could not have continued 
this long, had not her Brother's Arrival 
given a new Turn to all our Affairs. 

The fuddennefs of her Recovery, which 
the Marquis thought was owing to Fieu- 
ville^s lively Conveffation, was really the 
refult of her feeing the Palfion I hadinfpired 
him with flie was quite enlivened with the 
Imagination that this new Lover would 
make me forget Dumont ; and thought 
her Virtue could Hand any Teft;, but that 
of feeing him another's. This was the rea- 
fon flie appeared fo eager for me to marry 

Vuuvilk \ 

4 



Chap. 2. of David Simple. 173 

Fieuville \ and indeed flie fpoke Truths 
when fhe fo often declared, that her own 
Happinefs depended on my returning her 
Brother's Love. Dumonfs leaving us at 
that time ft ill contributed to the fully per- 
fuading her that it would be impoffible 
for me to refift the Charms of the young 
and beautiful Vieuviile : My obftinately 
refufing him was fuch a Difappointment 
to her Hopes, that at firft (he could hardly 
forbear giving vent to her Paffions, and 
quarrelling with me on that account but 
after he was irretrievably married, and 
fhe knew it was impoflible ever to bring 
about that Scheme, Dumonth Abfence, 
and her own returning Health, enabled her 
ferioufly to fet about the conquering her 
Pafllon ; which in a little time fhe thought 
fhe had fo effeftually got the better of, 
that fhe fancied fhe could even converfc 
with the Chevalier with great Indifference. 
My Brother's Extacies on her Recovery 
were not to be expreffed, and he now 
thought of nothing but compleating his 
own Happinefs, by contributing to that 
of his Friend^s, and letting him experience 
the Pleafures which arife from delicate and 
fuccefsful Love. 



H 3 V^^HEN 



174 Adventures Book IV. 

Wh e n firft Dorimene heard of this Dc- 
fign fhe was a little ruffled, and could not 
forbear making the Anfwer I have already 
related to you ; namely, that (he fuppofed 
this was the reafon her Brother was 
treated with fuch Contempt. But how- 
ever, fhe carried her Refolution fo far, 
that at laft fhe thought fhe could bear 
to fee us married with tolerable Patience : \ 
and, when every thing was concluded on, 
the Fear, left flie fliould reveal her real 
Thoughts, made her force herfelf to con- 
gratulate us with more Good-humour 
than I had feen her fliew from the time I 
had refuled Vieuville. But in that very 
Jnftant Dumont^s Look, and the R eturn 
he made to her obliging Compliment, on 
the Subjeft his Soul moft delighted in the 
Thoughts of, awakened all her former 
Paflion ; and dreadful Experience taught 
her, that to his Abfence alone fhe owed 
all her boafted Philofophy. 

That very Evening fhe took to her 
Bed, and the violent Agitations of her 
Mind threw h^r into that Fever, which 
gave us all fo much Afflidion, and had 
like to have coft her her Life but fhe 
recovered of that Diftemper of her Body, 
only to feel that much more terrible one 
of her Mind, She began to think fhe 



Chap. 2. of David Simple. 17 ^ 

had lacrificed enough to Virtue, in what 
fhe had aheady fuffered ; and when the 
Idea of Dumonf^ being about to be giv^n 
to another, forced itfelf on her Fancy, 
Rage and Madnefs fucceeded, and all 
the moft defperate Adtions appeared as 
Trifles to her, in comparifon of feeing 
that fatal Day. Sometimes fhe refolved 
to tell him of her Love ; but then the 
Senfe of Shame worked fo ftrongly on 
her, that flie abandoned that Thought, 
and fancied fhe could fuffer the utmoft 
Mifery, rather than fubmit to fo in- 
famous an Aftion. The Remembrance 
of the Marquis de Stainvilles unparal- 
leled Love for her, and the Senfe of 
her Duty to him, for a moment en- 
abled her to form Refolutions of pre- 
ferring Death, or, what is yet worfe, 
a Life of Torment to the wronging her 
Hufband. 

But then immediately Z)^»/<?;//'s Image 
prefented itfelf to her Imagination, foften'd 
her a httle into a Senfe of Pleafure, and 
bartiihed every other Thought from her 
Mind ; but this lafled not long, before 
the Idea that he muft be another's, fpite- 
fully intruded itfelf on her Memory. 
Horror and Confufion took place of the 
H 4 pleafmg 



iy6 Adventures Book IV. 
pleafing Scenes with which fhe had juft 
before been indulging her Fancy : And 
then, inftead of thinking on Arguments 
to calm her Paflion, flie turned all her 
Endeavours to find out what would beft 
exxufe it ; and pleaded to herfelf, that fhe 
might have been married when firft my 
Brother faw her nay, fhe might have 
happened to have been Wife to his beft 
Friend and that then, perhaps, he would 
have found it as difficult to refift the 
Torrent of his Inclinations, as fhe now did 
to fubdue her's. The thought of being 
his Friend's "Wife quite overcame her, 
and Sighs and Tears were her only Relief 
jrom thefe agonizing Refleftions. 

She endured feveral of thefe Conflicts 
within her own Bofom, without any 
other Confequence attending them, than 
the Pain flie fuffered : But when the Day 
was again fixed for our Marriage, her 
Paflion grew outragious, overleaped all 
Bounds, and Honour, Virtue, Duty, 
were found but fliallow Banks, which 
immediately gave way to the overflowing 
of the mighty Torrent. Something fhe 
was refolved to do, to prevent my marry- 
ing Bumont^ altho' her own, her Huf- 
band's, nay, even the Chevalier's Perdi- 



Chap. 2. of David Simple. 177 
tion Ihould be the ConfequenGe of the 
Attempt. 

One Morning, when the Marquis de 
Stainville was gone out, and I happened 
to be in my own Chamber, fhe faw Bu- 
rn on t from her Window walking towards 
that very Grotto, where fhe had at firft 
beheld him : She ftayed till Ihe thought 
he was feated there, and then followed 
him ; but fuch was the Condition of her 
Mind, that her Limbs had hardly 
Strength to carry her. As foon as fhe 
was come near enough for him to fee her, 
he got up, made her a refpeftful Bow, 
and walked towards her. He began to 
talk to her on fome indifferent Subjeft ^ 
but fhe did not feem to hear what he faid ; 
on the contrary, jflie fuddenly made a full 
Stop, and ftared fo wildly round her, that 
poor Dumont began to be frightened, and 
aflced her, if fhe was ill ? She made him 
no Anfwer, but fixed her Eyes on the 
Ground, as if fhe had, not tht Power to* 
move them like a Criminal, all pale,, 
trembling, and confufed, flie ftood before 
him. It was in vain for her to endeavour 
to give her Thoughts a Vent, for her 
Body was too weak to bear the vioknt 
Combuftion of her Mind, and Ihe fainted 
H 5 away 



178 Adventures Book IV 

away at his Feet. He immediatel 
caught her up in his Arms, and called 
out for Help but the Houfe was fo far 
diftant, that before he could be heard, fhe 
came to herfelf again, and in a weak, 
low Voice begged him to carry her to 
the Grotto ; where, as foon as flae was 
feated, for want of Strength to Ipeak, flie 
burit into Tears. The good-natured Du- 
mont faw her Mind was labouring with 
Ibmething too big for Utterance, and in- 
treated her to tell him if Ihe had any Af- 
fiiftion that he could be fo happy to re- 
move ; for that the Marquis de Stain- 
ville\ Lady might command him to the 
utmoll of his power ; nor fhould he think 
his Life too great a Sacrifice, to ferve the 
Woman, in whom all the Happinefs of 
his Friend was centered. 

DOR IM E NE now had gone fo far, 
fhe w^as refolved, whatever it coft her, to 
lay open all her Grief to the Chevaher ; 
and after a little Paufe replied, Oh ! 
" take care what you fay ; for to remove 
the Torment I now daily endure, and 
eafe me of all thofe Agonies which 
work me to Diftradlion, you muft fa- 
crifice what, perhaps, is dearer to you 
than your Life 5 jou mnft give up 

" Ifabellcy 



Chap. 2. of David Simple. 179 

Ifahelle^ you muft: forget the Marquis 
de Stainmlle was ever your Friend — 
^« And, Oh! how lhall I have Strength to 
^* utter it ? my Intereft in Dumonl muft 
" be on my own account/' When fhe 
had pronounced thefe Words, Shame 
glowed in Blulhes all over her Face, nor 
did fhe dare to look up to fee in what 
manner they were received. 

DUMONT was ftruck with Horror 
and Amazement at what he had heard, he 
could not perfuade himfelf he was awake. 
The Words, " You muft give up Ifa- 
i^elky and forget the Marquis de Slain-- 
w7/<? was ever your Friend/' refounded 
in his Ears, and filled him with fuch 
Aftoniftiment, that he had no Force to 
anfwer them, and they both remained for 
fome time in Silence. At laft the Che- 
valier threw himfelf on his Knees before 
Dorimene^ and faid, " He could not pre- 
tend to be ignorant of the Meaning of 
^' her Words, for they were but too 
" plain ; and he could curfe himfelf for 
being the Caufe (tho* innocently) of her 
fuffering a Moment's Pain : But, con- 
tinued he, I conjure you. Madam, by 
all the Ties of Virtue and of Honour, 
to collect all your Force, make ufe of 
H 6 th.t 



i8o 7he Adventures Book IV. 
that Strength of Reafon Nature has 
given you, glorioufly to conquer this 
unfortunate Paffion which has feized 
you^ and which, if indulged, muft in- 
evitably end in the Deftrudion of us 

** alL To wrong my Friend— I fhildder 
at the very Thought of it ; and to 
forego Ifabelle^ juft when I was on the 
point of polTeffing her for ever, it is 
utterly impoflible. Oh ! Dorimeney 

*^ recall thofe wild Commands, return 
again to your own Virtue, and do not 
think of facrificing all your future 

*' Peace, to Hopes fo guilty, and fa 
extravagant,'" 

She was all Attention while he was 
fpeaking ; but every Argument he ufed^ 
and every Word he fpoke, did but in- 
jflame her the more, for it was the Plea- 
fure fhe received from hearing him talk, 
and the feeing him thus humbly fuppli- 
eating at her Feet, and not what he faid,. 
that made her liften fo attentively to him 
in difclofing her Mind : fhe had got over 
the firft,, and confequently the moft dif- 
ficult Step. She grew every Minute 
more emboldened, and more loft to all 
Senfe of Shame y and Dumonf% unfortu- 
nately mentioning my Name with fuch 

Ten- 



Chap. 2. David Simple. 181 
Tendernefs, and fuch a R^efolution not to 
forfake me, enraged her £o Madnefs, and 
turned her into a perfed Fury. She told 
him, That his Pretence to Virtue and 
Faithfulnefs to his Friend could not' 
impofe on her, for fhe faw the Confide- 
" ration which ftuck deepeft with him, 
" was his L.ove of Ifabelle, But, con- 
tinued fhe, I fwear by all that's facred, 
the Day you marry her fliall be her 
" laft \ for with my own Hands I wnll 
" deftroy her, altho' the Deftrudion of 
Mankind was to be the Confequence of 
" her Death. Don't imagine I fpeak in 
a Paffion what I will not execute, for 
my Refolution that Ifabelle fhall never 
live with you as your Wife, is as llrong, 
and as much fixed, as the Torments I 
now feel, and have felt, ever fince I 
" firft knew you. Had not I feen your 
Afteftion placed on another, you 
had never known my Love ; for till 
that Mifery was added to the reft, I 
ftruggled Vv^ith my Paffion,, and was re- 
folved to conceal it for ever within my 
own Bofom : But now yo-u know it ; 
" and I would advife you to dread the 
Rage of a Woman, whofe Paflions 
have got fo much the better of her, as 
^' to enable her to break through aJl the 

ilrongelt 



i^z The Adventures Book IV. 

ftrongefl: Ties imaginable, and facri- 
^' fice every thing that is moft dear to 
her, to the Impofiibility ftie finds of 
fefifting her Inclinations. Confider 
" with yourfelf, whether or no you can 
bear to be the Caufe of Ifabelle's 
^ Death j for my Refolution is unalte- 
rably fixed, and it is not in the power 
of all Mankind to divert my Purpofe/' 
As foon as fhe had fpoke thefe Words, 
fhe got up, and walked haftily from him. 

But imagine the horrible Situation fhe 
left the Chevalier in. Ten thoufand va- 
rious Thoughts at once poflelTed him, 
Confafion reigned within his Breaft, and 
whichever way he turned himfelf, the 
difmal Profped aJmoft diftrafted him. 
Good God, what was his Condition ! 
with a Heart burfling with Gratitude to- 
wards his Friend, filled widi the foftell 
and faithfuUeft PalTion for the Woman he 
but an Hour before flattered himfelf he 
was juffc upon the point of receiving from 
the Hands of the Man, who made his 
Happineis neceflary to his own, with a 
Mind which ftartled at the leaft thouglit 
of afting againft the ftrifteft Rules of 
Honour. He fuddenly found that the 
Paflion his Friend's Wife was poflefled of 



Chap. 2. ^David Simple. 183 

for him, was too violent to be reftrained, 
and too dangerous to be daUied with t, 
he could not perceive any Method to ex- 
tricate himfelf out of the Dilemma he 
was thus unexpedtedly, unfortunately in- 
volved in. 

The fii ft thing he refolved on, was, 
whatever happened to him, never to dif- 
clofe the Secret of Dorimene's Love ; but 
then to give me up, to abandon all his 
Hopes, and at the fame time in appear- 
ance be ungrateful to my Love, and 
flight the Marquis's proffered and gene- 
rous Kindnefs, was what he could not 
bear : and yet fuch were his anxious Cares 
for my Safety, that he had fixed it in his 
Mind, rather to fuffer all the moft dread- 
ful Torments which human Nature is ca- 
pable of feeling, than run the leaft Ven- 
ture of my Life. Sometimes he flattered 
himfelf with the Thoughts that Time and 
Reafon would turn Dorimene from her 
horrid Purpofe, and enable her to con-p 
quer this unreafonable Paflion, 

This Secret, which I was then a 
Stranger to, was the Caufe of poor Du- 
monl's fudden Alteration, and fixed that 

Me- 



184 The Adventures Book 17. 
Melancholy on him, which I could not 
then account for. 

BORIMENE, now the Chevalier 
was not ignorant of her Love, threw off 
all Reftraint ; fhe contrived all the Me- 
thods poffible of fending the Marquis out 
of the way, and only fought the Means 
of meeting Dumont alone. It was in vain 
for him to feek new Walks and Bye-paths 
i^n the Labyrinths of a Wood juft by our 
Villa^ for her watchful Eyes continually 
found him ; he ftill perfifted in ufing new 
Arguments to prevail with her to return 
her Hufband's faithful Love, and change 
the dreadful Defign her Soul was fraught 
with and fhe on her fide was as obfti- 
nately bent never to give it up, but with 
her Life. 

In the mean time Pandolpb^ who had 
formerly been a Servant to my Fadier, 
and now he was old and paft his La- 
bour, was ftill retained in my Brother's 
Family, perceived thefe Meetings of Dii- 
wont and Dorimene in the Wood, and ob- 
ferved they generally happened when his 
Mafter was gone out. He was at firfk 
very much furprized at it, but was refolved 
to watch them y and fometimes he would 

hide 



Chap-2. ^'David Simple. 185 
hide himfelf near enough to obferve they 
were earneft in Difcourfe ; but old Age 
had taken from him the quick Senfe of 
Hearing, and he could not make much of 
what they faid ; only he confufedly heard 
the w^ords Love — Paffion — the Marquis 
de Staimille — If ah elk — and by what he 
could gather, he fancied he had very con- 
vincing Proofs that there was an Intrigue 
carrying on between them. 

This V)oor Pandolph fooliflily imagined, 
that ofEcioudy to difcover to his M after 
all he had feen, would be at once the moft 
faithful Service he could do him, and the 
moft grateful Return in his power to make 
him for his Kindrvefs in keeping him in 
his Family, now he was unable to take 
any Care of himfelf. He eagerly em- 
braced the firft Opportunity of doing his 
Mafter fuch a piece of Service^ and mi- 
nutely told my Brother all that he had 
feen and heard : and certainly if any Per- 
fon was ever juftly the Objeft of Com- 
panion, it was the Marquis de Stainville 
at that Inftant. His Paflions were natural- 
ly very violent, and altho* from the time 
the giving way to them had like to have 
caufed a fatal Accident between him and 
his Friend, he had taken great pains to 

keep 



i86 The Adventures Book I V'. 
keephimfelf calm, and prevent its being 
in the power of any Appearances to make 
him fudenly give way to Sufpicion : yet 
in this Cafe, the very Name of his be- 
loved Dorimene joined to the Idea of 
Falfliood, raifed fuch a Tumult in his 
Breaft, and filled his Mind with fuch 
Confufion, that all Reafon gave way to 
the prefent Horror which pofleffed his 
Sc ul a Horror greater than Words caa 
defcribc, or Fancy paint. 

H E threw himfelf on a Bed like one 
difi rafted repeated the Names of Z)«w^«/ 
and Dorimene^ a thoufand times then 
ftarted up, and fwore they muft be inno- 
cent, that Pandolpb had belyed them, 
and he would facrifice him, for thus 
difturbing all his Peace, and enraging 
him to madnefi. But then he recollefted 
that Dumont had once already on a frivo- 
lous Excufe put off our Marriage, that 
his Wife had lately feemed artfully to con- 
trive to fend him out of the way, and ten 
thoufand Circumftances which had pafled 
unheeded at the time of their happening; 
fuch as her fudden and ftrange Melan- 
choly a little after the Chevalier's Ar- 
rival, her vaft Eagernefs to marry me to 

Vieuville^ 



Chap. 2. ^ David Simple. 187 

Vieuville^ rufhed at once into his Memory, 
and correfponded fo exadlly with what 
Pandolph had told him, that he began to be 
worked into a Belief, it was but too fatally 
true : And when he had given his Paffion 
fome Vent, he at laft refolved to ftifle, if 
poffible, for the prefent, any Appearance 
of his Jealoufy, and ordered the old Man 
to continue to obferve all their Motions, 
and inform him of what he difcovered ; 
who, as foon as he had received his Com- 
mands, left him. 

S u c H a variety of Thoughts crouded 
into the Marquis's Mind the moment he 
found himfclf alone, that his Perplexity 
was too great to fufFer him to come to 
any certain Determination. At laft he 
concluded, that if the Chevalier again en- 
deavoured to put off the Marriage, it 
would be a convincing Proof of the Truth 
of his Sufpicions. And juft as he had fixed 
this Idea in his Thoughts, Dumont unfor- 
tunately entered the Room for that very 
Purpofe ; which was thus to make him 
appear guilty in his Friend's Eyes, of the 
moft monftrous Ingratitude, and the 
blackeft Treachery imaginable. His man- 
ner of fpeaking was fomething fo con- 
fufed, and his Mind feemed fo difturbed, 

that 



i88 TZ?^' Adventures Book IV. 
that indeed it was no wonder, as things 
then appeared, my Brother's Jealouly 
fhould be increafed by his Behaviour. He 
had not fpoke three Words before the 
Marquis, who perceived his Drift, was fo 
inflamed ; that he couki hear no more, 
and interrupting him, haftily faid, there 
*' was no occafion for any Excufcs, for 
" that he fiiould by no means force him 
to marry his Sifter againft his Inclina- - 
tions.'* After which, without waiting 
for any Reply, he pafled by him, looked 
at him with fo fierce an Air, that his 
Anger was but too plain, and walked out 
of the Chamber. 

Poor Bumont was fenfible of his 
Friend's Refentment, but did not guefs 
the true Caufe ; for he imputed it to the 
Indignity the Marquis muft unavoidably 
think he treated him with, in thus 
flighting the generous OlFer he made him 
of his Sifter. But what muft fuch a Heart 
as his feel in thefe unhappy Circum- 
ftances ! For akhough his whole Soul was 
filled with Gratitude, and nothing could 
be a greater Torture to him than his 
Friend's even thinking he had the leaft 
Caufe to complain of him ; yet in this Cafe 
he thought it was impoflible to undeceive 



Chap. 2. David Simple. 189 

him without a Breach of his own Ho- 
nour, and deftroying all .the Marquis's 
Happinefs, which vifibly depended on 
the continuing his good Opinion of his 
Wife. Sometimes he refolved to fly the 
Place, where he unfortunately caufed fo 
much Mifery, and give up all his future 
Hopes of Pleafure in poffeffing the Wo- 
man he loved, facrifice all the Joys of 
mutual Friendfhip, and even fufter my 
Brother to have an ill Opinion of his Ho- 
nour, in hopes by that means to prevent 
his being made mifcrable ; but then the 
Condition he thought he muft leave me 
in, at being thus negle£ted and abandoned 
by the Man I had even gone fo far as to 
confefs my Love for, foftned his whole 
Soul, and all his Refolution was loft in 
Tendernefs. In Ihort, Love, Gratitude, 
Honour, Friendfhip, and every thing that 
is moft valuable in the human Mind, con- 
tended which fhould have the greateft 
power over him, and by turns exerted 
themfelves in his generous Breaft. But he 
was involved in fuch a perplexing Laby- 
rinth, that whichever way he turned his 
Thoughts he met with frefh Difficulties 
and new Torments. He found it was im - 
poffible for him ever to pretend another 
Excufe to delay our Marriage j and yet 

when 



190 7^^ Adventures Book IV. 
when he confidered Dorimeneh furious 
Menaces, his Fears for my Safety would 
not fuffer him to think of it. 

At lad it came into his head, that he 
muft contrive fome Method of making 
the future delaying it, come from me ; 
and for that purpofe difguifing his Hand 
in fuch a manner, that it could not be 
known, he wrote the Note, which I have 
already told you I found on my Table. I 
knew not what to make of it, and was 
filled with Horror when I read it ; how- 
ever, it had the defired Effe6t, for I re- 
folved never to marry the Chevalier Bu* 
mont^ till I was acquainted with the Caufe 
of this fudden, ftrange Alteration in our 
Family, and let into the Secret why he now 
tried, by all ways poffible, to fliun me. 

I ACCORDINGLY told my Brother, that 
I had changed my Mind, and for the 
prefent, at leaf!:, would put off all thoughts 
of marrying his Friend, He looked tted- 
faftly at me, and faid, if I knew any rea- 
fon, which concerned him, for altering a 
Defign in which I had appeared fo fixed, 
it was neither afting like a Sifter, nor as 
he deferved from me, to conceal it from 
him. But before I had time to make him 

any 



5 



Chap.2. ^David Simple. 191 

any Anfwer, Dorimene entered the Room, 
and put an end to our Difcourfe. 

I GLADLY retired, for I was impatient 
to be by my felf, that I might be at full 
liberty to make what Reflexions I pleafed ; 
but when I came to confidcr, ferioufly, 
my Brother's Words, it was impo/Tible 
for me not to find out that they imported 
a Sufpicion of his Wife and Dumont. 
I prefently caught the Infedion, and fo 
many glaring Proofs, of the Juftice of that 
Sufpicion, immediately prefented them- 
felves to my Imaginauon, that I could 
hardly refrain going direflly to the Che- 
vaUer, and upbraiding him with his Trea- 
chery every new Thought was a frefli 
Difturber of my Peace, and helped to rack 
my Mind. However, hke my Brother, 
I refolved, if pofiible, to wait till I w^s 
quite convinced, before I would mention 
what I fufpefted. 

What I !iad told my Brother, had a 
violent Effe6l both on him and Dumont 
for to the former it was the ftrongeft In- 
dication imaginable, that I had found out 
what Pandolph had told him to be true ; 
and though the latter had wrote the Let- 
ter himfelf, which determined me to ad: 

in 



192 T'ke Adventures Book IV. 
in that manner, yet fuch was the Delicacy 
of his Love^ that he could not forbear 
fufpefting my AfFeftions were altered ; 
and the fear that I was difobliged by his 
late Behaviour, was dill a greater I'or- 
ment than he had yet endured. The 
thoughts of lofing me for ever, caufed too 
ftrong an Agony for even his Mind to 
bear, and that Idea appeared fo very hor- 
rible, that the Dread of all Confequenccs 
fled before it, and he refolved to fecure 
himfelf from that Fear by any means 
whatever, (the forfeiture of his Honour 
excepted.) 

For this purpofe he went the next 
Morning into a Chamber, v/here he knew 
the Marquis de Stainville was alone, and 
told him lie had received a Letter from 
his Mother, in which ftie complained of 
an ill State of Health, and begged him, 
as the only Comfort fne could hope for in 
this World, that he would bring his Wife, 
as foon as he was married, to fee her ; for, 
continued he, I have already informed 
her, of the Honour you intend me in 
giving me IJahelle. I have never in my 
Life difobi-yed my Mother, therefore if 
you will give me leave to marry your Sif- 
ter to-morrow, and carry her immediately 

home 



Chap. 2. ^David Simple. 193 
home for a little time, it will make me 
the happieft Man in the World, 

My Brother was at firft furprized ; but 
tho' he did not intend this Ihould really 
happen, yet he in appearance aflented, 
becaufe he had a Purpofe to work out of 
it. Dumont eagerly embraced him, and 
thanked him with Tears in his Eyes, for 
thus indulging him in all his Wifhes. The 
Marquis's ftruggling Paflions made it al- 
moft impofllble for him to conceal his 
Thoughts, and on fome pretence of Bufi- 
nefs he foon left the Chevalier by himfelf. 

Now returning Hope began to cheer 
his Spirits, and he fancied by this Scheme 
he fhould fecure me from Dorimene\ Fu- 
ry. Nay, he even flattered himfelf, that 
Time and Abfence would efface thofe 
ImprefTions he had made on her unguard- 
ed Heart, and that returning Reafon 
would bring her to a Senfe of her Duty, 
and his Friend might ftill be happy. He 
was fliocked at perceiving the Marquis's 
Coldnefs to him j but this he imputed to 
the Sufpicion he lately might reafonably 
have, of his neglefting his Sifter ; and did 
not doubt but his future Behaviour to me 
would foon regain him his Efteem. 

Vol. II, I While 



194 57?^ Adventures Book I V^. 
While he was revolving thefe things in 
his Mind, I accidentally enter'd the Room. 
I ftarted back at the fight of him ; for 
from the time I had fufpefted his Ho- 
nour, I had avoided all Commerce with 
him. But he cried out, Oh Ifahelle — 
don't fly me thus but condcfcend to 
fpend a few Moments in making m.e 
happy by your Converfation." He 
fpoke thefe Words with fuch an Air of 
Tendernefs, that in one Inftant he re- 
newed all my former Sentiments for him, 
and baffled every Refolution I had formed 
not to hearken any more to his Love. I 
fat down by him, without knowing what 
I did, or whither this unfeafonable Com- 
plaifance would carry me. He fcemed as 
much confufed as I was, but at lad he 
told me what he had jufl concluded with 
my Brother. This again roufed all my 
Refentment ; Love gave way to Jealoufy, 
and I haftily replied. Whatever he had 
agreed on with my Brother, I was re- 
foJved never to confent to be his Wife, 
unlefs he could clear up his late unaccount- 
able Behaviour ; and that I thought after 
his fo long endeavouring to fliew his In- 
difference to me, I ought to have been 
the firfl: Perfon acquainted with this new 
Alteration of his Schemes. He paufed a 

moment. 



Chap. 2. ^David Simple. 195 
moment, continued to fix his Eyes on 
mine, with a Look which exprefled tea 
thoufand different Sentiments at once ; 
and then cried out, " Oh ! don't let Ifa- 
belle doubt my Love : Could you but 
*^ know what Torments I have gone 
through whilft you had Reafon trom 
Appearances to think me guiky ; I 
am fure your tender Nature would pity 
rather than condemn me. But — Oh ! 
Dormene!'^ — The moment that Name 

had broke from his Lips, he ftarted 

appeared frightned at what he had faid, 
and flew from me with great precipi- 
tarion. 

He was no fooner gone than my Bro- 
ther fucceeded in his Place ; but he ftaid 
no longer than while he could fay, I/a- 
belle^ hearken no more to the Chevalier 
Dumonly refolve not to marry him ; 
Time fhall unfold to you the Reafons 
of this Requeft." And then he alfo 
fled my Sight as hafbily as Dumont had 
done the Minute before. 

What a Condition was I in! what 
cculd I think ! My Brother, Dorimene^ 
Dumont^ all feemed involved in one com- 
mon Madnefs ^ and I knew not to \\rhom 
1 2 to 



196 7Z^^ Adventures Book IV. 
to difclofe my Griefs : However I was 
refolved for the prefent abfolutely to avoid 
marrying Dumont ; and as I met him 
again alone that Evening, told him he 
muft entirely give up thatDefign forfome 
time at leaft, or he would force me to 
take a Refolution never to fee him more. 

As foon as my Brother had left Du^ 
fnonty he went to his Wife, and told her, 
that to-morrow he was to compleat his 
Friend's Happinefs, by for ever join- 
ing him to Ifahelle.^^ This he did to 
fee in what manner (he would behave on 
fuch a trying Occafion, 

BORIMENE.vfho was all Paffion, 
and who really had but little Art, eafily 
fwallowed the Bait, and told him, fhe 
" thought he ought to confult his own 

Honour, and not to difpofe of his 

Sifter fo rafhly, to a Man who had 

vifibly (lighted her.'' 

The Marquis was all on fire, to fee 
in what manner flie took it, and could 
not forbear faying, " that in all likeli- 
hood her own Inclination might be fa- 
tisfied in the Separation of Ifabelle from 
^ Dumont'^ And he then came direftly 

to 



Chap. 2. of David Simple. 197 
to me, and uttered the Words I have al- 
ready repeated to you. 

But fo intoxicated was Dorimene with 
the Violence of her Paflion, that ftie at 
prefent gave but little Attention to any 
thing her Hufband faid ; nor did ftie need 
the Information he had given her con- 
cerning our Marriage : for ftie fo nar- 
rowly watched Dumont^ th^t flie was never 
ignorant of any one ftep he took, and by 
hearkening at the Door had overheard 
all the lafl: Converfation between him and 
the Marquis de Stainville, She hid her- 
felf when he quitted the Room but again 
replaced herfelf within hearing, when I 
entered it : But it is impoffible to defcribe 
her Rage, when fne fancied flie heard 
him fay enough to let me into a Secret 
which file had extorted a Promife from 
him never to reveal. 

From the time my Brother had firft 
fufpefted his Wife, he had never lain at 
home-, but pretending that Change of Air 
was conducive to his Health, faid, he^ 

lay at a Tenant's about two Miles off 
" but indeed he was always within fuch 

a Diftance, that Pandolph could bring 

him home in five Minutes.** He fet 
I. 3 him 



198 TZ?^ Adventures Bock IV. 
him to watch all his Wife's Motions ; 
but he hitherto could never give iiim any 
farther account, but that flie continued Hill 
at times to meet the Chevalier in the 
Wood. 

But this Evening, as foon as he was 
gone from the Door, and as Bumont'^ 
uneafy Refledions on what I had faid, 
together with his Refolution of avoiding 
Dorimene^ made him refolve to confine 
himfeJf to his Chamber : flie grew per- 
fedlJy paft all Senfe of Shame, and was re- 
folved to follow him even thither, rather 
than not fpeak to him that Night, and 
inform him that flie Vv^as not ignorant of 
his Pufpofe, nor fliould he execute it 
without her fulfilling hers. 

The Agitations of my Mind made me 
feign Sicknefs for an Excufe to retire early 
into my own Room, fo that there was no 
Obftacle in her way to obftruft her De- 
figns. Every Step fne took added new 
Horror to her Thoughts, and increafed 
her Torment ; and yet fuch was the Force 
of her irrefiftible Pafiion, that Ihe v;as 
led on in fpite of all the Remonftrances 
of her Reafon to the contrary. 



The 



Chap. 2. ^David Simple. 199 



The watchful Pandolph^ the moment 
he faw her open Dumont's Chamber-door, 
ran to inform his Mailer, The Marquis 
flew on the Wings of Rage and Jealoufy, 
and arrived in lefs time than could be 
thought poflible for the Diflance of the 
Place to allow. At his Entrance into the 
Chamber, he was ftruck with the fight of 
Donmene drowned in Tears, fitting by the 
Chevalier on his Bed, and holding him by 
the Hand. This was no time for Reafon 
to bear any fway , ten thoufand tumultu- 
ous Paflions at once poffefTed his Soul, and 
he obeyed the Diftates of his Rage, hj 
fuddenly drawing his Sword, and burying 
it in the Body gf tlie J?i?(^ry unhappy^ tit 
jured Dtimont. 

The A6lion was fo quick, that Dori- 
mene did not perceive her Hufband's fatal 
Purpofe before he had executed it : But 
when Ihe faw Dumont's gufhing Blood, 
her Horror and Defpair took from her all 
Solicitude for her own Safety ; and flie 
immediately cried out, Oh ! Slainville- 
what have you done ! you have mur- 
dered the faithfuUeft Friend that ever 
Man was bleffed with. Dumonl is inno^ 
cent, and I am the only guilty Perfon ; 

I 4 I 



200 Tloe Adventures Book IV, 
I have perfecuted him with my Love, 
my furious Threats of Ifabelle^s Life, 
have caufed all the appearance of his 
negleding her; but no Temptation 
" could m.ake him once think of v/rong- 
*' ing his Friend. If any remaining Rage 
" yet poffefles you, point it at her Vv^ho 
only deferves it ; but if Pity fucceeds the 
Fury in your Bread, Jet that induce you 
to fhorten my Torments by ending my 
Life, and let me net linger in the Hell 
which at this Inftant 1 feel/* 

The moment llie had faid enough to 
open my Brother's Eyes on Dumont's In- 
nocence, he turned all his Thoughts on 
him, and let his Wife talk on unheeded. 
He ftood for a Moment motionlefs, with 
his Eyes fixed on Dumont^s Face ; where 
he fufficiently faw a Confirmation of all 
J)orimene had faid. Then he threw him- 
felf on his Knees at the Chevalier's Bed- 
fide, and gave him fuch a Look as would 
have pierced a Heart of Stone. It fo to- 
tally fubdued Bumont^ who too vifibly per-^ 
ceived his Repentance, and eafily con- 
ceived all thofe inward Horrors which 
diftrafted his Soul \ that, with a Look 
full of Companion only, he reached out 
his Hand to him^ and faid^ My Friend^ 



Chap. 2. of David Simple. 201 

I die well pleafed, if you are convinced 
that even Dorimene^s Beauty could not 
tempt me to wrong your generous 
Friendfliip. But I grow faint; indulge 
me in one laft View of my Ifabelle.^^ — 
Slainville ftarted up at the Word fainiy 
flew to fend for a Surgeon — ordered the 
Servants to force Dormene^ who was ra- 
ving like a mad Woman, to her Chamber 
then ran to me, and trembling with Hor- 
ror, faid, Come, If ah elk y view your 
Lover at his laft Gafp, and behold the 
guilty Hands which have executed the 
dreadful Didates of Rage and Jea- 
loufy/* 

1 FOLLOWED him, not knowing whe- 
ther I trod on Earth or Air, (for we ran 
fo fwiftly, that we feemed to fly) till we 
came to the Place where I was to be 
Ihocked with a Speflacle that furpaflTes all. 
Imagination, and be only convinced of 
'Dumont'^ Fidelity, at a time when I was 
juft going to lofe him for ever. All the 
Methods we could try to fcop die BIood^„ 
proved ineffe£lual. I could not Ipeak, 
but fat down by him, diflfolved in Tears, 
and almoft choaked with my fwelling 
Gne£ 

I 5 Mt 



202 Adventures .Book IV. 

My Brother continued to beg Forgive- 
nefs of the Chevalier ; and, in broken Ac- 
cents, told us how Pandolph had raifed his 
Jealoufy, and by what Steps it had been 
brought to fuch a height as to deprive 
him of his Reafon, and tempt him to an 
Aflion he would now give the World to 
recall, and with pleafure facrifice his own 
Life, could he but prolong his Friend's 
for one Hour. Poor Dumont was fo weak 
he could not fpeak much but yet he 
would exert himfelf to tell me on what 
account he himfelf had ^written the fore- 
mentioned Letter, with the Effe£t my Be- 
haviour had on his Mind ; and then cried 
out, Oh! Ifabelle^ cherifh my Memo- 
ry! And you, my Atsiv St ainvilkj for- 
give yourfeif as heartily as I do : Con- 
fider, the Appearances of my Guilt 
were fo very ftrong, that it was impof- 
*^ fible for you to avoid this fatal Jea- 
loufy. I am too weak to utter more ; 
altho' to fee you both look on me with 
^' fuch Tendernefs, would make me wifh 
to prolong this Moment to Eternity." 
Here his Strength failed him, and with 
his Eyes jfixed on us, and v/ith the Words 
Stainville — and Ijabelle — lingering on his 
dying Lips, he expired in our Arms j and 
left us, for the prefcnt, almoft in the fime 

Condition 



Chap. 2, ^David Simple." 203 

Condition with hinifelf. But he was for 
ever paft all Senfs of his Misfortunes ; 
whilft returning Life brought us back to 
the Remembrance of our Miferies. My 
Brother embraced the dead Body of his 
Friend, fwore he would never part from 
it ; and at lafl: ftarted up, like one dif- 
traded, caught hold of his Sword, and 
cried out, " Thou fatal Inftrument of 
hellilh Jealoufy, which haft made this 
dreadful Havock in Dumonfs faithful 
Breaft, now e.nd my Torments, and re- 
venge my Fri;jnd." In faying this, he 
till on his Sword, whilft I was vainly run- 
ning to prevent him. The Blow milled 
his Heart j but the EfFufion of Blood was 
fo great, that he inftantly fainted, and I 
thou2;ht him dead. 

In that dreadful Moment a Servant, 
who had lived with mc from my Inflmcy, 
from the Noife and Hurry which was in 
the Houfe upon Dori nene's being carried 
by Force into her Apartment, and the 
fending for a Surgeon, fearing what might 
have happened, was coming to feek me. 
She entered the Room juft as my Brother 
fell on his Sword, and law me fall down 
by him. She then immediately called for 
Help, and carried me fenfdefs, and fcem- 
1 6 ingly 



204 Adventures Book IV. 

ingly dead, from this Scene of Horror. I 
fell from one fainting Fit to another for 
the whole Night and, in every fliort In- 
terval, refolved not to furvive this double 
Lofs, as I then apprehended it, cf my 
Brother and Dimonl at once. 

Early in the Morning Dorimene^ 
Woman came into my Chamber, and 
begged me, in all the mcft perfuafive 
Terms fhe could think on, to come to 
fee her Mitlrefs, who appe-ired in all the 
Agonies of Death, and incefTantly called 
ok rny Name. I was So weak I could 
hardly walk, and had fuch an Indignadca 
againft the Woman who had cauled this 
terrible Catafbrophe, that I at firft thought 
nothing lliould prevail on me ever to fee 
her more : But at lafl:, v/hen I was told 
Ilie feemed very eager to impart to me 
fomething of great Importance, I fulFered 
them to lead me into her Apartment. She 
defired me to fit down but for a few Mo- 
ments, for that flie had already revenged 
me on herfelf, by fwallowing the very Poi- 
fon ihe had before prepared for me. She 
then told me the whole Story of her irre* 
fiftible Paffion, and concluded with fay* 
ing, I don't expcft, Ifabelle^ youfhould 
*^ ix)rgive me \ for \t is irnpolTible you 

fhould 



Chap. 2. ^David Simple, 205 
" fliould ever forget the irreparable Inju- 
ry I have done you : But yet give me 
Leave to fay, that, notwithftanding all 
" you feel, it is impoffible for you, who 
are innocent, to have any Idea adequate 
" to my Torments, who have the into- 
lerable Load of Guilt added to all my 
other Affliftions.'* The word GuiU 
filled her with fuch Horror, that I had no 
Opportunity of making her any Reply ^ 
for, from that Inftant, Ihe was infenfible 
of every thing that was faid to her, and 
died in three Hours. 

The Surgeon v/ho had been lent for 
by my Brother, in hopes of his helping 
Dumont^ came foon enough to give Him 
that Affiftance, which the poor Chevalier 
could not receive. The Wound he had 
given himfelf w^as not a mortal one, tho* 
very dangerous ; but the great Difficulty 
was to bring him to think of fuffering 
Life, and to quiet the Agony his Mind 
was in. This furpafled the Surgeon's Art \ 
but Religion did that, which no human 
Help could have done. An Ecclefiaftick 
af uncommon Piety, who had been long 
my Brother's Confeflbr, came to attend 
him upon this Occafion. He fo ftrongly 
repreknted to him the Danger his Soul 

would 



2c6 7Z^^ Adventures Book IV. 
would be in, if, to the other unfortunate 
Effcds of his Paffion, he added Self- 
murder : he fo pathetically enforced to 
him the Duty of compofing his Thoughts, 
in order to turn them to Heaven, and of 
affifting his Cure as much as lay in his 
ov/n power, that he might live to atone, 
by Repentance and Virtue, for the rafh 
Action he had committed ; that thef^ pi- 
ous Arguments brought him to a calmer 
Temper of Mind ; and, being naturally 
of a ftrong Conftitution, lie was by de- 
grees entirely recovered. The Tender- 
nefs he felt for me, contributed alfo to the 
faving his Life \ for as foon as I knew 
there were any Hopes of him, (v/hich 
was not till, after I had taken my lad 
Farewell of his v/rctched Wife) I flew to 
his Chamber, and never left Jiis Bed fide 
during his Illnefs ; tho* my Grief for Du- 
77iGnt was fo violent, that nothing lefs than 
m>y Care for my Brother's Life could have 
fupported my Spirits under fuch an Af- 
flidtion, or have hindered my following 
him to the Grave. And, indeed, the 
Day he was buried, I had like to Jiave 
died : But it pleafed God to pref-rve me 
beyond my own Strength, and to make 
me a Means of preferving the unfortunate 
Stainville. 

We 



Chap. 2. ^David Simple. 207 



We had fome great Friends at Court, 
to whom I applied fo effe£lually, letting 
for.h the ftrong Appearances by which he 
had been deceived, that they obtained his 
* Grace of the King ; no Friend of Du- 
mcnt^^ having appeared to folHcit againft 
me : For, in truth, my Brother was fo 
much an Object of Compaffion to all 
Men, that none could think of defiring to 
punifh him more than he had puniflied 
himfelf. 

I DURST not acquaint him with the 
tragical End of his Wife, tiil his Health 
feemed to be fully reftored ; and, even 
then, I would have concealed from him 
the fhocking Circumftance of her having 
poifoned herfelf, but he was unluckily 
told it by her Servant. This extremely 
affefted him, and, joined to the Horror 
he felt for the Death of Dumont^ threw 
him into fo deep a Melancholy, that he 
talked of nothing but renouncing the 
Pardon we had obtained for him, deliver- 
ing himfelf up to all^ the Rigour of the 
Law, and dying upon a Scaffold, the bet- 
ter to expiate the Death of his F>iend. 
But, at lafb, the religious Impreflions his 
Mind had received, got the better of all 

other 



2o8 72?^ Adventures Book IV. 
other Sentiments : He took a fudden Re- 
fokition to quit the World, and turn Car- 
^ujian^ having firft made over all his 
Eftate, in equal Proportions, to me and 
the Mother of poor Dumont. 

I WOULD have alfo gone into a Nun- 
nery, and refigned the Whole to her ^ 
but all my Relations were lb averfe to it, 
and begged me fo earneftly to continue 
among them, that I gave way to their 
Sollicitations. One of them, who was 
my Aunt by the Mother's Side, had fome 
ot her Hufband's Family fettled in Eng- 
land : She propofed to carry me thither, 
that I might remove from the Scene of 
my Misfortunes. I went with her ; but 
my ill Fate purfued me : We had not 
been in London a Week, before Ihe caught 
the Small-pox and died. Having myfeif 
never had that Diftemper, I was obliged 
to quit the Houfe fhe was in, and came 
to lodge here. 

A s foon as I have fettled fome Affairs, 
which fhe had ki this Country, I fhali 
return into France^ and execute my for- 
mer Intention of taking the Veil ; a reli- 
gious Life being the only Relief to fuch 
Sorrows as inine. 

Herb 



Chap. 2. ^ David Simple. 209 



Here Ifahelle ceafed, and it was fome 
time before any of the Company could 
make her an Anfwer : At laftZ)^W cried 
out, " How unhappy am I to meet with 

a Perfon of fo much Merit under a 

Sorrow, in which it is impoffible for 
" me to hope to afford her the leaftCon- 

folation ! Cynthia, and the reft of 
the Company, thanked Ifahelle for inform- 
ing them of her Story ; and faid, if they 
had thought what her Griefs were, they 
would not have afked her to have put 
herfelf to the pain, her obliging them 
muft unavoidably have coft her. 

Alas, replied Ifahelle^ had my Sor- 
" rows facc^n ieJs piercings perhaps, I 
fliould not have had Refolution enough 
to have related them ; but the Excefs 
of my Affli£lion has made me fo inr- 
tirely give up the Workl, that the 
Defpair of any future Enjoyments, and 
the very ImpolTibility I find of ever 
meeting with any Confolation, has in 
fome meafure calmed me, and pre- 
vents thofe violent Agitations of the 
Mind, which, whatever People may 
fancy, are always owing to fome latent 
^< Hope of Happinefs.'* 



210 TZ?^' Adventures Book IV. 



This -whole Company were fo fenlible 
that Ifahelle was in the right, in her Re- 
fokitions of retiring from a World, in 
which it was impoffible for her to meet 
w^ith any thing worth her Regard, after 
what flie had loft, that they did not at- 
tempt to diffuade her from it. And as 
foon as flie had fettled her Aunt's Affairs 
as fh^ thought necelTary, flie took her 
Leave of them, and returned to France. 

This tragical Story left very melan- 
choly Impreflions on all their Minds, and 
was continually the Subjeft of their Con- 
verfation, during two or three Days after 
Ifahelle\ Departure, At which time the 
W eather being fine, and their minds in a 
Humour to enjoy the being on the Wa- 
ter, they propofed fpending a Day there 
for their Amufement. But thefe Ad- 
ventures muft be referved for another 
Chapter. 




G H A P. 



Chap. 3- (?/^ David Simple. 211 



CHAP. III. 

Contaijiing fuch a Variety^ as makes it 
impojjihle to draw up a Bill of Fare^ 
but all the Guejis are heartily wel- 
come ; and I am in hopes every one 
will find Jomething to pleaje his 
Palate. 

T H E next fine Day was embraced 
by David and his CompanionSj to 
execute their Purpofe of going upon the 
River: And the Water, ever Friend tO 
Thought/' with the dafhing of the 
Oars, and the quick Change of Frofpeft, 
from where the Houfes, at a little diftance, 
feem, by their Number and Thicknefs, 
to be built on each other, to the Fields 
and rural Scenes, naturally threw them 
into a Humour to refieit on their paft 
Lives ; and they fell into a Convcrfa- 
tion on human Miferies, moft of which 
arife from the Envy and Malignity of 
Mankind ; from whence arofe a Debate 
amongft them, which had fuffered the 
m:;ll. The two Gentlemen agreed, that 

Cynthia 



212 The Adventures Book IV. 
Cynthia and Camilla's^ Sufferings had ex- 
ceeded theirs \ but David faid, " He 
thought Camilla'^ were infinitely be- 
*' yond any thing he had ever heard.*' 
Valentine repUed, That, indeed, he 
could not but own her Affliftions were 
in fome refpedts more violent than Cyn- 
thia^'s but then, (he had enjoyed 
" fome Pleafures in her Life : for, till 
" fhe was Eighteen, fhe was happy ; 
whilft poor Cynthia had been teazed 
and vexed ever fince fhe was born : 
And he thought it much worfe to live 
continually on the Fret, than to meet 
** with one great Misfortune ; for the 
Mind generally exerts all its Force, 
and rifes againil things of Confequence, 
while It is apt, by the Negled'of what 
we think more trifling, to give way, 
and be overcome.'* Cynthia and Ca^ 
milla {sdd^ That, indeed, they had al- 
ways thought their own Misfortunes as 
great as human Nature could bear, 
till they had heard poor Ifabelle^s 
Story/' 

As they were thus engaged in this 
Difcourie, they perceived, at a little di- 
fiance from them, the River all co- 
vered with Barges, and Boats of various 

Sizes i 



Chap. 3- ^/'David Simple. 213 
Sizes ; and, on Enquiry, found the Caufe 
of it was, to fee fix Watermen, who were 
rowing to Putney for a Coat and Badge. 
Minds, fo philofophical as their's, imme- 
diately reflected, how ftrong a Picture 
this Contention of the fix Boys is of hu- 
man Life ; the Eagernefs with which each 
of them ftrove to attain this great Re- 
ward, is a fively Reprefentation of the 
Toils and Labours Men vokintarily fub- 
mit to, for the Gratification of whatever 
Paflion has the Predominancy over them. 
But thefe poor Fellows, faid Cynthia^ 
have in view what they really want, 
and jufl:ly think of the Value of the 
Prize, which will be of real ufe to 
them ; whilfl: mofl: of the things we 
^' fee People fo eager in the pufuit of, 
have no other Good in them, but what 
*^ confifl:s chiefly in Fancy. 

Could the ambitious Man fucceed 
*^ in all his Schemes, if he would feri- 
oufly confider the many Toils and 
Hazards he has gone through to come 
" at this beloved Height and Grandeur, 
he certainly muft conclude, the Trouble 
greatly overweighed the Gain : For 
the Top of the Pinnacle, to attain 
which he has fpent all his Time, and 

watched 



214 The Advekturf.s Book IV. 

*^ watched fo many anxious Nights, is 

^' fo narrow, and has fo fmall a Foot- 
ing, that he ftands in continual Dan- 

" ger, and fear of falling : for thoufands 
of others^ v/ho are jult as wife as him- 

^' felf and imagine the Place he (lands' 
in the only one they can be happy in, 

" are daily leaving dieir own firm Foot- 

" ing, climbing and catching to pull him 
down, in order to place themfelves 

■ ' in his tottering^ and, in my Opinion, 
dreadful Situation. Or when the ava- 
ricious Man has heaped up more Money 
than an Arithm.etician can eafily count, 
if he would own his reftlefs State of 
Mind to gain yet more, and the Per- 
turbation of his Thoughts, for fear of 

^' lofing what he has attained, I believe 
no poor Man in his Scrnfes would change 
his Situation with him. But I fear I 
am grovs^ing too ferious." — On which . 

Valentine replied, It was impoffible but 
that what fhe faid mull be pleafing to 
all the Company." And David with 

a Sigh faid, He wifli'd all the World 
would imitate thcfe Watermen^ and 
fairly own when they were rowing 
againft each other's Intereft, and not 
treacheroufly pretend to have an equal 
Defire of promoting others Good with 

their 



Chap, 3* David Simple. 215 
their own, while they are under- hand 
acting to deftroy it." 

As they were talking, on a Hidden a 
Boat which paffed haftily by them fplail^ed 
them in fuch a manner, they were obhged 
to get into a Houfe, in order to refrefli 
and dry themfclves ; and during their 
Stay there, they heard a doleful Crying, 
and dilinal Lamentation in the next 
Chamber ; and fometimes they thought 
they heard the Sound of Blows. D^- 
vid^ according to his ufual Method, 
could not be eafy without inquiring what 
could be the Caufe of this Lomplaint. 
Valentine and the reft were alfo defirous 
to be informed. On which they agreed 
to go into the Room whence the Noife 
came. 

There late at one Corner of the 
Roonx a middle-aged Woman, who 
looked as if fhe had been very handfome, 
but her Eyes were then fwelled with cry* 
ing. By her rtood a Man, looking in 
the utmoft Rage, clinching his Fiji at 
her, as if he was ready every moment to 
ftrike her down. Camilla^ at IJavid\ 
Requeft, prefently went up to her, and 
defired to know of her what it was that 

had 

4 



2i6 77j^ Adventures Book IV. 
had put the Man into fuch a Paffion with 
her. The Woman, in the fofteft Voice, 
and mildeft Tone imaginable, replied, as 
follows : You are very good. Ma- 
*^ dam, to take fo much Notice of the 
Miferies of fuch a poor Wretch as I am ; 
I really cannot tell what it is that con- 
tinually throws my Hufband (for fo 
that Man is) into fuch violent Rages 
and PafTions with me. I have been 
married to him ten Years, and tiil- 
within this half Year, we always lived 
together very happily j but now I dare 
not fpeak a Word, left he fhould 
beat and abufe me, and his only Plea* 
fure feems to be the contradidting me 

*^ in every thing he knows I like.- 

What this Ufage proceeds from, or 
" how I have difpleal'ed him, I cannot 
find out, for I make it my whole Study 
to obey him.*' 

DAVID immediately turned to the 
Man, and begged him not to abufe his 
Wife in fuch a manner. If he had ta- 
ken any thing iil of her, it would be bet- 
ter to let her know it, and then he did 
not doubt, but fhe would behave other- 
wife. But he could get no other Anfwer 
from the Pvlan, than that he was refolved 

not 



chap. 3- ^/'David Simple. 217 
not to be made fuch a Fool of^ as Neigh- 
bour Such-a-one was by his Wife : for 
tho' perhaps he had not fo much Senfe as 
he in fome refpedls, yet he was not lb 
great a Fool^ as to give way to a ftUy IVo- 
man*s Humours neither^ but could tell 
how to govern his Wife. Cynthia and 
the reft of the Company joined in intreat- 
ing the Man to ufe his Wife better ; but 
as they found all Endeavours vain, for 
that the Man abufed her only becaufe he 
would not be made a Fool of they left 
chem. 

A s they were going home, 'Dai:id 
could not help talking of this laft Scene ; 
and trying if any of the Company could 
find out any Reafon for this Fellow's Be- 
haviour. Camilla fiid, " She fancied Ihc 
guefs'd the Caufe of it ; for fhe remem- 
bered, when ftie lived at home with 
her Father, a Gentleman who ufed to 
come often to their Houfe, and who 
made a very good Hufband, but from 
' the time he faw her Father's extravagant 
Paffion for his Wife, he rejoiced in the 
Thought that he had found out a 
" Weaknefs in him, and therefore took 
a Refolution to have a Superiority over 
^' him, at leaft in one Pointy and hence 
Vol. II: K «^ ^rew 



2i8 Adventures Book IV. 

grew fo morofe^ fo four to his Wife, 
that he contradidted her in every thing 
flie faid, or did faying, fhe fhould 
not make fuch a Fool of him, as Livia 
did of her Hufband. Now, continued 

" Ihe, I think this Inftance fomething 
Hke this Fellow*s Behaviour. On the 
other hand, I knew feveral others who 
imitated my Father, and by aukward 
Pretences to a Paflion they were not 
fufceptible of, made the moft ridicu- 
lous Figures imaginable. I never fhall 
forget one Man, who was but in a 
middhng Station in Life, but, how- 
ever, in the Country, he and his Wife 

^' often dined and fupped at our Houfe ; 
they Hved together without any Quar- 
rels or Dif[)utes, and each performed 
their feparate Bufinels with Cheerful- 
nels and Good-lrumour, and they were 
what the World calls a happy Couple. 
Bi]t after my Father brought Livia 

" home, and behaved to her in the manner 
before related, this Man took it into 
his head that he alfo mull be the fond 
tiufband^ and confequently humoured 
his Wife in every thing, till he made 
her perfedly nnferahle\ for flie grew 

" too delicate to be happy, acid Vvas fo 
whimCca!, it wa& impoffible to pleafe 

" her. 



Chap. 3- ^David Simple. 219 
her. For I have always obferved, tt 
requires a very good Underftanding to 
bear great Indulgence, or great Profpe- 
rity, without behaving ill, and being 
" ridiculous : for grown up People, as 
" well as Children, when they are too 
" much humoured, cry and are miferable^ 
becaufe they don't know what they 
would have/* 

CTNrHIA fmiled at Camilla'^ Ac. 
count of this fond Hufband, and faid^ 
^ She could eafily believe, that a ftrong^ 
" Affeftation of Senfe, and a Defire to be 
thought wife, might lead People into 
the mod prepofterous Adlions in the 
" World : For, continued Ihe, I once 
knew a Woman, whofe Underftanding 
was full good enough t© gonduft her 
through all the Parts (he had to ad in 
Life, and who was naturally of fo calm 
a Difpofition, that, while fhe was young, 
*^ I thotight her formed to be the hap- 
" pieft Creature in the World. And 
" yet this Woman was continually un- 
" happy ; for (he accidentally met with 
thofe two Lines of Congreve\ in the 
Double Dealer : 



K2 



Z20 T/^t* Adventures Book IV. 



IfHappinefs in Self - content is plac^ 
Tke Wife are ur etched^ and Fools 
only blef'd. 

" And from that Moment took up a 

" Refolution of never being contented 

" with any thing : And I have really 
known her, when any trifling thing has 
gone otherwile than Ihe would have if, 

" llrut about the Room like a Heroine 
in a Tragedy^ repeating the foremen- 

" tioned Lines, and then fet herfelf 
down perfectly fatisfied with her own 

" PartSy becaufe flie found fhe could 
with Art raife an Uneafinefs and Vexa- 
tion in her own Mind. For as People 
who really have Senfe, employ their 
Time in lowering all Senfations which 
they find give them Pain ; fo Per- 
fons who are fo 'ivife^ as to think all 
Happinefs depends on the Reputation 

" of having an Underflanding^ often pay 

" even the Price of continual Fretting^ 
in order to obtain this their imagi^iarj 

" Good. And the human Mind is fo 
framed, that I believe no Perfon is fo 
void of PafTiOQ, or fo perfedly exempt 
from being fubjeft to be uneafy at Dif- 

" appointments, but by frequently giving 

" way 

3 



Chap. 3- ^ David SixMPLE. 221 

way to being difcompofed at Trifles, 
they may at laft bring themfelves to 
fuch a Habitude of teazing and vexing 
" themfelves, as will in the end appear 
perfeftly natural." 

VALENTINE hearkened with the 
utmoft Joy and Attention to every word 
Cynthia uttered. Camilla perfeftly agreed 
with her in her Sentiments, and David 
could not forbear expreffing a great Un- 
eafinefs that Mankind iliould tiiink any 
thing worthy their ferious Regard, but 
real Goodnefs. Nothing more worth re^ 
marking happened to them that Day ; 
they fpent the Evening in a Converfation 
on Tfabelle^s Misfortunes, which dwelt 
ftrongly on poor David's Mind ; and the 
next, being very wet Weather, they re- 
folved to ftay at home. 

C TNTHIA^ who always employed 
her Thoughts in what manner fhe could 
befl amufe her Company, propofed the tel- 
ling them a Story flieknew of two young 
Ladies while fhe was abroad. And as 
every Perfon of this Party delighted in 
hearing her talk, andexprefied their great 
Defire fhe would relate it, fhe without 
any Ceremony began what will be feen in 
the next Chapter. 

K3 CHAP. 



222 72?^ Adventures BooklV. 



C H A P. IV. 

Containing fome fmallHintSy that Mem 
CharaBen in the World are not aU 
'ways juited to their Merits notwith^ 
Jiandi77g the great Penetration and 
Candour of Mankind. 

THERE were two young Engltfo 
Ladies at Faris^ with a married 
Lady of their Acquaintance, who were 
celebrated for their Beauty throughout the 
whole Town one of them was named 
Ccrinna^ and the other Sacharijfa : and 
notwithftanding they were Sifters, yet 
were they as perfedlly different in both 
Perfon and Temper, as if they had been 
no way related. Corinna was tall, well 
proportioned, and had a Majefty in her 
Perfon, and a Luftre in her Countenance, 
which at once furprized and charmed all 
her Beholders. Her Eyes were naturally 
full of Fire ; and yet flie had fuch a Com- 
mand of them, that fhe could lower their 
Fiercenefs, and turn them into the great- 
eft Softnefs imaginable, whenever ftie 

thought 



Chap. 4. ofDAVijy Simple. 223 
thought proper : She fpoke ia fo many 
different Turns of Voice, according to 
what flie defired to exprefs, and had fuch 
various Geftures in her Perfon, that it 
might truly be faid, in her was found 
Variety in one/* In Ihort, the conftant 
Flow of Spirits, which ftie Confcioufnefs 
of an unhniited Power of pleafing fup- 
plied her with, enabled her in the molt 
ample manner to execute that Power. 

SJCHJRISSJ's Perfon was very 
"^dl made, and iil her Countenance v/as 
a great Sv/eetnefs. She fpoke but fd- 
dom ; but what fhe feid was always a 
Proof of her good Underftanding. Her 
manner was grave, and referved, and her 
Behaviour had fomething of that kind of 
Quietncfs, and Stillnrfs in it, which is of- 
ten imputed by the Injudicious to a Wi^nt 
of Spirit, In fhorr, notwithftanding her 
Beauty and Good-fenle, Ihe wanted thofe 
little ways of fctting off her Charms ta 
the befl advantage, which Corinna had to 
the greateft perfeftion and, quite con- 
trary to her Sifter, from her great Mo- 
defty, and fear of difpleafing, often loft 
Opportunities of g^iining Lovers, which 
ftte otherwife might have had. 



K 4 These 



224 Adventures Book IV. 

These two Ladies fet out in the World 
with very different Maxims : Corinna*s 
whole Delgiht was in Admiration ; flie 
propofed no other Pleafure, but in firft 
gaining, and then keeping her Conquefts \ 
and fhe laid it down as a certain Rule, 
that few Mens Affeflions were to be kept 
by any other Method, than that of fome- 
times endeavouring to vex and hurt them : 
for that Difficulty and Difappointmentsin 
the Purfuit were the only things that made 
any Bleffing fweet, and gave a relifh to 
all the Enjoyments of Life. 

Her Converfation, when flie was only 
amongft Women, continually ran on this 
Subjed: ; fhe ufed to try to prove her Af- 
fertion, by every thing flie met with : 
if flie vv^ent into a Room adorned with all 
the different Arts invented by Mankind, 
fuch as Paintings Sculpture^ &cq. flie 
would always afk her Sifl:er, " whether 

flie thought if that Room was her own 

Property, and flie might make ufe of 
*^ it whenever flie pleafed, it would not 

become perfectly indifferent to her ; 
" the Beauties of it fade in her Eyes, 
" and all the Pleafure be lofl: in the 

Cufl:om of feeing it Nay, flie faid, 

" She 



Chap. 4. of David Simple. 225 

She believed Variety would make 
the plaineft Building, or the homeJiefl: 
" Cottage fometimes a more agreeable 
Sight/' 

SACHARISSA could not help a- 
greeing with her in this, and then Corinna 
had all Ihe wanted. " Why then, faid 
fhe, fliould we expeft Men to go from 
the common Rule of Nature in our 
" favour and if we will fatiate them 
with our Kindnefs, how can we blame 
" them for the natural Confequence of it, 
" viz, their being tired of us ? Health ' 
itfelf lofes its Reliflh to a Man, who 
knows not what it is to be fick, and 
Wealth is never fo much enjoyed, as 
by one who has known what it is 
" to be poor ; all the Pleafurcs of Life 
are heightened by fometimes experi- 
*Vencing their contrary. Even Fezvcl 
burns the ftronger for being dallied 
" with cold Water. But then indeed we 
ought to have Judgment enough not 
to throw too much^. left we extinguifli, 
inftead of increafing the Flame. We 
" muft examine the different Tempers of 
" Men, and fee how much they will 
bear, before we attempt the dealing 
" with them at all." 

K .5 In 



226 Adventures Book IV. 

In this manner would flie run on for 
an Hour together. On the other hand, 
Sacharijfa had no Levity in her Temper, 
and confequently no Vanity in having 
Variety of Lovers. The only Pleafure 
fhe propofcd in Life, was that of making 
a good Wife to the Man fhe liked, by 
which rneans fhe did not doubt, but fhe 
fliould make a good Hufband of him ^ 
and ufed often to fay, " that as fhe did 
not value having many Admirers, fhe 
did not fear, but an honeft plain Be- 
haviour would fix the Affedtions of 
one worthy Man. But if her Sifter 
was in the right, and no Man was to 
be dealt with, but by ufing Art, and 
" playing Tricks, fhe could content her- 
felf very well t4) live all her Life- time 
" a fino;le Woman : for fhe thoue^ht the 
Love of a Man which was to be kept 
*^ that way, was not worth having. Nay, 
*^ fhe refolved to make that Trial of a 
" Man's Goodnefs, that whenever flie 
liked him, fhe would tell him of it ; 
and if he grew cold upon it, flie fhould 
think fhe was happily delivered of fiich 
*t a Lover/* Corinna laughed, and told 
her, fhe might tell a Man fne liked- 
" him, provided fhe woi^jld j:)ut now and 



I 



Cliap. 4:. oftyAviB Simple. 227 
" then he cold enough to him, to give 

him a fmall Sulpicion and Fear o£ 

lofmg her/' 

S AC B AR IS SA was as much talked 
of for her Beauty, by thole who had only 
feen them in publick, as her Sifter ; but 
amongft the Men who vifited them, Co- 
rinna had almoft all the Lovers ;^ flie had 
fix in a Set of Englijh Gentlemen, who 
generally kept together the whole time 
they were at Paris j whofe Charafters, a9« 
every two of them were a perfect Con- 
traft to each other^ I will give you before^^ 
I go any farther. 

The Gentleman whofe Charader I 
fllall begin with, had the Reputation^, 
amongft all his Acquaintance, of being 
the moft artful Man alive he had very 
good Senfe, and talked with great Judg- 
ment on every Subjeft he happened to fall; 
upon : but he had not learned tlut moft 
ufeful l^ffon of reducing his Knowledge^ 
to Pradtice ; and whilft every body was: 
fufpefting him, and guarding againft thofe 
very deep Deftgns they fancied he was 
for?ni?igy he, who in reality was very cre- 
dulous, conftantly fell into the Snares , 
of People who had not half his Under- 
K 6> ftandi-ng. 



228 27^^ Adventures Book IV. 
{landing. He could not do the mofh in- 
different Aftion, but all the wife Heads^ 
who fancy they prove their Judgments by 
being fufpicious^ faw fomething couched 
under that apparent Simplicity, which 
they faid was hid from the injudicious and 
unwary Eye. I have really feen People, 
when they have been repeating fome Say- 
ing, or talking of a Tranfaftion of his, 

Hum and Ha — for half an Hour, and 

put on that Look, which fome People 
are fpightful enough to call dull ^ whilft 
others are fo cxctfTivdy good-natured^ as to 
give it the Term of ferious^ only to con- 
fider what great Myllery was concealed 
under fuch his Words or Anions. 

The poor Man led a miferable Life 
from being thus reputed to have Art : 
That open Generofity of Temper, which 
for my part I thought very apparent in 
him, was generally efteemed only to be 
put on, in order to cover thofe cunning 
Views he had continually before his Eyes. 
Thus, becaufe he did not talk like a Fool^ 
he muft adl like a Villain^ which in my 
Opinion is the falfeft Conclufion ima- 
ginable ; and as a Proof of it, I will let 
you into the Character of a Man, 



Chap. 4' ^/'David Simple. 229 
who was in every relpedl perfe6tly ojf)po- 
fite to the other. 

This Perfon*s Underftanding was but 
very fmall j the beft things he laid were 
irite^ and fuch as he had picked up 
from others ; he had the Reputation in 
the World of a very fdly Fello-w^ but of 
one who had no harm in him. Whereas 
in reahty he fpent his whole time in 
laying Plots which way he might do 
the moft Mifchief. And as things in this 
World, even of the greateft Confequence, 
fometimes turn on very fmall Hinges, 
and his Capacity was exaftly fuited to the 
Comprehenfion and Management of 2r/- 
^es he often fucceeded in his pernicious 
Schemes better than a Man of Senfe 
would have done, whofe Ideas were more 
enlarged, and his Thoughts fo much fixed 
on great Affairs, that fmall ones might 
frequently have efcaped his Notice. 

I LOOK upon the difference between a 
Man who has a real Underftanding, and 
one who has a little low Cunning, to be 
juft as great as that between a Man who 
fees clearly, and one who is purblind. 
The Man to whom Nature has been fo 
kind, as to enable him to extend his 

Views 



230 TZ^^ Advent (J R^:s Book IV. 
Views afar off, often employs hisThoughts 
and raifes his Imagination with a beautiful 
diftant Profpedl, and perhaps he over- 
looks the Shrubs and Rubbijh that lie jufl: 
before him ; which notwithftanding, are 
capable of throwing him down, and do- 
ing him an Injury : whilft the Man who 
is purblind^ from the ImpolTibility he finds 
of feeing farther, is in a manner forced to 
fix his Eyes on nearer Objefts, and by 
that means often efcapes the Falls, which 
thofe who negleft the little Stumbling- 
Blocks in their way are fubjeft to. la 
this cafe I fancy it would be thought very 
ridiculous, if the one who walked fteadi- 
ly, bccauie he can only fee what is jufl 
under his Feet, fhould fwear the other 
has no EyeSj becaufe he fometimes makes 
a falfe ftep, while he is wandering over^ 
and delighting himfelf with the Beauties 
of the Creation. 

But let Mankind divide Underftand- 
ing or Senfe (or whatever they pieafe to 
call it) into ever fo many Parts, or give 
it ten thoufand difrerent Names, that 
every one may catch hold of fomething 
to flatter themfelves with,, and itrut and 
look big in the fancied Poffefiion of; I 
can never believe but that he vvho h.s^the- 

quickelt 



Chap. 4- o/'David Simple. 231 
quickeft Apprehenfion, and the greatefl 
Comprehenfion, will always judge-beft of 
every thing he attends to. But the Mlnd^s 
Eye (as Shakefpear calls it) is not formed 
to take in many Ideas, no more than the 
Body^s many Objeds at pnce ; and there- 
fore I ftiould not at all wondsr to fee a 
Man, who was admiring the Beauties of 
the rifing Sun, and greedily devouring 
the various Profpedt of Hills and Val- 
leys, Woods and Water, fall over a 
Cabbage-ftump, which he tliought un- 
v/orthy his Notice. 

But to return to my Gentleman : I 
aftually knew feveral Inftances of his de- 
ceiving and impofing on People in the 
moft egregious manner, only becaufe they 
could not fufped: fuch a Head as his of 
forming any Schemes ^ but if ever there 
was a vifible Proof that he had done anjr 
Mi/chiefs then the artful Man (tho' per- 
haps he had never known any thing of the 
matter) had fet him cn^and it was a thou- 
f nd Ptties the poor inmcent Creature 
fhould thus be made a T^goI of an other 's^ 
Villainy \ for he certainly would never 
have thought of it hin^fclf. I could not 
help laughing foni€times> to fee how 

much 



232 Tbe Adventures Book IV. 
much this Man endeavoured at the Repu- 
tation of Art, (fooJillily thinking it a 
Sign of Senfe) without being able to at- 
tain it ; while the other, with full as ill 
Succefs, did all he could to get rid of it, 
that he might converfe with Mankind 
without their being . afraid of him. 

The third Gentleman of this Commu- 
nity pafled for jhe hefi-natured Man in 
the Worlds he never heard of another's 
Misfortune, but he fhrugged up his 
Shoulders, expreffing. a great deal of 
Sorrow for them, altho' he never thought 
of them afterwards : the real Truth was, 
he had not Tendernefs enough in his Dif- 
pofition to love any body, and therefore 
kept up a continual Chearfulnefs, as he 
never felt the Difappointments, the Tor- 
ments of Mind thofe People feel, who 
are ill ufed by the Perfon they have fet 
their Affe6tions on. He was beloved, 
that is, he was liked by all who con- 
verfed with him ; for, as he was fel- 
dom vexed, he had that fort of Com- 
plaifance, which makes People ready to 
dance^ pla)\ or do any thing they are 
defired and I believe fuch fort of Rea- 
fons as . Shakefpear puts in Faljlaf^s . 

Mouth, 



Chap. 4- David Simple. 233 
I Mouth, for Pnncc Harry's loving Pointz 
are the Grounds of moft of the Friend- 
fliips profelTed in the World, and this 
makes them fo lafting as they are. Who- 
ever can accompany another in his Diver- 
fions, and be like him in his Tafte of 
Pleafures, will be more loved, and better 
thought on by him, than a Man of much 
more Merit, and from whom he has re- 
ceived many more real JCindnefles, will 
be. 

But 

* That the Reader may not have the Trou- 
ble to turn to Shakefpeavy to fee what thefe 
flrong Ties of Affeftion are, which Faljlaff 
fpeaks of; I have here fet down the Paflage, 

DolL Why doth the Prince love Pointz fo 
then ? 

Fal. Becaufe their Legs are both of a big- 
nefs, and he plays at Quoits well, and eats 
Conger and Fennel, and drinks off Candles- 
Ends for Flap-dragons, and rides the wild 
Mare with the Boys, and jumps upon Joint- 
ftools, and fvs^ears with a good Grace, and 
wears his Boot very fmooth, like unto the Sign 
of the Leg, and breeds no Bait with telling 
difcreet Stories, and fuch other gambol Facul- 
ties he hath, that {hew a weak Mind and an 
able Body, for the which the Prince admires 
him : for the Prince himfelf is fuch another, 
the Weight of an Hair will turn the Scale be^ 
tween their Averdupois. 



234 T/&(? Adventures Book IV, 

But I now proceed to the Contraft of 
this Good-natured Man^ whor^ Reputation 
was quite contrary ; for whoever men- 
tioned him, was lure to hear he w\is the 
worfi-natured^ moft morofe Creature liv- 
ing ; and yet this Man did all the bene- 
volent Actions that were in his power ; 
but he had fo much Tcndernefs in him, 
that he was ccgitinualiy hurt^ and confe- 
quently out of humour. His Love- of 
Mankind was the Caufe that he appeared 
to hate them ; for often, when his Heart 
was torn to pieces, and ready to burft, at 
either ill Ufage from his Friends, or fome 
particiJar Misfoitune which had befallen 
them, and which he was incapable of re- 
moving, he cared fo little what came of 
the World, that he could hear a pitiful 
Story without any Emotion,, and perhaps 
fliewed a CareLeflhefs at it, which made 
the Relater go away with a fixed Opinion 
of his Brutality and Ill-nature. 

But there is nothing fo falfe as the 
Charadlers which are given to moft Peo- 
ple ; and I am afraid this is not owing fo 
much to Men's Ignorance, as to their Ma- 
lignity : for whenever one Man is envious 
of another, he endeavours to take from 

him 



Chap. 4. of David Simple. 235 
him what he really has, and gives him 
fomething elfe in the room of it, which 
he knows he has not. He leaves it to 
the World to find out his Deficiency in 
that Point if he can but hide from Men's 
Eyes whatever it is he envies him for, lie 
is fatisfied* 

The next Chara6ler I am to give you^ 
diat of a Man, who has fuch ftrong 
Senfations of every thing, that he is, as 
Mr. Pope finely fays, tremblingly alive 
all o'er.'* His Inclinations hurry him 
away, and his Rcfolution is too weak ever 
to refift them. When he is ^ith any one 
he loves, and Tenderneft is uppermoft, 
he is melted into a Softnefs equal to that 
of a fond Mother, with her fmiling Infant 
at her Bi^aft. On the other hand, if he 
either has, or fancies he has the lead Caufe 
for Anger, he is, for the prefent, perfedl-^ 
ly furious, and values not what he fays 
or does to the Perlon he imagines his 
Enemy but the moment this Pafllon 
fubfides, the leafh Submiffion entirely blots 
the Offence from his Memory. 

He is of a very forgiving Temper; 
but the worft is, he forgives himfelf with 
full as much eafe as he does another, 

which 



236 The Adventures Book IV^ 
and this makes him have too little Guard 
over his Adtions. He defigns no ill, and 
wifhes to be virtuous ; but if any Virtue 
interferes with his Inclinations, he is over- 
borne by the Torrent, and does not deli- 
berate a Moment which to chufe. 

Confer an Obligation on him, and he 
is overwhelmed with Thankfulnefs, and 
Gratitude ; and this not at all owing to 
Diffimulation : for he does not exprefs 
half he feels. But this Idea foon gives 
place to others, and then do any thing 
which is in the leaft difagreeable to him, 
and he immediately fets his Imagination 
(which is very ftrong) to work, to leffen 
all you have done for him and his whole 
Mind is poffeflTed by what he thinks your 
prefent ill Behaviour. 

He has often put me in mind of a 
Story I once heard of a Fellow, who ac- 
cidentally falling into the Thames^ and 
not knowing how to fwim, had like to 
have been drowned \ when a Gentleman, 
who flood by, jumped into the River and 
faved him. The Man fell on his Knees, 
was ready to adore him for thus deliver- 
ing him, and faid, he would joyfully fa- 
crifice the Life he had faved, at any time^ 

on 



Chap. 4- ^David Simple. 237 
on his leaft Command. The next -day 
the Gentleman miet him again,, and afked 
him how he did after his Fright ? When 
the Man, inftead of being any longer 
thankful for his Safety, upbraided him 
for pulling him by the Ear in fuch a man- 
ner^ that it had -pained him ever Jince. 
Thus that trifling Inconvenience, in twen- 
ty-four Hours, had intirely fwallowed up 
the Remembrance that his Life was owing 
to it. Juft fo doth the Gentleman, I am 
fpeaking of, aft by all the World. 

He has the greateil Averfion imagina- 
ble to fee another in Pain and Uneafmefs ; 
and therefore, while any one is with him, 
he has not Refolution enough to refufe 
them any thing, be it ever fo unreafon- 
able : Importunity makes him uneafy, and 
therefore he cannot withftand it. But 
when they are abfent from him, he gives 
himfelf no trouble what they fuffer ; let 
him not fee it, and he cares not : He 
would not interrupt a Mom^ent of his own 
Pleafure on any account whatever. He 
never confiders what is right or wrongs 
but purfues the Gratification of every In- 
clination with the utmofl Vigour ; and all 
the pains he takes, is not in examining 
kis Adions, either before or after he lias 

done 



238 Adventures Book IV. 
done them, but in proving to himfelf, 
that what he hkes is beft : And he has the 
Art of doing this in fuch a manner, that, 
while People arc with him, it is very dif- 
ficult to prevent being impofed on by his 
fallacious Way of Arguing. And yet tell 
him a Story of another's Aftions, and no 
one can judge better, only I think rather 
too rigidly ; for, as he doth not feel their 
Inclinations, he can fee all their Folly^ and 
cannot find out any Reafon for their giv- 
ing way to their Pajfions. 

He has great Parts, and, when he is in 
good Humour, and nothing ruffles him, 
is one of the agreeableft Men I ever 
knew; but it is in the power of every 
the leafi Difappointment to difcompofe 
and fliake his whole Frame, and then he 
is much more offenftve and dif agreeable 
than the moft infignificant Creature in the 
World. He never confiders the Confe- 
quences of any thing before he does it. 
He ruined his Sifter by his wrong-placed 
Pride : for flie had a Lover, who was 
greatly her Superior in point of Fortune ; 
but there were fome Circumj^ances in his 
Affairs, which made it very inconvenient 
for him to marry her immediately. The 
Brother took it into his head he was de- 

figning 

2 



Chap. 4. of David Simple. 239 

figning to dijhonotir his Family^ and chal- 
lenged him. The Gentleman overcame 
him, and gave him his Life ; but refolved 
never to fpeak to his Sifter more : for he 
faid it Ihould not be reported of him, 
that he was compelled to marry hen 
The poor young Creature^ who had fixed 
her Affedlions on him, had a Slur caft on 
her Reputation, and has been miferable 
ever fince. He is not fo ill-natured, but 
that feeing her fo makes him uneafy ; and 
therefore the Remedy he takes is not to 
fee her at all, but to live at a diftance 
from her : And he comforts himfelf, that 
it was his Love for her made him aft in 
fuch a manner. Had it been another 
Man's Cafe, he would have foon found 
out, that it was not Tendernefs for a Sifter, 
but Pride and Vanity^ that caufed fo rafti 
an A6tion. 

One thing is very diverting in him, 
and has often made me laugh ; for it is 
very eafy to know whether the laft A£tion 
he has done is good or bad, by what he 
himfelf fays : For when Benevolence has 
prevailed in his Mind, and he has done 
what he thinks right, then he employs all 
his Wit and Eloquence to prove the great 
Goodnefs of Human Nature. But when 

by 



240 TZ?^ Adventures Book IV. 

by giving way to Pride, Anger, or any- 
other Palfion, he hath been hurried into 
the Commifllon of what he cannot per- 
fe£lly approve, he then irrimediately falls 
on the great JVickednefs of all Mankind^ 
a,nd fets himfelf to work to argue every 
Virtue out of the World. The Inconfi- 
Itence of his Behaviour makes his Cha- 
rader in the World very various : for Peo- 
ple, who have been Witneffes of fome 
Parts of his Condu6t, take him for the 
bed of Creatures ; whilft others, who have 
known fome of his worft Aftions, think 
him the vileft. It is not to be wonder'd 
at, that he fliould be thus inconfiftent 
with himfelf, for he has no fixed Princi- 
ples to a£t by : He gives way to every 
Inclination that happens to be uppermoft ; 
and as it is natural for People to love to 
juftify themfelves, his Converfation turns 
greatly on the Irrefiftiblenefs of human 
Paflions, and an Endeavour to prove, that 
all Men ad by them. But People, who 
have the Reputation of Wit, or Senfe, 
fhould take great care- what they fay, or 
do, for the fake of others, who are apt to 
be influenced by their Example, and form 
their Sentiments by their Precepts. 



The 



Chap. 4, of David Simple. 241 

The laft of the fix Charaflers I pro- 
mifed to give you, and the Contrail to 
this Gendeman, is a very odd one. His 
Underftanding is very indifferent ; but he 
has a ftrong Inclination to be thought both 
w//y and wife : He envies the other, be- 
caufe he finds, that, with all his Faults^ his 
Company is more coveted than his own ; 
and therefore, as he . finds he cannot equal 
him in Wit, and Entertainment, he fixes 
on Wi/dom and Difcretion^ and exults in 
the Superiority he imagines thefe give 
him ; fo that inftead of being hke the 
other, hurried into A6tions by his own 
Inclinations, he deliberates fo Jong, and 
weighs fo nicely every Circumftance that 
may attend whatever is propofed to him, 
that he puzzles his Brain^ and bewilders 
himfelf^ in his own JVifdom^ till he does 
not know how to aft at all ; and often, 
by thefe Methods, lofes Opportunities 
of doing what would be very much for 
his Advantage, while he is confidering 
whether he fliould do it or no. And 
it is not only in things of moment he, is 
thus confiderate, but alfo in the m.oft tri- 
fling Affairs in Life : He will not go even 
to a Party of Pleafure, till he has confufed 
himfelf fo long, whether it will be difcreet 

Vol. II. ^ L or 



242 7he Adventures Book IV. 
or no, that, when he is refolved, he can 
have no Enjoyment in it. 

I REMEMBER once, while we were at 
Paris^ this Knot of Gentlemen, my La- 
dy, myfelf, in the Character of a 2" oad- 
Eater^ and fome m.ore Ladies, propofed 
fpending a Week at Verfailles : This Gen- 
deman could not find out whether it 
would give him mod Pleafure or Pain to 
accompany us ; and was fo long in deli- 
berating, that at laft: Monfieur Le Vive 
(which was the Name the Gentleman, 
v/ho was fo whimfically guided by his 
PaJJiGns^ always went by, while he was at 
Paris ) fwore he would flay no longer, 
and we drove away, leaving him at the 
Gate in as thoughtful a Pofture, as if he 
had been endeavouring to find out the 
moft difficult Problem in the Mathema- 
ticks. 

He pretends to a great AfFedion for 
Le Vive ; but I verily believe he hates him 
in his Heart : for, when he is abfent from 
him, his whole Difcourfe turns on his /;/- 
difcretionsy , which, indeed, he expreffes 
great Sorrow for : But, in my Opinion, 
he only affects to pity him, for an Excufe 
to fix People's Minds on his Faults, and 

to 



Chap- 4. of David Simple. 243 

to make them fee his own imagined Supe^ 
riority. I have known feveral of thefe 
Friends^ who go about lamenting every 
wrong thing done by the Perfon they 
falfly pretend a Friendjhip for ; but to me 
they cannot give a ftronger Proof, that 
they hate and envy them. 

For a Man, who is really concerned 
for another's Frailties, will keep them as 
much as poflible even from his own 
Thoughts, as well as endeavour to hide 
them from the reft of the World : And 
whenever I hear one of thefe Lamenters 
cry, It is pity fuch-a-one has fuch Fail- 
" ings ; for otherwife he would be a 

charming Creature*/^ and then reckon 
them all up, without forgetting one C/r- 
cumjlance : I cannot forbear telling them, 
that I think this would better become an 
Enemy than a Friend. This Man got the 
Nick-name of the Balancer^ and was the 
Diverfion of all who knew him. 

Many other filly Fellows, who con- 
verfed with Le Vive^ afted quite contrary 
to the Balancer^ and affefted to imitate 
him. It was a common thing with him 
to fay, that People of the greateft Under- 
ftandings had generally the llrongeft Sen- 
L 2 fations j 



244 Adventures Book IV. 
fations : For which Reafon, I really knew 
two Men, who were naturally of cold 
phlegmatick Difpofttions^ throw themfelves 
into continual Paflions, in order to prove 
their Senfe. They could not come up to 
I^e Vive in their Converfation, and there- 
fore, with great Penetration^ they found 
out an eafier way to be like him ^ and were 
fo very humble as .to imitate him in his 
Failings. 

I VISITED the Wife of one of them, 
and was fitting with her one day when 
the Hufband came in. She happened to 
fiy fomething he did not like ; on which 
he, in Appearance, threw himfelf into a 
violent Agony^ fwore, and ftampt about 
the Room like a Madman ; and at laft 
catched up a great Stick, with which he 
broke one of the fineft Sets of China I 
lever faw. The poor Woman, who was 
really frighted, flood ftaring, and knew 
not what to fay ; but when his PaJJion 
-had continued jull as long as he thought 
necelTary to prove his Wifdom^ he grew 
<:alm again ; and then afked his Wife 
ten thoufand Pardons for what he had 
done ; faid, he was very forry he was fo 
paffionate ; but all People acted by their 
Pajfions^ ajid he could npt help his Na^ 

tare % 



Chap. 4- of David Simple* 245 
iure ; it was a Misfortune often attended 
Perions of very good Senfe \ and, as an. 
Inftance of it, named Le Vive. I faw 
thro' the whole thing, and could hardly 
keep my Countenance but immediately, 
took my leave, that I might have the 
liberty to make my own Refledions,^ 
without being obferved : for nothing is fo 
captious as a Man who is a£ling a Part^ 
it being very natural for him to be in a con^ 
tinual Fear of being found out. 

COR INN J had another Lover, who 
was a Frenchman^ in a very high Station, 
His Mind was caft much in the fame 
Mould with hers. Vanity was the chief 
Motive of all his Aflions, and the Gratifi- 
cation of that Vanity was the fole End 
of all his Defigns. He delighted in all 
manner of fine things; that is, he was 
pleafed to call them his own : for the 
fined Pifture that ever Michael Angela 
drev/, would have given him no PleaTurc, 
unlefs the World had known he was in 
poiTeffion of it. And what is yet more 
llrange, the moft beautiful Woman was 
only preferred to the reft by him, that it 
might be faid his Charms had made a 
Conqueft of the Perfon others fighed for 
in vain. It was for thia Reafon he fol- 
L 3 lowed 



246 Adventures Book IV. 
lowed Cortnna ; every new Lover flie got, 
increafed his AfFeftions ; the greater Croud 
of Admirers flie had, ^ the better he was 
pleafed \ provided flie would but fhew to 
the World, that fhe only kept them in , 
her Train, whilft he was permitted to 
lead her by the Hand. 

Here Cynthia faid fhe was tired, and 
would referve the Remainder of her Story 
till the Afternoon. They fpenf the In- 
terval, till fhe thought proper to begin 
again, in general Converfation, and Re- 
marks on the Charafters fhe had given 
them. As foon as Valentine thought fhe 
had refted long enough, to make it agree- 
able to her to tell them the refl of the 
Story, he begged her to go on with it ; 
and fhe, who never wanted to be afked 
twice to oblige any of that Company, 
proceeded as will be feen in the next 
Chapter. 




CHAR 



Chap. 5. ^David Simple. 247 



C H A P. V. 

^he Continuation of the Story of 
t Corinna, 



CO RINNJ's manner of dealing 
with thefe various Charaders, was 
really very divertfmg. For to the Man of 
Senfe, who had the Reputation of being an 
arful Man^ and who always treated her 
with very great Refpefl, yet told her his 
Love in a plain unaffe£ted manner, (for he 
had not been much ufed to Gallantry) and 
always dealt with every one with Simpli- 
city ; flie foftened her Looks to fuch a 
degree, as gave him fome diftant Hopes 
that he might be her Choice. And as a 
Coquet was the Chara6ter he mod de- 
fpifed, it would have been impoffible to 
have perfuaded him, that /he had any fort 
of Coquetry in her. She plainly faw how 
much his real Character was miftaken ; 
and that the other Gentleman, who was 
reputed to be ferfe^ly artlefs^ employed 
his whole Time and Thoughts in endea- 
vourincv to undermine her by his Cunning, 
1-4 'lo 



248 T'^^' Adventures Book IV. 
To him therefore fhe was more refer ved, 
and, by continually counterplotting him, 
at laft gave him the moft confummate 
Opinion of her fVifdom : for as he look'd 
on yfr/ and Senfe to be the fame thing, he 
thought a Woman, who could equal him 
in the former, mull be the moft extraor- 
dinary Creature in the World. 

The Man v/hom the World efleemed 
to be ill-natured^ oniy becaufe he was ca- 
pable of being touched with either the 
Ajjit5ltGns'^ or Behaviour of his Friends j fhe 
worked backward and forward in fucJ} a 
manner, as made him one Moment curie 
her, and the next adore her ; by that 
means keeping his Thoughts continually 
on the Stretch, and giving him no time 
to recolleft himfelf enough to forfakc her. 
The thing in the World he valued in a 
Woman, was having the fame Senfations 
with himfelf; therefore, whenever fhe 
found fhe had gone far enough to hurt him 
thoroughly, fhe picked up lom^e Trifie he 
had done, and told him it was the Sufpicion 
of his flighting her, that had made her 
fo uneajy fhe could not command herfelf : 
By this means he was perfeftly convinced 
that fhe had no Fault, but what arofe 
from the Strength of her Good-nature. 



Chap. 5. of David Simple. 249 

As to the Gentleman who was always 
pleafed, flie had no great Trouble with 
him \ and only danced and fung with 
him ; and he was perfedlly fatisfied fhe 
was the beft-humoured Woman in the 
World, which was the ^ality he moji 
admired. 

The Balancer never told her he liked 
her in his Life , for he did not dare to go 
fo far, left he fhould not be able after- 
wards to difengage himfelf. He fat whole 
Hours, and looked at her with Wonder 
and Admiration, confidering with him- 
felf whether it would be wife for him to 
make Love to her or no. She faw flie 
had him fure enough ; but did not let it 
appear to him that Ihe underftood his 
Looks : She flattered him in his own Wa)\ 
afking his Advice about every Trifle, pre- 
tending flie was deliberating about things 
fhe never had a ferious Thought of ; he 
therefore believed her a Miracle of Dif- 
creiion. 

Her hardeft Taflc was how to manage 
Le Vive ; for the Impetuofity of his In- 
clinations would not bear being dallied 
with, and ftie found, with all her ylrt^ it 
L 5 was 



2 50 7he Adve n t u r e s Book IV. 
was impoflible to keep him long, with- 
out confenting to marry him. But as he 
was always apt to believe whatever his In- 
clinations fuggefted to him, fhe contrived 
to make him think, tiiat fhe had no other 
Reafon for not immediately complying 
with hisDefire. but DeUcacy ; for that fhe 
thought a Woman muft be a ftrange Crea- 
ture, who did not expeft fome Gallantry 
from a Man, before he could obtain her 
Love. And as Le Vive had really a very 
delicate Turn in his own Mind, it was 
what he moft admired in a Woman ; and 
confequently he was the more charmed 
with her, for thinking fhe had fo large a 
Share of it. She was obliged to be de- 
nied to all the reft, whenever he came to 
fee her ; for fhe could not fo eafily im- 
pofe on him as on the others, and the 
leaft Sufpicion would have excited him to 
the higheft degree of Rage. She durft 
not play many Tricks with him, only flie 
would now and then juft teaze him 
enough to make his Paflion return with 
the greater Violence* 

As to the vain Man, he eafily believed 
fhe preferred him to ail Mankind ; and it 
is incredible how vaft a Pleafure he took 
in reflcfting on the Joys he fnould feel, in 

being 



Chap. 5- ^David Simple. 251 

being reputed to have the handfomeft 
Wife in all France. The Poffeffion of fo 
fine a Woman was the lead thing in his 
Confideration ; for if he had been obliged 
to have lived a reclufe Life with her, all 
her Charms would have immediately va- 
niihed, and his Rehfh would have been 
totally loft for them : but whilft his Va^ 
nity was gratified, he thought her pof- 
feffed of every Accomplijhment any Wo- 
man could be adorned with. Thus Man- 
kind go farther than Pigmalion in the 
Fable for he, indeed, fell in love with 
a Statue, but ftill kept his Senfes enough^ 
only to pray to the Gods to give herLif^ 
and Motion : But they, if once a Wo- 
man's Form plcafes them, not only wiih 
her pofleffed of every thing eife^ but be- 
lieve and fwear £he is fo. 

I ONCE vifited Corinna^ when all her 
Lovers happened to be there toge- 
ther. I fuppofe Le Vive was let in by 
fome Accident fhe could not avoid. 
The grave Man of Senfe appeared diffi- 
dent of himfelf, and feemed afraid ta 
fpeak to her. The artful Man fat filent, 
and feemed to be laying fome very deep 
Plot, The Man who was fo apt to be 
hurt by the Behaviour of others, could 
L 6 hardly 



252 The Adventures Book IV. 
hardly forbear breaking out in Reproaches, 
The gay, good-humoured Spark, capered 
and fung^ and was never better pleafed in 
his Life. The Balancer attempted to 
fpeak feveral ' times, but broke off with 
half a Sentence, as not having confidered 
enough whether he was going to fpeak 
wifely or no. Le Vive had no patience, 
and could hardly be civil to her ; but per- 
fedly ftormed at her, and left the Room 
in a violent Paffion. But the vain Man 
Vv^'as all Joy and Rapture : for, on fome 
particular Civilities Ihe fhewed him, he 
concluded he was the happy Man. And 
indeed, whether the Sympathy there was 
in their Minds (for both their Pleafures 
lay in gratifying their Vanity) influenced 
her, or whether his having a great For- 
tune fwayed her, I cannot tell ; but flie 
certainly did give him the preference be- 
fore ail her other Lovers. 

After thi$ meeting of them all toge- 
ther, as file found it impofhble any longer 
to keep them all as Danglers^ fhe began to 
think ferioufly of marrying the vain Man, 
She confidered, that if fhe led this Life 
much longer, Ihe fhculd get the Reputa- 
tion of a finijhed Coquette, and confequent- 
ly lofe all her Power \ whereas by marry- 



Chap. 5. of David Simple. 253 

ing, flie might have the hberty of con- 
verfing with all her Hujband^s Acquaint 
tance^ without being much cenfured. Be- 
ftdes, fhe knew enough of his Temper, 
not to be ignorant, that he would bring 
her home all the Admirers he could, in 
order to indulge himfelf in the Thoughts 
that he had gained the Woman fo much 
liked by others. She was very fure £he 
could not be particularly fond of him, nor 
of any other Man ; and always laid it down 
as a Maxim, that it was too much Love 
on the Women's fide, that was generally 
the Caufe of their lofing their Hufband's 
Affedions. In fliort, thefe and feveral 
other Confiderations induced her, at laft, 
to give her Hand to the vain Man. 

They were married three Months be- 
fore I came from Paris^ and were gene- 
Tally efteemed a very fond Couple. She 
coquettes it juft enough to fhew him, 
that, if he does not take care of his Be- 
haviour, he is in danger of lofing her : 
And he indulges her in every thing fhe 
can wifh, and Itill keeps up the Lover, 
for fear of the Difgrace of her liking any 
body elfe. Sacharijja^ with whom I con- 
verfed as often as 'I could get hberty, 
told me, that Corinna often alked her. 

How 



2 54 Adventures Book IV. 

" How long fhe thought flie fliould 
reign thus ah folate in her Hulband's 
Houfe, if fhe made an humble fond 
IVife^ and did not continually ftiew 

" him how much he was obliged to her 
for chufing him I will relate to 

you one Scene that paffed between them. 

Word for Word, as Sachartfja told it 

me. 

Th ere was a young Gentleman dined 
with them one day, with whom Corinna 
w^as more gay, and went farther in her 
Coquettry than ufual; infomuch, that 
at lafk her Hufband grew quite out of 
humour : She perceived it, but did not 
at all alter her Behaviour on that ac- 
count. There was a great deal of Com- 
pany at the Table, and Corinna was in the 
higheft Raptures to fee the Joy which 
fparkled in the Eyes of the Man Hie took 
moft notice of ; the envious uneafy Looks 
of all the others, and her Hufband'sDif- 
content. This might be called the Wan- 
tonnefs of Power, and fhe was refolved 
to indulge herfelf in the full Enjoyment 
of it. When the Company were gone, 
her Hufband fat fullen, and out of hu- 
mour, and would not fpeak one word. 
It was her ufual Method, whenever he 

thought 



Chap. 5* ^^/'David Simple. 255 
thought proper to be m this Temper, to 
let him come to himfelf again as he 
pleafed ; for fhe never faid any thing to 
him, to endeavour to bring him out of it. 
I cannot fay I much pitied him, as all his 
Uneafinefs arofe from Vanity ^ but had 
the greateft Tendernefs for her been the 
Caufe of it, fhe would have afted juft in 
the fame manner : for it was one of her 
political Maxims^ That whatever Woman 
troubled her head whether her Hufband 
was pleafed or no, would find Employ- 
ment enough to keep him in Temper \ 
but if fhe could have fo ftrong a Refolu- 
tion as to hold out, if he either loved 
heVy or a quiet Life^ he would certainly 
fubmit in the end ; and the Difficulty he 
found in being reconciled to her, would 
make him afraid of offending her. 

However, this pafled on three or four 
Days, and neither of them fpoke. Co- 
rinna drefled, and went abroad v/ith as 
much Chearfulnefs as ufual \ till he held 
out fo long that flie began to be frighted, 
left he Ihould be meditating fome Defign 
of parting with her, and by that means 
bring a Difg^ace upon hen Her Pride 
would not fufFer her to think of a Sub- 
miffion 5 befides, ftxe knew that Method 

would 



256 The Adventured Book IV. 
would be totally inefFeftual with a Man of 
her Hulband's Temper, 

SACHARISSA, although flie could 
not approve her Behaviour, had fo much 
Good-nature, £he would willingly have 
affifted her in bringing about a Reconci- 
liation but' her Mind was fo perfeftly 
free from all Art, and every Word flie 
fpoke, nay, her very Looks fo plainly 
Ihewed her Thoughts, that it was impof- 
fible for her to hit on any Scheme for her 
Sifter's Advantage. Corinna^ after much 
Deliberation, as her laft Effort, engaged 
a Lady of her Acquaintance to invite her 
and her Plufband to Dinner ; where, as 
by Accident, they were to meet the Gen- 
tleman who was the firft Occcafion of their 
Quarrel ^ who, the moment he faw Co- 
rinna^ began to behave to her with all the 
AfTurance a Man, who fancies himfelf the 
Objed: of Admiration, can be infpired 
with. But Ihe had now another Scheme 
in view ; and as fhe had before indulged 
her own Vanity at the Expence of her 
Hufband's, flie thought it necelTary, in 
order to bring about her prefent Defigns, 
to turn the Man into Ridicule, who, from 
her own Behaviour, had fed himfelf with 
the Hopes of obtaining her Favour : And 

\yhiift 



Chap. 5- (^David Simple. 257 
while flie play -d him off with all the Live- 
linefs and Wit flie was miftrefs of, by the 
whole Company's plainly perceiving the 
great Preference ftie gave her Hufband^ 
he was by degrees work*d into Raptures 
he never felt lor her before ; and when 
they came home, was vifibly more her 
Slave than ever; 

Thus by foliowing the Maxim fhe 
had laid down from her Youth, of never 
fhewing too much Love to the Man ihe 
had a mind to govern, ftie fo far fuc- 
ceeded in all her Schemes, that if ever 
any Difpute arofe between them after 
this Scene, it was not without the moft 
fervile Submiflions on her Hufband's fide, 
and her exerting ail the moft haughty 
Airs Ihe could think on, that he could 
ever obtain a Reconciliation with her : 
nor did flie think herfelf at all to blame 
for fuch a Condu6t, but often aflerted, 
that notwithftanding all the Complaints 
of Women's Levity and Coquettry, 
yet, that fhe thought the Man who gives 
up all his Eafe, and facrifices all his 
Time to the fatisfying, a reftlefs Ambi- 
tion, and the grafping of Power, wasjufl 
on the fame footing with the Woman 
who makes it her Study to difplay and 



258 I'he Adventures Book IV. 
fet off her Charms, in order to gain a 
general Admiration ^ that the fame Love 
of Power was the Motive of both their 
Aftions ; and confequently that flie could 
not fee, if there is fo much Folly as is faid 
to be in the one, how the other could be 
exempted from the fame Imputation. 

But here I will leave her, and go 
back to Sacharijfa. Her Tafte was too 
good, altho' fhe had a great Softnefs in 
her Temper, for her eafily to fix her Af- 
feftions ; but the Man of Senfe, whom I 
have already mentioned to you as a Lover 
of Corinna'Sy touched her Heart. She 
took care to conceal it, becaufe fhe well 
knew Corinna would be uneafy at part- 
ing with one Admirer^ altho' her Diflike 
to him was ever fo great. But when Co- 
rinna was married, and this Gentleman 
compared her Ufage of all her Lovers, 
with Sachariffa^s modeft, and good-na- 
tured Behaviour, he fixed his Love on the 
Woman who now appeared fo much the 
moft deferving. The Courtfliip did not 
laft long for as fiie had made it a Rule 
never to conceal her Affe£lions from the 
Man fhe loved, longer than fhe doubted 
of his, Decency was the only thing con- 
fidered by her 5 and they were mar- 



Chap. 5. of David Simple. 259 

ried about a Month before I left Paris, 
I never faw a greater Profpedt of Hap- 
pinefs in my Life ; for their Love was 
reciprocal, and they highly efteemed each 
other. 

CTNTHIJ had the Thanks of the 
whole Company for her Relation, parti- 
cularly Valentine^s^ who expreffed the 
greateft Admiration at her manner of 
telling it. They fpent the reft of the 
Evening in Remarks on Cynthia s^Story ; 
and David faid, he did not think there 
could have been fuch a Charadler as Co- 
rinna^s in the World that he began to 
be in great Anxiety to fee a Woman 
painted in fuch a Light; hut SachariJ/a*s 
Tendernefs and Good-nature had revived 
his Spirits, in Ihewing him the Blefling a 
Man polTefled, when he could gain the 
Affeilions of a Perfon whofe Heart was 
faithful, and whofe Mind was replete 
with Goodnefs. In faying this, he fixed 
his Eyes ftedfaftly on Camilla^ till he faw 
her blufli, and feem out of countenance, 
which made him immediately turn the 
Difcourfe : and when they feparated to 
go to bed, Valentine followed his Sifter 
into her Room, and feemed almoft 
choaked for want of Power to utter his 
Thoughts, 



26o 57^^ Adventures Book IV, 



CAMILLA was not ignorant what 
Subjed he wanted to talk on, and imme- 
diately began a Difcourfe on Cynthia. At 
kft fhe brought him to fay, ''Oh! Ca- 
milla^ how happy mtift that Man be^ 
*' who can touch the Heart of Cynthia ! 
^" There is no Hopes for your unfortu- 
nate Brother for even if fhe could 
condefcend to look on me, my Cir- 
cumftances are fuch, I dare not own 
^' my Love to her. Mr. Simple''^ Gene- 
rofity and Goodnefs to us, makes it 
utterly impoffible I fhould ever think 
^ of loading him with more Burdens. 
No ; I muft for ever banifh from my 
Thoughts the only Woman who is ca- 
" pable of raifing my Love and Efteemv 
You may remember in our very youth- 
ful Days, when I hardly knew why I 
liked her, how fond I was of being 
^ with Cynthia \ and notwithftanding our 
Separation, I have never thought of 
any other Woman with any great- 
*' Affection.'* He then went on with 
Extacies on Cynthia^ % Wit and Charms. 

CAMIL L A heard him out, and then 
told him, fhe would do any thing in her 

power 



Chap. 5* 5f David Simple. 261 

power to ferve him ; but advifed him, if 
poffible, to try to conquer his Paflion. 
At thefe Words he turned pale, and 
looked in the utmoft Agonies ; which his 
Sifter perceiving, flie told him, if his 
Love was fo fixed, tl^at he could not en- 
joy himfelf without Cynthia^ fhe hoped, 
and did not at all doubt, but he might 
gain her AfFedions % for that before fhe 
went abroad, fhe had obferved much 
more than a common Complaifance in 
her Behaviour towards him ; which ihc 
found was rather increafed than abated 
fmce this laft Meeting ; and he muft wait 
with patience, till Time, perhaps, might 
put it in his power to be as happy as he 
could wifh. 

VALENTINE was vaftly com- 
forted in the Thoughts of Cynthia^ s z'p^ 
proving his Love, and for that Moment 
quite forgot all the Confequences that 
might attend indulging his Paflion. He 
begged his Sifter to obferve all Cynthia's 
Words and Adlions ; and then retired to 
Reft. Poor Camilla could have fighed as 
well as her Brother ; but I don't know 
how it was ; She could not fo eaftly unfold 
Griefs of that kind to Valentine, as he 
could to her. 

CHAP. 



262 Ti?^ Adventures Book I 



CHAP. VL 

2^ which our Hero began again to 
defpair of ever meeting with any 
thing but Difappointments. 

POOR David had no Perfon to tell 
his Griefs to : he loved Camilla fo 
fincereiy, that whatever Refolutions he 
made to declare it to her, the great Awe 
with which he was feized whenever he ap- 
proached her, took from him the Power 
of fpeaking. And he was afraid to men- 
tion it to her Brother firft, left flie fliould 
be offended, and think he was mean 
enough to exped: a Compliance from 
them both, on account of the Obligations 
they owed him. 

Sometimes his Imagination would in- 
dulge him with the Thoughts of the Hap- 
pinefs he fliouId enjoy, if he could be 
beloved by, and lead his Life with CamiU 
la. He was fure fhe had every good Qua- 
lity human Nature is capable of pofleffing. 
He ran over every Virtue in his own 
Mind, and gave them her all, without 

any 



Chap. 6. of David Simple. 263 
any Exception. Then he reflcdled on 
every Vice; and exulted in the Thought 
that fhe was quite free from them. 
Sometimes he was in delpair of ever 
engaging her to return his Love, and 
then in a moment fucceeded Hopes 
and Raptures, and all this without any 
intervening A6lion of her's to give him 
the leaft Reafon to believe either one way 
or the other. 

In fhort, both David and Valentine 
were afraid of explaining themfelves too 
far, left they fhould difoblige Camilla and 
Cynthia ; and they, on the other hand, 
had no Fear, but that their Lovers meant 
no more than they exprefled« Mifs John-^ 
fon^s Behaviour, in fpight of himfelf, would 
often force itfelf on David's Memory ; for 
that is one of the Curfes which attend the 
having ever been difappointed in our Opi- 
nion of a Perfon we have efteemed : It is 
an Alloy to all our future Pleafures ; we 
cannot help -remembering, while we are 
indulging ourfelves in any new Engage- 
ment, that once we thought as" well of 
another, who, with the fame feeming In- 
nocence deceived us ; and we dread the 
fame thing may happen over again. But 
thefe Thoughts only took place in CamiU 



1 



264 T/?'^ Adventures Book IV. 
Z^'s Abfence : The moment flie appeared, 
all difagreeable Ideas vanifhed, and the 
moft pleafing ones imaginable fucceeded, 

VALENTINE znd Camilla often 
fighed at the Remembrance of their Fa- 
ther's Ufage ; but they cautioufly hid 
from their generous Benefa^or^ that any 
uneafy Thoughts ever intruded on their 
Minds : He fancied them entirely happy, 
and that their Happinefs was owing to 
him. None but Minds like David's cm 
imagine the Pleafure this Cortfideration 
gave him. Cynthia faw through Valen- 
tine^% Behaviour and yet fometimes fhe 
could not; help fearing that his Thought- 
fulnels might arife from fome other Caufe 
than what (he would have it^ and her 
great Anxiety concerning it, naturally 
produced Sufpicion. 

As this little Company were fitting 
and comparing their prefent Situation 
with that they had formerly been in, they 
heard fo violent a Rap at the next Door, 
they could not help having Curiofity 
enough to run to the Window, and faw 
it was occafioned by the Arrival of a gilt 
Chariot ; in which was a Perfon, in whofe 
Looks was plainly to be perceived, that 



2 



Chap. 6. ^ David Simple. 265 

!ie was perfe6lly fatisfied with himfelf \ 
and, confcious that he made a good 
Figures that is, he was very well dref- 
fed, and his Equipage fuch as no Noble- 
man would have had any reafon to have 
feeen afhamed of. While the Door was 
opening, he happened to caft his Eyeson 
Camilla^ and fixed them with fuch At- 
tention, that as he was entering the Houfe, 
his Foot dipt, and he fell down. Davidy 
who was always ready to give Aftiftancc 
where it was wanted^ ran down ftairs to 
fee if he could be of any fervice to him. 
The Gentleman had ftruck his Face a- 
gainft an Iron at the Side of the Door, 
and felt a good deal of Pain ; but the 
moment he faw David, he begged he 
would be fo good as to carry him into 
the Houfe where he had feen him at a 
Window with a young Lady, whom he 
was very defirous of fpeaking to ; be- 
eaufe he had fomething to tell her, which, 
he believed, would prove to her advan- 
tage. That Confideration was enough 
for David, and without any farther He- 
fitation, he introduced liiLii into the Room 
to Camilla, The moment flie faw him, 
it was vifible by her Countenance he 
war not a perfedt Stranger to her; for 
flie alternately bluftied, turned pale, and 
Vol. II. M feemed 



^66 The Adventures Book IV, 
tfeemed to be in the greateft Agitation 
of Spirits imaginable. The Gentleman 
begged the liberty of being one half 
Hour alone with her; as what he had to 
communicate concerned only her, and 
was of fuch a nature, that it required the 
utmoft Privacy. 

CJMILLJ^ who did indeed know 
him to be my Lord .... an intimate 
Acquaintance of her Father^s, fancied he 
had fomething to fay to her from him \ 
and that Thought made her fo follicitous 
to know what it was, that without think* 
ing of any farther Confequence,fhe begged 
the reft of the Company to retire a little, 
while fRe heard what my Lord had to 
fay ; which, as they none of them ever re- 
fufed her any thing flie defired, was im* 
mediately complied with. 

VALENTIN E was a Stranger to 
this noble Lord^ as he ivas gone abroad, 
before he came from his Studies to live 
with his Father *, however, he thought the 
Alteration of Camilla* s Countenance at 
the fight of him, was owing to the Shame 
of feeing a Perfon (he knew whilft flie 
lived in Reputation with her Father, now 
that flie Was certain he muft have heard 

art 



Chap. 6. of David Simple. 267 
an infamous Story of her. But David 
could not help fearing flie felt fomething 
more at the fight of him than merely 
Shame, Mifs John/on forced herfelf 
again on his Memory, and when hp 
confidered the Jine Equipage^ and the 
Title of a Lord, he was in the utmoft 
Confternation what would be the Event 
of this Affair. 

This Lord was one of thofe MenV 
who lay it down as a Maxim, that a 
Woman, who has loft her Virtue from 
Fondnefs to one Man is ever afterwards 
to pur chafed by the beji Bidder. He had 
always Hked Camilla^ but as fiie lived in 
a Station that he could not think of her 
on any other Ter^'is than Marriage, and 
he knev/ her Father could not give her as 
much Fortune as was neceflary to pay 
off a Mortgage which was on his Eftate^ 
he had never faid any thing to her, farther 
than commonGallantry vbut when he heard 
that fhe was run away in fuch an infamous 
manner with her Brother, he concluded. 
Money would be fo acceptable to her, 
that he could not fail obtaining her by 
that means. He had often enquired pri- 
vately after her, but always in vaia till he 
accidentally faw her at that Window% ' 
M z The 



268 The Adventures Book IV. 



. The Moment they were alone, Ca- 
milla inquired with great Eagerne's if he 
had any thing to fay to her from her Fa- 
ther, or could tell her any News of him. 
On which he replied, " That all he 
knew of her Father was, that he and 
his Wife Jived on in the fame Houfe in 
which flje had left them ; but his Bu- 
ftnefs v^'2iS of another kind^ in which he 
himfelf was only concerned/' Then 
with a heap of thofe fulfome Compli- 
ments^ which only prove the ftrongeft 
Contempt for the Perfon they are 
inade to ; he modejlly propofed her living 
with him as a Miftrefs \ faid, flie 
*^ fhould command his Fortune, that he 
would get her Brother a Commiffion 
in the Army to go abroad, — and her 
Father fhould never know by whofe 
Intereft he had obtained it.*' 

CAMILLA, whofe Virtue was not 
of that outragious kind^ which breaks out 
in a Noife like "Thunder on fuch Occafions, 
very calmly anfwered him as follows: 
My Lord, notwithftanding what you 
have heard of me, I am as inno- 
cent now as when you firft knew me ; 
II and though Malice ijas contrived to 

make 



Oiap. 6- of David Simple. 269 
make me infamous, it never fliall 
make me guilty nor is it in the 
power of all your Fortune to bribe me 
to do a criminal or a mean Aftion : and 
if your Lord/hip has no other Buiinefs 
*^ with me, I mufb beg Leave to defin* 
my Brother, and the Man on Earth 
I moft elleem, to walk in agaui.'' 
He had too much Confidence in h:s oWii 
Charms to take an immediate Denial ; 
and as to her talking of the Man Ihe 
efteemed, he fancied flie was grown weary 
of her Brother, and had acquired a new Gal- 
lant, which he thought looked well on 
his fide. He ufed the moft prefling Ar- 
guments he could think on, to make her 
comply, but all in vain : He imagined 
her not calling to her Brother was an En- 
couragement to him to proceed ^ .but flie 
was really afraid to let mm know any thing 
of the matter, dreading what might be the 
Confequv^nce. At laft, when my Lord 
found all his Prmnifes^ and fine Speeches^ 
made no Imprelfioa on her, he took his 
Leave. 

The moment he was gone, Vavid^ 
Valentine^ and Cynthia flew into the Room, 
and found Camilla in the utmoft ..onfu- 
fion : Ihe knew not which way to aft ; 

M 3 had 



270 Adventures Book IV. 

had not an Inftant to confider, and could 
not refolve whether it was befV for her to 
inform them of what had paffed or no. 
Valentine hartily inquired, if Ihe had 
heard any thing from their Father ; for 
he faid he fuppoled fhe miift know that 
Lord while flie Hved at home.** 
She repHed, No, fhe had heard no- 
thing, but that he lived in the fame 
" Place where thty left him/' She ftam- 
mered, and feemed to wifh they would 
aflc no more Queftions; but this put 
David on the rack, and he could not for- 
bear being fo inquifitive, that at laft flie 
was forced to tell them the whole Truths 
with the Referve only of the Lord's Title. 

rALEN'TINE flew into a vioTent 
Paffion, vowed he would find out who 
he was, and let him know, no Station 
ihould fcreen a Man from his Refent- 
ment, who durft affront his Sifter. Poor 
Cynthia was quite frighted, and urged all 
the Reafons Ihe could tliink on to make 
him change his Purpofe ; and Camilla 
told him, he (hould confider that her un- 
happy Circumftances, and her being in- 
famous had thrown her fo low, that a 
Man might be more excufable for talking 
to her in that Strain than to any othisx Wd- 

man* 



Chap. 6. David Simpj-e. 271 
man. What Ihe faid to pacify Valentine^ 
made David almoft mad, and threw him 
fo off his Guard, he could not help faying, 
*' he thought pleaded very well in the 
^ ' Defence cf her Lover' * On which he left 
the Room, and retired to his own Cham- 
ber. When he was gone, Cynthia em- 
ployed all her Thoughts in endeavouring 
to calm Valentine. 

Poor Camilla knew not which way 
to aft : fhe faw David's Uneafinefs 5 it 
was not her Pride which prevented her 
following him, and endeavouring to make 
him eafy. But as he had never ferioufly 
declared more than a great Friendfliip for 
her, fhe knew not which way to treat (b 
delicate a Paffion as Jealoufy, whilft flie 
muft not own flie faw it. She fate fome 
time filent ; but at laft found the Agita- 
tion of her Mind was fo great, it would 
be impoflible for her to conceal her 
Thoughts ; and therefore on the Pretence 
of Indifpofition, retired to her own Ch 3m- 
ber, where fhe fpent the whole Night ia 
greater Anxiety than I can exprcfs. She 
did not feel one pleafing Senfxtian fro|B 
the Idea that the Man v.ho loved her^ 
was in Torment on her accUunt.; but pa 
the contrary, was melted into Xendernefs 
M 4 and 



1^72 T^^* Adventures Book IV- 
and Grief at the Thoughts of every Pang 
he felt, and nothing but the moft invin- 
cible Regard to Decency could have pre- 
rented her flying to him, and telling him: 
the whole Truth ia order to eafe him of 
his Pain* 

A s to David^ the Thoughts of Ca- 
mil/a s having ever liked, another, quite 
overcame him he knew not whether he 
was awake, or in aDream. But notwith- 
ftanding all the raging' Paffions which 
warred in his Mind, he could not but re- 
fledl, that he had nothing to accufe Ca- 
raiHa of; for that flie was under no fort of 
Engagement to him,, and at full liberty- 
to hke whom flie pJeafed ; yet, when 
he fancied any other Man was the Object 
of her Love, he could not help thinking 
Ihe had not half thofe Virtues he before 
thought her pofleffed of. For an Inftant, 
he felt a Paflion which he had before 
never conceived for her, nor indeed for 
any other ; and which I fliould not fcruple 
to call Hatred, had it not been one of 
thofe abortive Thoughts which are the 
firft Sallies of our Paffions, and which 
immediately vanifh on Refleftion ; for as 
\l v/as impoffible for him to hate a Crea- 
ture wha had never injured him, that 

Con- 



Chap. 6. of David Simple. 273 

Confideration abfolutely removed what 
feemed alone to promife him Comfort, 
and he law Camilla in the fame amiable 
light in which he had ever beheld her, 
with the Addition only of a Defpair, 
which at once heightened all her Beauties, 
and made them fatal to his Repofe. 

VALENTINEmdi Cynthia, from 
feeing their Diftrefs, had both endea- 
voured to bring them together in the 
Evening \ but they pleaded ill Healthy 
and begged to ftay in . their feparate 
Apartments. The next Morning they 
found fuch Mifery, in not feeing each 
other, that they both came to Breakfaft 
with their Companions: They entered the 
Room at different Doors, at the fame 
Inilant ; the Wannefs of their Looks,. (for 
it is incredible how much one Night's 
Perturbation of Mind will alter People, 
who have ftrong and delicate Senfations) 
and the faultring of their Voices, more 
ftrongly pointed out their Thoughts than 
the moft laboured Eloquence could pof- 
fibly have done. Neither of them, could 
bring themfelves to fpeak firft: ; for as 
David had never made any adual Ad- 
dreffes to. Ca^uillay it was impoffible for 
him to charge her with any Crime, or 
M 5 even 



274 Adventu^ies Book IV. 

even to mention the Affair to her, which 
gave him fo much Uneafinefs. She, on 
the other hand, (tho* her Mind had 
been totally void of Pride, of which ftie 
had very little, orof Modeftyy of which 
flie was the mofh exafl Pattern) could 
not have begun to excufe a Crime of 
which fhe was entirely innocent, to a Man 
who neither did nor had any Right to 
cenfure her. As for Valentine^ he was 
in a Dilemma no kfs perplexing 5 for 
tho^ he was fenfibk of David's Jealoufy^, 
and confident of his CamUa% Innocence,, 
yet in their prefent Situation, he could 
by no means perfuade hirnfdf to £iy any 
thing which might have been conftrued as 
a direft Offer of his Sifter to a Man to^ 
whom they both were fo greatly obliged ^ 
and who at that time appeared in the 
Light of Fortune {the only Light by which 
fome FeopUs Eyes can fee) fo highly 
their Superior. 

As for Cynthia^ fhe knew too much 
€f the World, and WuStoo well bred, to 
intermeddle cfficioully in fo delicate an 
Affair. 

Under thefc Circumftances were this 
little Company, waen by lucky Accident, 

rather 



Chap. 6. ^ David Simple. 275 

rather than good Defign, did the Author 
of all this Mifchief unravel the Perplexity 
he had occafioned, by means of a Letter . 
-which a Servant now delivered to Ca- 
milla. She opened it haftily, wondering 
what Corner of the Earth could produce 
a Correfpondent for her at this time. 
David watched her Looks, and obferv* 
ing fhe blufh'd, and changed Colour, 
was in the utmoft Anxiety, in which 
fhe left him no longer than while fhe read 
the Letter ; when (he fent the Servant out 
of the Room, and gave it into his Hand 
faying, (he thought every one in that 
Company had a Right to know all that 
concerned her, as fhe was convinced they 
were her fincere Friends. David read it 
aloud to Valentine and Cynthia but how 
mucji were they furprized, when they 
found the Contents were as follows ! 

Madam, 

JA M really ajhamed of my ConduSl to^ 
' wards you yefterday ; my Inclinc^tion 
for you makes it an eafy matter for to be 
convinced of your Innocence^ hut I would 
have you alfo clear in tie Eyes of the 
World ; and tf you l ill come home again to 
your Falh^r^Sy I .will make it my whcU_ 
^tudy to jufiify y ou^ aitd find gut the Au-. 

M 6 thoT 
4 



276 The Adventures Book IV. 
thor of this vile Report. As focn as that 
can be done^ if you will confent to it, I 
will receive you of your Father as my 
Wife. 

I am, Madam, 

Your moft Obedient, 

Humble Servant, 

They all fat for a moment ftaring at 
each other, as in A mazement. Camilla firft 
broke filence,, and looking at Davids faid, 
if they pleafed, either Vakntine or he fhould ? 
diftate an Anfwer to this Letter. Davids 
inftead of being pleafed at this, turned 
pale : he remembered he had over- heard 
Mifs Johnfpn fay, fhewas in hopes he 
would be too much afraid of making her 
unhappy, to prefs her to refufe a good 
Offer tor him ; and he now began to fear 
Camilla hzA the fame way of thinking, 
2nd only fnid this to pique his Genero- 
ficy, to defire her to accept of fuch av 
Match : he therefore told her, he thought 
fhe was the beft Judge what to anfwer \ 
for as the Happinels of a reafonable Crea- 
ture did by no means depend on Gran- 
deur,, he did not think himfeJf obliged t6 

perfuade 



Chap. 6. of David Simple. ^77 

perfuade her to co^fent to my Lord . . .*s^ 
PropofaL When Camilla found whicb 
way he took what fhe had faid, flie ptted 
him^ becaufe flie faw he voas meafy \ iiii- 
puted it to the DeHcacy of his Love for 
her ; and a6ted quite contrary to what 
{om^ good-natured Women who, when 
they fee a Man vexed on their account^ 
take that Opportunity of teazing him. 
She told him, he had f erfedlJy miftaken 
her Meaning, as fhe would immediately 
c:onvince hrm ; on^ Which fhe rtalled for ^ 
Pen and Ink, and wrote the following 
Letter.' 



My Lord, 

'-. . A'A h/:' 

jNow ' think nryfelf as much obliged 
' to yeu^ as I thought the contrary yefter- 
day : I have fome very Jlrong Reafons^ 
which ' make it impoffible for me to accept 
the Honour you - in! end 7ne ; and as to my 
returning to my Fathei/^-s Houfe.^- tht 
I have already met zvith there ^ has de- 
termined me never to fuhjeSi myfelf to the 
like again j which I am cer'.ain mujl 
ways'' be the Cafe ^ whilf lLAYm is Mijirefs 
ef it^ I amy my Lordy with the moft 



278 72^^ Adventures Book IV. 
grateful Senfe of th€ Favour you deftgmd 

Your Lord fhip's moft Obliged, 

Obedient Humble Serv^ant,^ 
Camilla. 

: It is utterly impoffible to defcribe the 
Agitations of David's Mind, while flie 
was writing, or his Raptures when he 
heard what fhe had written. Valentine 
highly approved of her Proceedings ; for 
as llie had kept her Word in informing 
him of every thing that paflTed betweea 
her and David \ he was not ignorant how 
much he w^ould liave fufFered had fhe ac-' 
cepted of my Lord. And Cynthia zd^^^- 
mired her Refolution and Greatnefs of 
Mind to fuch a degree, that fhe could not 
forbear exprefling to her Friend, with, 
what an additional Efteem that one Ac- 
tion iiad infpired her» 

They were all furprized what could 
have altered my Lord . . . . fo much in one 
Day ; but his Lordlliip, when he left 
Camilla^ could not believe he was awake : 
fo impoffible it appeared to him, that any 
Woman could refift both his Perfon and 

Fortune "f 



Chap. 6. i/'DAviD Simple. 279 
Fortune. ; his Pride was piqued at it, and 
befides, his Inclination was heightened 
by the difficulty he found in die grati- 
fying it. 

H2 now be^an to bdieve.all the Sto-- 
ries he had heard of Camilla were falfe, 
for he was very certain the Woman who 
could iiithjtand him mujl be virtnom. In 
fliort, he found himfelf fo uneafy without 
her, that he thought if there could be 
any Method found of regainii g her Re- 
putation^ he couki be contented to marry^ 
her a ftrong Proof of the ftrange In- 
confiftency of the human MLad ! For 
whilft there was no other Obje6lion but 
her waiit of Fortune^ and he might have 
received her with Honour at her Father's^ 
hands^ he could command his PafTicn 
but when there was the Addition of many 
other Objedions to prevent his indulging 
k, he was willir g to overcome them ail. 
The .truth was,^ while flie lived v/irli 
her Father^ he had never given himfelf 
leave to have the fmalleft Hopes of her 
in one way, and as he thought it impru- 
dent to think on her in the other., his De< 
fires were curbed by the apparent Impof- 
fibility of gratifying them. But v/hen he 
thought her both infamous and poor^ he 
had made himftlf fo certain of obt:iin- 

ing 



2S6 The Adventures Book IV. 
ing her, he could not bear the Difap- 
pointment of being refufed ; and per- 
plexed himfelf fo long about it, that 
at laft, like Heartfree in the Play of the 
Old BatcheloTy He ran into the Dan- 
^' ger, to avoid the Apprehenfion and 
wrote the foregoing Letter. 

DAVID now was perfeftly eafy, 
and there was a general Chcarfulnefs 
throughout the whole Company for the 
Evening \ and when they retired to Reft, 
it was with that Calmnefs which is al- 
ways the Companion of Innocence and 
Health. The Adventures of the next 
Day fhall be referved for another Chapter. 




C H A P> 



Chap. 7. ^David Simple. 281 



BmmmmmmmmMmm 

CHAP. Vll. 

In which is related the Life of an 
Atheifl. 

IN the Morning they all met, with the 
utmoft Good-humour and it being 
Sunday^ David propofed the going to 
Church \ for he faid he had great reafon; 
tc> thank CnutoTy, for giving him fo 
much. Happinefs as he had found in that 
Company. The other three heartily con- 
lented to it ^ and ^ laid ^ they were lure 
the meetinor with him,- and the beins; de- 
livered from their Affliftions and Diilrels, 
was fo fiorn^l a Mark of divine Provi- 
dence, that they could never be thankflil 
enough for it. -This naturally led CjUtkiai 
to give fo me Account of the Converfa-. 
tion fhe met with in her Journey to - 
Town. She had mentioned it flightly 
before, but now fhe told them all the ri- 
diculous Arguments the Atheilt made ufe 
otitQ prove there was no Betty. 



-DAVID 



282 The Adventures Book IV. 

DJFID could not forbear crying 
out, Good God I is it poffible there 
*^ can be a Creature in the W orld fo mucK 
an Enemy to himfelf, and to all Man- 
kind, as to endeavour to take fronri 
Men's Minds the greateft Comfort they 
can poffibly enjoy They all admired 
the Clergymaris Behaviour, and David 
faid, he heartily wifhed he was acquainted 
v/ith him. Now it happened, by great 
Accident, that this very Clergyman preach- 
ed at the Church they went to \ and, as 
foon as Cynthia faw him, Ihe informed 
her Company who he was. They v/ere all 
rejoiced ax it, and David was charmed 
with his t)i(courfe, and meditated fome 
Method, by Cynlibia's means, of intro- 
ducing hiriifelf to him. When Church 
was done, it rained fo violently, that no 
Coach being to be had, they were forced 
to ftay ; and in the mean time the Cler* 
gyman brought about David's Wifh, with- 
out any trouble of his, for he pre- 
fently came and Ipoke to Cynlhia ; 
fhe told him that Gentleman longed for 
his Acquaintance. David begged the fa- 
vour ot him to dine with them ; he ci- 
villy accepted the Invitation, and they all 
. went home together. 

crNruiA 



Chap. 7 ► ^ Davjd Simple. 28^3: 



CTNTHIA^ as foon as (he had an 
Opportunity, alked hina if he had ever 
heard any thing of the Atheift ; to which 
the Clergyman reply*d, that having fome 
Biifinefs that way^ he Galled at the Apo- 
thecary's to inquire what was become of 
him, and heard he was dead ; for he 
would drink hard in fpight of any Per« 
fuafions to the contrary, which, with the 
Pain, threw him into a Fever that killed 
him. But, continued this good Man, I 
was moved with Campaflion , (tho* not 
with a mixture of Pleafure) when I heard, 
that, as foon as he found he muft die, 
all his fancied Infidelity vanifhed into no- 
thing, and in its room fucceeded Horrors 
impolTible to be defcribed. He begged the 
Apothecary to f.nd to a neighbouring 
Clergyman, and before them both didlated 
the enfuing Account of the Life he had 
led,, wliich they writ down, and at my 
Requeft gave me a Copy of it* 

*^ When I was a young Fellow, I 
took a delight in reading all thofe fort 
*^ of Boolcs which beft iuited my own 
Inclinations, by endeavouring to prove 
that all Pleafure lay in Vice ; and that 
the wi.feft thing a Man could do, ^ was tp 
give a Loofe to all PaJJions^ and 

take 



284 TZ?^ Adventures Book IV. 

take hold of the prefent Moment for 
Pleafure, without depending on un- 
certain Futurity, As I had but little 

" Money, I got in v/ith a Set of Sharpers^ 
and, by confenting to play all the Game 
with them, v/as admitted to Jhare fome 
Part of the Booty. Whenever I had 
any Succefs that way, I immediately 

*' fpent it on Wine and IVonien. As 
to the latter, I had never any fort of Af- 
fedlion for them, farther than for their 
PerfonSy and confequently was never 
much difappointed by any Refufal from 
them: for 1 went from one to another ; 
and as I was always certain of fucceed- 
ing with fome of them, I was very 

*' well fatisned. Pronnfes coft me no- 
thing ; for I was full as liberal of them^ 
as I was fparing in the Performance : 
And whenever 1 had by any means 
gained a Woman, as foon as I grew 

" tired of her, I made no manner of 
Scruple of leaving her to Infamy and 

^' Povtrty^ without any Confideration 

" what became of her. 

''As foon as I had fpent all my Mo^ 
ney, J generally returned to thcGaming- 
Tai^Ie, But at laft my Companions, 
^' whom I only trulled becaufe I could 

not 



Chap. 7- Simple: 285 

not avoid it, on finding out one Even- 
ing that I had defrauded them of their 
Share, all combined to difgrace me ; 

" and the next time I came, watch'd nar- 
rowly, till they faw me flip fomc 
falfe Dice out of my Pocket, and dif- 
covered me to the whole Table. It 
was in vain for me to proteft my Inno- 
ceme^ and complain of the others, for 
\ could not be heard and the Gentle- 
I " man, whom I had endeavoured to 

" cheat, held me till I was ftript of all I 
had about me, which I had won that 
Night, and then kicked me out of the 
Room. Befides the Lofs, I had Pride 

" enough to be hurt to the quick by 
fuchUfage, and yet I had not Courage 
enough to refent it. Thus this Scheme 
proved abortive, and I was obliged to 

" have done with it. 

*^ I HAD an Acquaintance, who, when 
I was in the utmoft Diftrefs, ufed to 
relieve me ; but then that was only 
enough perhaps to pay fome Debt, juft 
to keep me from a Jail ; but was no- 
thing to what I wanted to fquander iri 
Extravagance/' 



*^ The 



2*85 77^^ Adventures Book IV, 



" The next Scheme I took into my 
head was to follow Women, for their 

*^ Money ^ inrtead of their Per fens: and 
it was a Rule with me, generally to go 
amongft thofe who had but fmall For- 
tunes \ for as to thofe who had great 
ones, I thought I fliould have my mer- 
cenary Defigns found out, if I purfued 
them. But by following fuch as had 
but a fmall matter, they eafiiy con- 
eluded I could have no Views upon 

^' their Money^ and that therefore my 
ProfefTions muft be fincere: by which 
means I got away every Farthing they 
were worth, and then left them to 
bemoan their Folly ^ ^^SS^^S ^yf^lf 
7ny own Ingenuity. My Method was, 
wlien firft I got acquainted with any 
one, to pretend that all Fortune was 
equal between us; and if ever they 
wanted Money, I lent it them, (that is, 
when I had it.) Thus I pafled upon 
them for the moft generous Creature in 
the Worlds till I had got from them 
what I wanted. But at laft I was 
catched in my own Snare ; for I met 
" with a Woman, who was cunning 
enough to penetrate my Scheme and 
when Ihe had got from me all the Mo- 

ney 



Chap. 7. of David Simple. 287 

" ncy I had, llie would never fee me 
more. Another Woman, from whom 
I had got 500 /, in this treacherous 
manner, happened to have a Brother, 
who loved her fo fincerely, that fhe 

" was never afraid to let him know even 
her own Indifcreuons : He pulled me 
by the Nofe in a publick Coffee-houfcy 
and fwore, till I had returned his Sif- 
ter every Farthing I owed her, he 

^* would ufe me in that manner, where- 
ever he met with me. As it was im- 
poflible for me to raife the Money, I 
was forced to lurk about in Corners, 
that I might avoid him. Thefe two 
Difappointments made me weary of this 

" ProjeSl. 

The next Scheme I formed was to 
" go Canting amongft the Men, of the 
Value of real Friendjhipj to try if by 
that means I could draw any Perfon 
into my Net^ in order to make a Prey 
" of them. Here too I followed my old 
*^ Maxim^ of frequenting thofe Compa- 
nies where Fortune had not been lavifh 
^' of her Favours ; for I always found, 
that thofe People who had but little, 
were moft ready to part with their 
MoHe^k Here 1 fiourijhed for a fmaJl 

time 5 



'-sSB Ti-Y Adventures Book IV, 

timt but as I took care always to 
leave the Perfons I had Jleexed^ and con- 
verfe no longer with them than I could 
gain by them, I foon became very 
fcandalous : And as I happened to meet 
with fome Gentlemen, who did not at 
all reUfli fuch Treatment, I got two or 
three good Beatings^ and could fhew 
my Head no longer in thatNeighbour- 
hood. 

Thus was I both poor and infa- 
*^ mous ; and yet I was {o be^Ji:itched with 
the Fancy of my own IVifdom^ that 
even thefe Miferics did not open my 
Eyes enough, to make me engage in 
an honefter Way of Life. 

I TOOK another Lodging, with a 
*^ Defign of laying fome new Plot to get 
Money by ; and the next Scheme I 
purfued was to talk very religioufly, 
^' and try what that fort of Hypocrify 
would do. Now I chiefly frequented 
oUWomen^ as I thought keeping Com- 
pany with the young ones would 
" be an Injury to the Charaiter I then 
" affeSled, I got fome fmall matter, 
" which was given me by People who 
were really charitable, to difpofe of to 

poor 



Chap. 7- ^David Simple. 289 
" poor Families, which I made up dif- 
mal Stories of, and this Money I put 
in my own Pocket. But this did not 
laft long ; for m.y Propenfity to all 
manner of Vice was fo ftrong, it broke 
out on all Occafions : And as I could 
" not forbear my Bottle, which fometimes 
brought out Truth in fpite of me, I 
was foon found out ; and then there 
was fo general an Outcry fet up again ft 
me, I was obliged to fly from the Cla- 
mour. 

The next Character I appeared in, 
was that of aMoralift ; that is, I cried 
down all Religion^ calhng it Super^ 
fiition^ in order to fet up Morality. 
By this means I impofed on feveral 
ignorant People, who were fo glad to 
" catch hold on any thing that they 
" thought could give them any Repura- 
tion of Senfe, that they were quite 
happy in this Diftinction. There 
was a Set of us ufed to meet every 
Night at a Tavern, where, when we 
were half drunk, we all difplayed our 
Parts on the great Beauties of Mora- 
lily, and in Lontempi of the Clergy ; 
for we were fure we could be veiy 
good without any of the J' Teachifi^. 
Vol. II. N Anvi 



290 Adventures Book IV. 
And then we raked together all the 
Stories which reflefted Scandal on their 
Order. My Converfation turned chief- 
ly on the great Meannefs of Treache- 

*^ ry \ and that all Men fhould have 
that Hoftour in their Dealings towards 
each other, that their Words fhould 
be as good as their Bonds. By this 
means there was not one of the Com- 
pany whofe Purfe was not intirely at 
my Command ; and had their Money 
lafted, I fhould not have been found 

*' out a o;reat while: But when I had 
drained them all as much as I could, 
their feeing me fpend what I had got 
from them, in my own Extravagance, 
whilft I would not return them one 
Farthing, even tho' they really wanted 
it, opened their Eyes, and they difco- 
vered whence arofe all my boajled Mo- 
rality. They had taken no Security of 
me, and had no way to redrefs them- 
felves ; but one of them happened ac- 
cidentally to be acquainted with a 
Tradefman, (in whofe debt I was to 
the Value of 50 /.) to whom he told 
the Story ; and, juft as all I had trick'd 
the others of was Ipent, he arrefted 
me. 



Now 



Chap- 7 » (?/ David Simple. 291 



Now I knew not what to do : — I 
thought the Perfon I mentioned to 
" you, who ufed foniecimes to fuppl/ 
me v/kh Money in my laffc Neceffitics, 
would grow weary of doing it ; and 
" yet I had no other Refuge but to feiid 
*^ to liim. He faid, he would pay the 
" Money, if I would promife to go into 
the Country, and live upon a fmall In- 
" come, which he paid me quarterly; 

otherwife he would let me go to 
" Jail, and never take any farther notice 
of me. Hard as thefe Terms ap- 
peared, I was obliged to confent to 
them ; on which the Gentleman freed 
me from my Confinement, gave me 
Money enough to go into the Country, 
and paid me as ufual, to maintain me 
there. 

Now again, if I had not been ut- 
terly abandoned to all the Sentiments 
of Humanity, or the true Knowledge 
of my own Intereft, I had an Oppor- 
tunity of recovering my loft Conftitu- 
tion, which I had racked out in fuch a 
manner, that tho' in reality I was but 
a young Man, I had all the Infirmities 
and Difeafes incident to old Age. But 
N 2 inftead 



92 7^^ Adventures BooklV. 
inftead of refledling how much I had 
all my Life- time been a Dupe to my 
own millaken Maxims^ and deceived 
myfelf, whilft I fancied I was cheating 
others ; I grew defperate at being 
obliged to retire into the Country, left 
off all my Schemes, and gave myfelf 
up fo intirely to the Bottle, that I 
was feldom Mafter of even that fmall 
Share of Underftanding my worn- 
out Health and Strength had left me ; 
and began to curfe the Author of my 
Being, for all thofe Misfortunes I had 
brought upon myfelf : Till at laft 111- 
humcur, and the Fear of believing 
there was a Deity^ made me turn 
Atheift 3 or at lead my own Defire of 
being fo, flattered me into, a fixed Opi- 
nion, that I was one. in Drink and 
Debauchery, I fpent my Qiiarter's 
Income in a Month, v/ich only a Re- 
fcrve of enough to bring me toTown ; 
whither I was returning with aRefo- 
lution of doing any thing ever fo de- 
Jperate, even robbing on the Highv/ay, 
rather than deny myfelf the Indulgence 
of any vicious Faflion that wms upper- 
moft. I was travelling to London 
when the Misfortune happened to me, 
which 1 believe will bring me to my 

End. 



Ghap. 7- ^/'David SixMPLE. 293 
End. I cannot fay I ever enjoyed any 

" real Happinefs in my Life; for the 
Anxiety about the Succefs of my 
Schemes, the Fear of being fcund 
out, and the Difappointment which al- 
ways attended me in the End, joined 
to the Envy which continually preyed 
on my Heart, at the good Fortune of 
others, has made me, ever fince I came 
into the World, the moft wretched oi 
all Mortals. To this Conduct I owe 
my Ruin." Here he ftopt, and v/as 

fo tired with having talked fo long, that 

he infenfibly fell into a found Sleep. 

The Dinner coming then upon the 
table, the Clergyman deferred the Re- 
mainder of what he had to tell them till 
the Afternoon. And here I think it right 
to give them time to refrefli themfclvcs, 
and conclude this Chapter. 




CHAR 



294 Adventures Book IV. 



CHAP. VIII. 

Which proves the great Difference of 
thofe wrong ASlions which arife fro7n 
violent PaJJions^ and thofe which have 
their Source in the Malig^iity of a 
rancorous Heart. 

H E Dinner paffcd in Obfervations 
^ on Athe'iff% Story j but as foon 
as the Company thought the Clergyman 
had recruited his Spirits enough to make 
it agreeable to him to relate what re- 
mained, they defired him to proceed, 
which he immediately complied with. 

The Atheifl waked very hght-headed, 
and raved on nothing but his Brother; 
talked of his having concealed from them 
the main Part of his Scory, only from 
Shame. But the Apothecary, by apply- 
ing proper Remedies, at laft brought him 
to his Senfes, and then begged him, if 
there was any thing lay on his Conicience 
which he had not yet difclofed, he would 
do it : On which he defired him to fend 

for 



Chap. 8. of David Simple. 295 
for the Clergyman again : And as foon as he 
came, he told him, he could not be eafy 
in his Mind till he had difcovered to them 
the moft wicked Part of his Life, which, 
from fome fmall Hopes of recovering, he 
had not yet difclofed. But, continued 
" he, fince I find it is impoffible for me 
*' to live, I will no longer conceal it from, 
you. 

Know then, altho' I was never told 
" it, I am fenfible the Relief I told you 
I often received in my greateft Dif- 
" trefies, was owing to the beji of Bro- 
*^ th^rs : But I, inilcad of having my 
" Mind overflowing with Gratitude for 
" his Goodnefs, in my own Thoughts 
" only defpifed his Folly j for when we 
were young, from a Defire of en- 
groffing to myfelf all my Father was 
worth, I contrived, while he lay on his 
Death-bed, to burn his real Will, and 
forge a new one in my own favour, in 
order to cheat my fond good Brother 
" of his Share of his Father's Patri- 
^' mony/' 

Whilst the Clergyman was repeating 
this laft Incident, David by degrees was 
worked up into fo great an Agony, and 
N4, fo 



296 The Adventures Book IV. 
fo often changed Colour, that the whole 
Company fixed their Eyes on him ; and 
Valentine begged to know what it was 
could have caufed fo fudden an Altera- 
tion in him. Alas, Sir!" replied D^x'/V, 
with a faultering Voice, and trembling all 
over, the poor Wretch, whofe Story I 
have juft heard, I know, by fome Cir- 
cumftances, was my own Brother. I 
once fondly\ovtdi him and, notwith- 
ftanding his Behaviour, cannot hear of 
his Mifery without the greateft Af- 
fiiction. I did, indeed, fupport him 
underhand, and was in hopes to have 
heard, while he was yet living, that he 
v^as brought to a Senfe of his own Mif- 
condudt; but had I known, at laft, 
that he had repented of his paft Life, 
I would have fiown to have feen and 
forgiven him before he died. I cannot 
^' forbear paying fome Tears to his Me- 
mory."' In faying this, he clappM 
his Handkerchief before his Eyes. 

CAMIL L who was charmed witli 
David'^s Goodnefs to fuch a Brother^ 
and yet torn to pieces by feeing him fo 
affeded, had not power to fpeak but 
turned fo very pale, that Cynthia defired 
Valentine to run for a Glafs of Water, for 

Ihe 



Chap. 8. ^David Simple. 297 
jfhe was afraid his Sifter would faint 
away. Thefe Words roufed David, and 
he immediately loft all Thoughts but 
for Camilla, His Teeming to recover, 
and the Water they gave her, prevented 
her fainting. Cynthia and Valentine did 
all they could to comfort D^i'/i; and the 
Clergyman was very much grieved, that 
he had accidentally been the Occafion of 
all this Confufion. 

Whilst they were in this Situation, 
a Servant came up, and told Camilla there 
was an old Gentleman below, who begg'd 
to fpcak with her. She ran down ftairs 
with fuch precipitation as amazed them 
all ; but they were much more furprized 
when they heard her fcream out, as if 
fome terrible Accident had happened to 
her. They did not lofe a moment before 
they flew to her Relief : They met an old 
Gentleman bringing her up in his Arms^ 
and crying out, Oh ! give me way, 
" for in finding my Child I have for 
*^ ever loft her: But, dead or alive, I 
" will hold her in my Arms, and never 

part with her more." 

CrNrillA and Valentine prei^ntfj 
knew him to be their Father ; and what he 
faidj convinced David it could be no other. 

N5 T!i« 



298 The Adventures Book IV. 
They condufled him into a Chamber, 
where he gentiy laid Camilla on the Bed. 
Their prefcnt rhoughts were all taken up 
m bringing her to herfelf : But the mo- 
ment Ihe opened her Eyes, fhe fixed them 
on her Father for fouie time, without 
beirg able to utter her Words. At laft 
fhe burfl: into a Flood of Tears, which 
gave her fome Rehcf, and enabled her 
to fay, Arn I then, at laft, fo happy 
that my Father thinks me worthy his 
Regard ? And could you be fo good, 
" Sir, to come to look for me?" 
Valentine took hold of the firfi: Opportu- 
nity to throw himfelfat his Father's Feet, 
and begged he v/ould condefcend to 
look on him. He tenderly raifed him, 
and embracing him, faid, Ch my Son! 
nothing but the Condition I faw your 
Sifter in, could have prevented my 
^' fpeaking to you before." , He then 
flew from him to Camilla, and then back to 
him again, which he repeated alternately 
for the fpace of fome Minutes. At laft, 
in his Extacy, he fell on his Knees, and 
faid, My deartft Children, if you can 
*^ forgive me (for Guilt has rendered me 
*' unworthy of fuch a Son and Daughter) 
every Minute of my future Life fliall be 
employed to promote your Pleafure and 

Hap- 



Chap. 8. of David Simple. 2^9 
" Happinefs/' They both, almo^ by 
force, got him up from thje^Ground, 
and affured him, if he would be fo good 
to reftore them to his Love, having whole 
Worlds at their Command could not af- 
ford them half the Comfort. In fhort, 
to defcribe this Scene, and all the 
Grief which the poor old Gentleman 
(who had no Fault, but that of having 
been miOed by a too violent Paffion) and 
his Children felt, requires a Shake/pear*^ 
Pen ; therefore I am willing to clofe it 
as foon as polTible, being quite unequal 
to the Taflc. David and Cynthia felt- 
all the Tendernefs and Pleafure of their 
Friends ; and the Clergyman rejoiced 
in having found a Company where fo^ 
much Goodnefs reigned. He took his 
Leave for the prefent, thinking at this 
Junfture he might be troublefome, with 
a Promife of returning again in a Day or^" 
two to fee them. 

The poor old Gentleman was fo much 
overcome by the violent Agitation of his 
Spirits, that he couJd hardly bring him- 
fdf that Evening to fpeak one coherent 
Sentence. All they could get from him 
was, that' Livia was dead, and a Promife 
to tell them all another time. But his 
N & Childrens 



300 Adventures BooklV. 

Childrcns Goodnefs, and. the Joy of fee- 
ing them after fo long a Separation, 
was more than he could bear, and almoft 
deprived him of the Power of Speech. 
To fay the truth, this good Man was fo 
entirely overcome with Extacy at the 
Sight and Behaviour of his Children, that 
he was that Night incapable of enquiring 
what Methods they had taken to procure 
Subfiftance from the time he had loft 
them. But by the little he could gather, 
his Heart was inflamed with the warmeft 
Gratitude to David. 

C AMIhLA,, feeing how much her 
Father was afFefted, prevailed on him to 
retire to Reft. David was now refolved, 
as Camilla had found her only furviving 
l^arent, that very Night to obtain her 
Confent to his afking her Father's Ap- 
probation of his Love, and defired the 
Liberty of entertaining her one Hour 
alone. 

I SHALL not dwell minutely on this 
Part of my Hero's Life, as I have too 
much Regard for my Readers to n:akc 
them third Perfofis to Lovers ; and fhali 
only inform the Curious, that Camilla^ on 
?he Confideration that fhe had already re- 
ceived 



Chap. 8. ^David Simple. 301 
ceived fuch ftrong Proofs of David's fin- 
cere AfFeftion, thought proper to abate 
fomething of the Ceremonies prefcribed to 
Lovers, before they can find out whe- 
ther their Miftreffes hke them, or no. 
And as fhe was convinced every Word 
of her's was capable of giving him either 
the greateft Pleafure^ or the utmoft Pain^ 
her Tendernefs and Softnefs prevented 
her making ufe of any of that Coquettry 
which is very prevalent in fome Part of 
her Sex. She was not afhamed to own 
(lie loved him, and that if her Fa- 
ther confented, the greateft Happinefs 
fhe could propofe in this World was, to 
imploy that Life he had fo generoufiy 
faved, in endeavouring to make him 
happy. 

And now, Reader, if you are in- 
clined to have an adequate Idea ot Da- 
vid^s Raptures on that Confefficn , 
think what Pretty Mifs feels when her 
Parents wifely prefer her in their Ap- 
plaufe to all her Brothers and Sifters : 
Obferve her yet a little older, when flie 
is pinning on her firft Manteau and Pet- 
ticoat ; then follow her to the Ball, and 
viev/ her EAyes fparkie, and the con- 

vulfive 



302 Adventures Book IV. 

vulfive Tofles of her Perfon on the firft 
Compliment fhe receives: But don't 
lofe fight of her, till you place her in a 
Room full of Company, where fhe hears 
her Rival condemned for Indifcretion^ 
and exults in her Lofs of Reputation. 
No matter whether fhe rivals her in my 

Lord- or Captain, ■ or 'Squire^^ 

i^c. ^c, For as fhe is equally de- 

firous of engroffing the Admiration of all, 
her Enmity is equal towards the Wo- 
man who deprives her of fuch great Blef- 
JingSj which-ever flie robs her of. — Ima- 
gine the Joys of an ambitious Man, 
who has juft fupplanted his Enemy, and 
is got into his Place ; imagine, what 
a young Lawyer feels the firft Caufe he 
has gained ; or a young Officer the 
firft time he mounts Guard. — But ima- 
gine what you will, unlefs you have ex- 
perienced what it is to be both a fincere 
and fuccefsful Lover, you never can ima- 
gine any thing equal to what David felt. 

The Converfation between him and 
Camilla was of the delicateft, tendereft 
kind ; and he told her with the greateft 
Joy, that fhe had delivered him from the 
utmoft Defpair of ever meeting witb any 

Happincfs 



Chap. 8. ^ David Simple. 303 

Happinefs in this "World: For that when 
he had the good Fortune to meet with 
her, liis Condition was fo unhappy, that 
he began ferioufly to think of getting into 
Ibme Corner of the Earth, where he 
might never fee the Face of a human 
Creature : for to be always in the midfh of 
People, who, by their Behaviour, forc'd him 
todefpife them, was to him the greateft of 
all Curfes. " To you therefore, Madam, 
faid he, I owe that delicate Pleafure of 
having my Tafte approved by my 
Judgment. You know, I made an 
Offer to Cynthia, for I never defired to 
' ' conceal any thing from you. 1 1 hought 
indeed, that in her I had met with what 
I was in fearch of, a Woman I could 
efteem. This made me admire her; 
" but you alone truly touched my Heart."' 

C AMI LLA exulted as much in 
having gain'd fo generous, fo good a Man 
as David, and had now no fartherThoughts 
of his Love for Cynthia : But the men- 
tioning her, put her in mind of Valentine \ 
and as Ihe was not amongft that number 
of People who can be very happy themf elves ^ 
though their Friends be at the fame time 
ever fo miferable^ flie could not help iS/^i?- 
ing at the Refletlion, how difficult it would 

be 



304 TZ?^ Adventures Book IV. 
be for Valentine to bring about a Marriage 
with Cynthia. 

DAVID immediately guefled the 
Caufe of her fuddenly growing melan- 
choly, and told her, he fliould not de- 
ferve the good Opinion fhe had expreffed 
of him, if he could enjoy any one Plea- 
fure in Life, while her Brother was un- 
happy ; that the Death of the poor Crea- 
ture, whofe Story the Clergyman had re- 
lated, added fomething to his Income, 
and he thought he had enough to make 
her and all her Family eafy in a private 
retired Way of Life ; and as to his part, that 
was all he defired. Ca?nilla was every 
Minute more and more charmed with his 
Goodnefs ; and as fhe was certain, he 
delighted in no other Expence but aflifting 
his Friends, and that fhe herlelf could be 
contented in any Way of Life, provided 
every one fhe lived with was eafy ; fne 
thought it more Greatnefs of Mind to let 
David fully fatisfy his Darling Pajfion of 
doing good^ and to live lower herfelf in 
order to ferve her Brother, than to refufeher 
Lover's Offer, under the pretence of think- 
ing fhe ought not to burden him, only 
that fhe might have more Opportunities 
of indulging herfelf. 



Chap. 8. of David Simple. 305 



They went together to fee for Va- 
lentine and Cynthia \ and found them 
both fitting in the moft pen fiv e manner, 
as if they were quite uneafy : and upon 
Inquiry found that Cynthia had fixed a Re- 
folution on Valentine'' z begging her Leave, 
now he had found his Father, to afk 
hisConfent to marry her, of leaving them 
the next Day ; for flie infifted on it, that 
fhe would not come into a Family to be 
any Difad vantage to it. She owned, if 
fhe had a Fortune, fhe fhould think her- 
feJf happy in giving it to Valentine \ for 
that from her Youth he was the only Man 
fhe had ever thought on : but in her pre- 
fent Circumftances Ihe could have no 
other Profpeft, but to be a Burden to him 
as long as flie lived, and was refolved 
fhe would fufFer any thing rather than 
that fliould ever be the Cafe. 

DAVIT) begged her to confider, that 
in Valentine^s Happinefs (he would in- 
creafe, inftead of diminifli that of the 
whole Family ; in fhort, they all ufed fo 
many Arguments with her, that at laft 
flie found her Refolution began to ftagger, 
and therefore got up and infifted on going 
to bed, faying, flie would confider farther 
of it. Valentine could not but approve 



3o6 TZ^^ Adventures Book IV. 
of Cynlhia^s Conduft, and the very Me- 
thod flie took to prevail on him, to get 
the better of his Inchnation, onjy increafed 
it fo much the more. David and Camilla 
fat up with him fome time, for he was 
fo uneafy he could not prefently com- 
pofe himfelf to reft. His PafTion for 
Cynthia had got fo much the better of 
him, that it was not in his power to com- 
mand it; and yet he could not help 
condemning the Thoughts of indulging 
himfelf at the Expence of fo greaty and 
good a Friend as David, 

The next Morning, as foon as Valen- 
tine and Camilla heard their Father was 
awake, they went to pay their Duty to 
him. Exceffive was the Joy they felt at 
thus having an Opportunity of again re- 
newing what had been their greateft Plea- 
fure from their Infancy. The poor old 
Gentleman, even the Day he was married 
to his beloved Livia^ never experienced 
half the Raptures the Sight of his long- 
loll Children gave him. As foon ashew^as 
up, and they had all breakfafted together, 
Camilla begged her Father, if it would 
not be troublefome to him, to relate how 
Livia died, and what had happened fmce 
their unfortunate Separation ; faying, he 
might fpeak any thing before all that 

Com- 



Chap. 8. ^David Simple. 307 
Company for that Cynthia was no Stran- 
ger to him, and fhe was fure the Man 
who by his Goodnefs had faved both hers 
and her Brother's Life, and been their 
only Support, would be always efteemed 
by him as his Friend. Her Father, who 
was now reftored again to his former Self, 
followed his ufuai Method of not delay- 
ing a moment before he complied with 
what fhe defired, and began as follows : 

I MUST take fliame to myfelf, that 
" at my Age, and having two fuch 
Children to be my Comfoit, I fuffered 
" an unreafonable Paflion to overcome 
me to their difad vantage. Which 
" way fhall I be able to thank the Man 
who has preferved them to blefs me 
again with their Sight ? From the time 
you left me, and I was perfuaded of 
" your Infamy, 1 was every day more 
*^ and more taken up with my Admira- 
" tion of Livia. She turned and wound 
me juft according to her own Inclina- 
tions ; my Thoughts were almoft all 
^' fwallowed up in the Contemplation of 
^' her Charms, and my Defires v/holly 
centered in her Happinefs ; and yet 
in fpite of all my Fondnefs, a Sigh 
^' would fometimes fteal from my Breatt, 

whw 



3o8 T/??^' Adventures Book IV. 
when the Idea of my Children forced 
itfelf on my Fancy. I made no fcruple 
of difclofing whatever I felt to Livia : 
But v/henever I fpoke of you, flie con- 

^' ftandy grew melancholy^ took care to 
drop Expreflions, (and they appeared 

*' to liow from the height of her Love) 
as if no Behaviour of hers could fix 
my whole Affe6lions but that flie 
found even Undutifulnefs to me^ and 
the moft abandoned Anions could not 
erafe from my Mind, the Pcrfons I 
loved fo much better than her. In 
fliort, it is impoflible to defcribe half 
the Arts (he made ufe of, that I 
might never mention or think of you. 

" Fits^ ^earSy and Good-humour ^ were 
play'd upon me each in their turn, 
till I was almoft out of my Senfes ; 
but if ever her Behaviour provoked 

" me to be the leaft fufpicious of her, 

" the next Moment her Smiles threw my 
Soul into Raptures, and every other 

" Thought gave way to the Delight and 
Joy fhe infpired me with. 

" All the Money I could get, flie 
" fpent in her Extravagance, till at laft 
" I found I could fupport it no longer, 

and was obliged to keep in my own 

" Houfe, 



Chap. 8, ^ David Simple. 309 

Houfe, for fear of my Creditors. I 
durit not fo much as mention you, 
for fear of fhocking Livia ; and all 
this, I was blind enough to impute 
to her great Tendernefs for me. But 

" Poverty, the continual Fear of fee- 
ing her miferable, and the horrible 
Thought which fometimes forced it- 
felf upon me, of what could become 
of my Children, had fuch an Ef- 

" fe6t on me, that it threw me into 
violent Diforders, and made me quite 
unhealthy. I was in the utmoft 

" Defpair, how to fupport her, or my- 
felf. 

Whilst I was in this unhappy Si- 
tuation, Livia^s Brother died ; and as 

" he had before loft his Wife and Chil- 
dren, and Livia was his neareft Rela- 
tion, in Confideration of my Kindnefs 

" to her, and knowing her extrava- 
gant Temper, he left me in full Pof- 
ftffion of all his Fortune, whidi 
amounted to twenty thoufand Pounds. 
This was a very feafonable Relief to 
me ; but yet it was fome time before 
I could in the leaft recover my Confti- 

" tution, during which time fhe nurfed 
me with all the Affiduity of the moft 

" tender 



3IO T/^^ Adventures Book IV« 
tender Wife in the World, in hopes 

" of getting this new Fortune from me. 
She fat up with me whole Nights ; and 
as flie was always with me, her Flat- 
tery at laft got llich an Afcendant over 
me, that I was befotted to her Love, 
and forgot I had ever been a Father. 
Thus getting rid of my moft pain- 
ful Thought, and in poffefllon of 
a plentiful Fortune, I foon grew well 
and ftroBg again. But Livia^s Dif- 
fimulation coft her her Life ; for the 
Delicacy of her Frame could not fup- 
port the Fatigue fhe had undergone 
during my Illnefs, and fhe fell into a 
nervous Fever, of which flie died. 

That Diftemper naturally inclines 
People to all manner of horrible 
" Thoughts, and as her Crimes were 
" fuch, as greatly heightned all theTer- 
rors of its fhe was at laft, by the Per- 
turbation of her own Mind, forced to 
confefs to me all the Arts ihe had ufed, 
to make me have an ill Opinion of you 
^' while you lived with me and that fhe 
^' had afterwards falfely accufed you of 
a Crime, flie had no manner of rea- 
fon to fufpeft you of, in order to pre- 

!^ vent 



Chap. 8. 5/^David Simple. 311 

vent any Means of a Reconciliation 
between us. 

''Imagine now, my dear Children, 
'' what I felt, when the Confideration of 
this Woman's Perfidioufnefs brought 
back to my Memory all your Good- 
nefs ; and when I confidered what 
'' Miferies you muft have been expofed 
''^ to in being abandoned to the wide 
'' World without any Support, I thought 
*' I fhould have gone dift railed. I 
" af]<:ed her, what could have tempted 
" her thus to ruin the Man who doated 
on her, and whofe every Wifh was 
'' centered in her Happinefs. All the 
" Reafon I could get from her was, that 
" fhe thought her Inlerefi and yours was 
'' incompatible ; for the more I did for 
" you, the lefs fiie could have for her- 
" felf : That fl\e foon perceived your Dif- 
'' content at the Alteration of my Beha- 
'' viour to you ; and as fhe was your 
Enemy, ihe concluded you muft be 
hers. This fhe faid made her go 
*' greater Lengths than flie at firft in- 
'' tended. Soon after this Confeflion 
^' fhe died^ and left me in a Condition 
impoffible to exprefs. And as I am 
now convinced of your Love and Ten - 

dernefs 



3ia 7"^^ Adventures BooklV. 
dernefs for me, I will not fhock you 
with the Repetition of it. 

The next day while I was revolving 

^' in my Mind what Method I fhould 
take to find you again, my Lord . . . . 

" came to fee me. At firfl: my Servant 
denied me, and faid I faw no company ; 

*^ he infilled on coming up, faying, he 
had fomething of the greateft Con- 
fequence to impart to me. The mo- 
ment he entered the Room, he in- 
formed me, that by Accident he had 
met with you and Valentine. — This 

" fudden Tranfport of Joy almoft de- 
privcd me of my Senfes ; I afl<:ed him 

" a thoufand Queftions before I gave him 
time to anfwer one : At laft, as foon 
as he could fpeak, he told me, he was 
convinced by your Behaviour, you 
was intirely innocent-, and if I would 

" fend for you home, and clear up your 

^' Reputation, he fliould be very glad to 
receive you as his Wife. I was quite 
aftonifhed at this Difcourfe, but how- 
ever would not (lay with him a Minute 
longer, than to thank him for his good 
News and kind Offer, took a Direc- 
tion where to find you, and flew once 

more 



2 



Chap. 8. ^David Simple, 313 
*' more to have the Flappinels of em- 
bracing my dear Children. 

I have but ten thoufand Pounds 
" left; divide it between you: and for 
" the reft of m-y Life, all I defirq is 

to fee you both happy.** 

And then addreffijig himfelf to Davids 
he faid, Are there any Words, Sir^ 

capable of expreffing the Gratitude 
" I owe you^ for your fupporting ft) 

generouQy thefe two young Crca- 

tures ? 

DJVID, who had trembled from the 
time he had mentioned my Lord . . . nov7 
thought he had an Opportunity to fpcak i 
and immediately replied, " If, Sir, you 
think you have any Obligations to mc, 
which I aflfure you I do not, as I am 
fully paid by having ferved Perfons of 
fuch worth as Valentine zndi Camilla \ 
it js in your power to give me all my 
Soul holds dear : — Content to my havr 
ing a Title to call you Father, by be- 
i.ig joined for ever to Camilla^ and the 
World cannot produce a Man fo hap- 
py as myfelf." Camilla added, that it 
v/as what flie wifliccl, and related in 
Y/hat manner ihe had already refufed my 
Vol. IL O Lord 



3 H Adventures Book IV. 
Lord . . . ; on wliieh the dd Gentleman 
immediately joined their Hands, affuring 
Davids he had rather fee his Daughter 
married to the Man, whofe A<5lions had 
ib ftrongly proved his real Love for her, 
than to any Eftate or Title in Europe. 

C AMILLA k\f Valentine ^2i% afraid 
to fpeak, as Cynthia had not yet given him 
PermiiTion; and therePc^e vindertook it 
hcrfelf, as Ihe was refolved to make her 
own Happinefs compleat by adding that 
of her Brother's to it. She told her Father, 
that to compleat the general Joy, there 
w^s yet wanting his Gonfent to her Bro- 
ther's taking Cynthia for a Wife. On this 
Valentine fell on his Knees, and faid, his 
Sifter had afkedthe only thing which could 
make him happy. His Defires were no 
fooner known than complied with, by his 
now once-more fond Father. 

CTNtTlIJ, on hearing that he 
rhight be able to live with her in a decent, 
(hough plain Way, thought fhe had ilow 
no longer any Reafon to refufe him the 
Happinefs of being her Support and Pro- 
teftor, and inwardly enjoyed the Thought 
df the Plcafure aMan of his Temper muft 
bivc> in finding it in. hijs power to be fo. 



Chap.8. cf David SiM?LE. 315 
David infifted, that what Fortune was a- 
niongft them might be fhared in common ^ 
and they all joined in intreating the good 
oldGentleman to fpend the reft of his Days 
with them, affuring him, his Will fliould 
be a. Law to them all. And now I believe 
it is impoffible for the moft lively Imagi- 
nation to form an Idea of greater Hap - 
pinefs than was enjoyed by this whole 
Company. That very Evening the C/^r- 
gyman before mentioned came to fee them \ 
and although he really liked Cynthia^ yet 
had he fo little Selfiflinefs in him, he 
heartily congratulated them all on their 
Happinefs and the next Morning was- 
appointed by the Confent of all Parties 
for the performing the Ceremony. 




C H A P, 



3 1 6 ^he hm% N T tr*E s Book IW 



^ ^ ^ ^ 5^ ^ ^ 

e H A p. IX. 

Containing two Weddings^ a7id confe-^ 
quently the Ccncliifion of the Book. 

T H E next Morning, as foon as 
Camilla rofe, fhe went into Cyn- 
thia s, Chamber, where they mutually 
congratulated each other, on the Happi- 
nefs they had now fo near a Prolpedt 
'of enjoying for the reft of their Lives, 
(after all the Scenes of Mifery they had 
gone through) in being for ever joined 
to tht only Men they could really like or 
efteem. Camilla^ with a Smile, related 
to her Friend what Pain fhe had fuf- 
fered, from an Apprehenfion of David^^ 
former Kindne'fs for Cynthia ; who, ac- 
cording, to her ufual obliging manner, re- 
plied, that David indeed did her the ho- 
nour of his Efteem ; and ftie believed the- 
Condition in which he firft found her,raifed 
companion enough in a Heart like his, to 
make him imagine he loved her : But, con- 
tinued ftie, with Joy I perceive, that you, 
Camilla^ whom for the future I am to 



Chap.9- ^^/'David Simple. 317 
have the Pleafure of calhng Sifter, are 
the only Perfon who could truly touch his. 
Heart. Camilla blulhed, and felt at 
that Moment (if poffible) more Tender- 
nefs for Cynihta than ever. But before 
£he had time to make any Anfwer, a 
Meffage was brought from her Father, 
that he defired them both to walk into> 
another Apartment,, where David^ Va- 
lentine^ and the Clergyman waited for 
them. From thence they proceeded 
to the Church, where the Ceremony was 
performed. To attempt to defcribe T>a- 
vid's and Valentine's Raptures, is utterly 
impoflible ; Camilla and Cynthia^ with- 
out Reludlance, gave their Hands where 
their Hearts were already united with, 
so much Sincerity. 

Tbe old Gentleman wept for Joy^ 
'riaat all Livia^s Deceit, and Cunning, 
and his own extravagant Paflion for her,, 
€ouId not prevent his enjoying the ex- 
>Geflive Happinefs of thus bleffing his Chil- 
dren, and having fuch a Profpeil of their 
Profperity. And the Clergyman's real 
Goodnefs made him partake of all their 
Pleafures,. 



P^RHAfS 



3^8 The Adventures Book IV. 



Perhaps it may be- here expected I 
fhould give feme Defcription of the Per- 
fons of my favourite Charafters ; but as 
the Writers of Novels and Romances 
have ^h-eady exhaufted all the Beauties of 
Nature to adorn their Heroes and He- 
roines, I fhall leave it to my Readers Ima- 
gination to form them jult as they like 
befl: : It is their Minds I have taken moft 
pains to bring ihem acquainted with, and 
from that Acquaintance it will be eafy to 
judge what Scheme of Life was followed 
by this whole Company, 

D AV I B^s Travels were now at an 
end, and he thought himfelf overpaid in 
Camilla''^ Goodnefs for all his Troubles 
and Difappointments. On the other fide, 
her Happinefs was compleat, in having 
it in her power to give David pleafure 
in feeing her Brother, inftead of the mi- 
ferable Condition he was once in — now ia 
the poffeffion of all he defired ; — in having 
her Friend for her Companion, and in 
her Father's returning and growing Fond- 
nefs. 

VALEN'TINE and Cynthia had 
not a W-iih beyond what they enjoyed 5 

and 

2 



Chap, 9. bJ David 3impli. 319 
and the Father had all the Comfort his 
Age would admit of, in the dutiful and 
affeftionate Behaviour of all his Children 
towards him. 

Every litrie Incident in Life was 
-turned into fome delicate Pleafure to th^ 
whole Company, by each of them endea- 
vouring to make every thing contribute 
to the Happinefs of the others. The 
very Infirmities, which it is impoffible for 
human Nature to efcape, fuch as Pain^ 
Sicknefs, i^c. were by their Contri- 
Tance not only made fupportable, but 
^illy compenfated in the frelh Opportunities they gave teach Individual of teftifying 
their Tendernefs and Care for the whole. 
In ihort, it is impoffible for the moll 
lively Imagination to form an Idea more 
pleafing than what this little Society en- 
joyed, in the true Proofs of each other's 
Love : And,^ as ftrong a Picture as this is 
of real Happinefe, it is in the power of 
every Community to attain it, if every 
Member of it would perform the Part al- 
lotted him by Nature^ or his Station in 
Life^ with a fincere Regard to the Inte- 
reft and Pleafure of the whole. Let every 
Man, inftead of burfting with Rage, 
and Envy, at the Advantages of Nature^ 

or 



320 Ty&e' Adventures Book 1V\ 
or Station, another has over him, extend 
his Views far enough to confider, that if 
he ads his Part well, he dcferves as much 
Applaufe^ and is as ufeful a Member of 
Society, as any other Man whatever': 
for in every Machine, the fmalleft Parts 
conduce as much to the keeping it toge- 
ther, and to regulate its Motions, as the 
greateft-. That the Stage is a Pifture of 
IJfe, has been obferved by almolt every 
body, efpecially ftnce Shakefpear'j "Time \ 
and nothing can make the Metaphor more 
ftrong, than the obferving every Thea- 
trical Performance fpoiled, by the great 
Defire each Performer froews of playing the 
^op'part. In the Animal and Vegeta- 
ble World there would be full as much 
Confufion as there is in human Life, 
was not every thing kept in its proper 
Place : 

Where Order in Variety we fee ; 
And where^ tho^ all things differ^ all 
agree, 

Th^e lowly Hedge, and humble Shrub, 
^contribute to the varying and confequent- 
ly beautifying the Profped, as well as the 
ftately Oak and lofty Pine. Were all 
Mankind contented to exert their own 

Faculties 



Chap. 9* ^/^ David Simple. 321 

Faculties for the comnioa Good, neither 
envying thofe who in any refpeft have a 
Superiority over them, nor defpifing fuch 
as they think their Inferiors ; real Happi- 
nef^ would be attainable, notwithftanding 
all that has been faid on that Subjeft : 
and the various Humours, and the dif- 
ferent Underftandings with which Hu- 
man Nature is fupplied, would, inftead 
of Difcord^ produce fuch a Harmony^ as 
would infallibly make the whole Species 
happy. 

I F every Man, who is poflelTed of 
a greater Share of PFil than is common, 
inftead of infuhing and fatirizing others, 
would make ufe of his Talents for the 
Advantage and Pleafure of the So- 
ciety to which he happens more parti- 
cularly to belong; and they, inftead 
of hating him for his fuperior Parts^ 
would, in return for the Entertainment 
he affords them, exert all the Abilities 
Nature has given them, for his Ufe, in 
common with themfelves ; whatHappinefs 
would Mankind enjoy, and who could 
complain of being miferable? It was this 
Care, Tendernefs, and Benevolence tc 
each other, which made Bavid^ and his 
amiable Company happy j who, quite con- 
trary 



3^22 T/^^ Adventures, &cBook IV. 

trary to the reft of the World, for every 
trifling Frailty blamed themfelves, whiHl 
it was the Bufinefs of all the reft, to lef- 
fen, inftead of aggravating their Faults. 
In fhort, it is this Tendernefs and Be- 
nevolence, which alone can give any real 
Pleafure, and which I moft fmcerely wifti 
to all my Readers* 



FINIS. 



